Tariana texts and cultural context
compiled and edited by Alexandra Y. Aikhenvald Languages of the World/Texts 07
LINCOM EUROPA

LW/T 07 Contents

2

Tariana

List of Tables, Diagrams and Maps

3

Abbreviations

6

Preface

7

Introduction — Linguistic situation, short history and cultural background

of the Tariana

8

1 Tariana and the multilingual setting of the Vaupes

8

2 The linguistic situation in the Vaupes and in the Upper Rio Negro region 8

3 Language attitudes and historical evidence

9

3.1 Multilingualism and language attitudes

9

3.2 Traditional evidence

10

3.3 Historical information about the Tariana, and their present state

14

4 The Tariana language

16

4.1 Language names

16

4.2 Previous studies of the language

16

4.3 The linguistic profile of Tariana

17

5 Cultural background

21

5.1 Environment, means of subsistence and material culture

21

5.2 Social organisation. Kinship and marriage

26

5.2.1. Social organisation

26

5.2.2. Relations with neighbours

28

5.2.3 Kinship system and marriage

29

5.3 Ceremonies and beliefs

30

5.3.1 General remarks: the Tariana pantheon

30

5.3.2 Shamans

33

5.3.3 Initiation. Feasts and rituals

33

5.3.4 Taboos and fears

35

5.3.5 Naming and names

36

6 The present collection

37

Stories

1 The Tariana. Author: Cândido Brito

39

2 The Deeds of the Creator. Author: Cândido Brito

45

3 The Origin of Tobacco, Snuff and Fire. Author: Cândido Brito

69

4 The Secret Flute. Author: Cândido Brito

83

5 A Menstruating Girl. Author: Juvino Brito

89

6 How Children Turned into Guans. Author: Olívia Brito

94

7 Evil Spirits. Author: Graciliano Brito

103

8 A Man and a Snake. Author: Juvino Brito

111

9 A Widow. Author: Jusé Brito

132

10 The Tariana Language. Author: Graciliano Brito

141

References

144

Index

147

LW/T 07

3

List of Tables, Diagrams and Maps

Table 1. The Brazilian Vaupés: languages and their speakers Table 2. Properties of Tariana place names Table 3. Examples of multilingual ‘actual’ place names Table 4. Examples of monolingual ‘historical’ place names Table 5. Examples of ‘mythological’ place names Table 6. Traditional divisions of the year Table 7. Structure of the day in Tariana Table 8. Tariana kinship system Table 9. Classification of shamans and their powers Table 10. Hierarchy of evil spirits of the jungle Table 11. Names of the Brito family (Wamiarikune subtribe)

Diagram 1. The structure of a Tariana longhouse

Map 1. Languages of the Içana-Vaupés basin with approximate locations Map 2. Languages spoken in the region of Upper Rio Negro, Brazil

Tariana
9 12 12
13 13 23 25 31 34 36 37
27
4 5

LW/T 07

4

Map 1. Languages of the Içana-Vaupés basin with approximate locations

Tariana

LW/T 07

5

Map 2. Languages spoken in the region of Upper Rio Negro, Brazil

Tariana

LW/T 07

Abbreviations

A - subject of a transitive verb ADV - adverbial AFF - affix AG - focussed and/or agentive subject AN(IM) - animate ANT - anterior APPR - approximative AUG - augmentative CAUS - causative CL - classifier CL.SP - closed space COLL - collective COMPL - completive COND - conditional CONTR - contrast CONTREXP - counterexpectation CONV - converb CURV - curved DECL - decarative DEM - demonstrative DIM - diminutive DIST - distal DS - different subject EMPH - emphatic EX(IST) - existential EXC - excessive EXTRAL - extralocal f, fem, FEM - feminine FIN - finality FOC.A/S - focussed subject FR - frustrative FUT - future HAB - habitat HABIT - habitual HORT - hortative HUM - human IMM.IMPV - immediate imperative IMP - impersonal IMPV - imperative INAN - inanimate INDF - indefinite INDIR - indirect (command) INDIV - indivudiated INFR - inferred INS - instrumental case INT - intentional INTER - interrogative LOC - locative LOCN - locational derivational affix masc, MASC - masculine

6

Tariana

MENT - mental NAT.PHEN - natural phenomenon NEG - negation NEG.EX - negative existential nf - nonfeminine NOM - nominalisation NOM.FUT - nominal future NOM.PAST - nominal past

NON.INDIV - non-individuated NPOSS - non-possessed NUM.CL - numeral classifier O - direct object OBJ - object case p - person PAST.REL - past relative PAUS - pausal PEJ - pejorative PERF - perfective PERM.IMPV - permissive imperaive PL - plural POSS - possessive PREC - precative PRES - present PRES.INFR - present inferred PRES.NON.VIS - present non-visual PRES.VIS - present visual PROB.FUT - probable future PROH - prohibitive PURP - purposive REC - reciprocal REC.P - recent past REF - referential kinship term REL - relative REM.P.REP - remote past inferred REM.P.NON.VIS - remote past non-visual REM.P.SEC.H - remote past second hand REP - repetition REPR - reported RES - result S - subject of an intransitive verb SEQ - sequential sg -singular SINGL - singulative SS - same subject TOP.ADV - topic advancing voice TOP.NON.A/S - topical non-subject VERT - vertical VIS - visual VOC - vocative (kinship address form)

LW/T 07

7

Tariana

Preface The effective authors of this book are the Brito family — the father, Cândido, and his four children — Olívia, Graciliano, Juvino and Jusé — who are among the last remaining speakers of Tariana and the last experts on Tariana culture and tradition. Cândido and his family welcomed me into their midst, offering friendship and assistance; and shared with me their wonderful language and the culture and traditional lore that go with it.
This book consists of an Introduction1 — which provides a brief overview of Tariana culture and habitat — and ten stories in Tariana.
My warmest thanks go to all my teachers of other North Arawak languages of the Upper Rio Negro — Humberto Baltazar and Pedro Ângelo Tomas (Warekena), the late Candelário da Silva (Bare), Afonso, Albino and João Fontes, Celestino da Silva and Cecília and Laureano da Silva, Januário Paiva and — last but not least — my very first teacher, the late Marcília Rodrígues (Baniwa). I am also grateful to those who helped me with learning a few things about East Tucano languages — Tiago Cardoso (Desano, Piratapuya) and Alfredo Fontes (Tucano). Eliseu Muniz (the grandson of Anibal Muniz: see §4.2) and Maria and Rafael Brito provided useful help in the initial stages of my fieldwork.
I am deeply grateful to R.M.W. Dixon for encouragement and comments. I have also profited from discussions with Henri Ramirez, Stephen Hugh-Jones, Elsa Gomez-Imbert and Janet Barnes.
I would also like to acknowledge my debt to Padre Casimiro Beks&ta, an expert on the area of the Upper Rio Negro and the Vaupés, who frequently helped me with information and advice. This collection would have been impossible without the assistance and friendship of Silvana and Valteir Martins, and of Lenita and Elias Coelho.

1 All the relevant terms in the Introduction are supplied with a Tariana equivalent in parentheses.

LW/T 07

8

Tariana

Introduction. Linguistic situation, short history and cultural background of the Tariana

1. Tariana and the multilingual setting of the Vaupés. Tariana is spoken in the linguistic area of the Vaupés river basin, in an unusual linguistic situation of obligatory multilingualism, dictated by the principles of linguistic exogamy. Tariana is the only Arawak2 language spoken in the Vaupés region; the other languages belong to the East Tucano subgroup. There is a strong inhibition against ‘language-mixing’, viewed in terms of lexical loans.
Tariana combines grammatical features inherited from proto-Arawak with those developed under the areal influence from East Tucano, alongside independent innovations and phenomena of language attrition (for the analysis of the patterns of areal diffusion in Tariana see Aikhenvald 1996a, forthcoming-b and c).
Tariana is spoken as the first (‘father’s’) language by about 100 people (none of whom are children) in two main settlements on the Vaupés river, the area of Upper Rio Negro, Amazonas, Brazil: Santa Rosa (previous names: Jukira-ponta, Tariana Iwi-taku ‘point of salt’) and Periquitos (Kerekere-pani ‘rapid of a sparrow’, or Tupiyari-numana ‘the mouth of a lizard’). There are also a few Tariana-speaking people in Iauarete and Ji-Ponta — see Map 1. Most of those who identify as Tariana no longer speak the language (see Table 1; cf. Aikhenvald 1996a and Moreira and Moreira 1994).
This introductory part is organised as follows. In §2 I describe the linguistic situation in the Vaupés and in the Upper Rio Negro region, with a particular focus on Tariana. Then, in §3, I consider language attitudes in the Vaupés area and historical evidence for the migrations of the Tariana. The following section, §4, discusses the Tariana language — its names, dialects, previous studies, and its linguistic profile. Cultural background — environment, means of subsistence and material culture, as well as social organisation, kinship and marriage, ceremonies and beliefs — is described in §5. Finally, in §6, I overview the Tariana stories included in this collection.

2. The linguistic situation in the Vaupés and in the Upper Rio Negro region. The Içana and Vaupés basins and adjacent regions, within the Upper Rio Negro basin (see Map 2), contain languages of the following genetic groups: North Arawak, East Tucano, and Makú. There is no proof of genetic relationship between any of these language groups.
The North Arawak languages are spoken on the Içana and its tributary, the Aiari (the Baniwa/Kurripako language), on the Vaupés (Tariana) and on the Upper Rio Negro (Warekena and, formerly, Bare).
Although today over 1500 people identify as Tariana (Rodrigues 1986), the language is spoken by only about a hundred people. The dialect complex of Baniwa of Içana (also known as Kurripako) is spoken by 3,000-4,000 people on the Içana and its tributaries and in the adjacent regions of Colombia and Venezuela (see the list of dialects given by Rodrigues 1986: 67 and Nimuendajú 1982: 174-176). Warekena, a dialect of Baniwa of Guainia, is

2 The denomination of the Arawak language family, the genetic unity of which was first recognized by P. Gilij in 1783, has been the subject of a controversy between Arawak scholars for some time. The majority of native South American scholars use the name Arawak (Aruák) to refer to the group of unquestionably related languages; a number of scholars, mainly, North-Americans, prefer to use the term Arawak(-an) to refer to much more doubtful genetic unities of a higher taxonomic order, and reserve the term Maipuran, or Maipurean, for the group of languages which South American scholars call Arawak, or Aruák (see Payne 1991, Kaufman 1990). Here I keep the denomination Arawak for the family of definitely related languages, following Rodrigues (1986).

LW/T 07

9

Tariana

spoken by a few dozen old people on the Xié river, and by about 200 people in Venezuela (see Aikhenvald 1998b). There is also old Warekena (also known as Warena, or Guarequena) spoken by a few old people on the Xié river, and by a few hundred people in Venezuela where they moved early this century (see Aikhenvald 1998b). Finally, Bare, once the most important language along the Upper Rio Negro, is now almost extinct (see Aikhenvald 1995a).3
The North Arawak languages of the Içana and Vaupés and the adjacent regions of the Upper Rio Negro basin fall into three distinct genetic groups: (a) Warekena, (b) Bare and (c) Baniwa of Içana, Tariana and Warena (Aikhenvald forthcoming-c). Baniwa of Içana shares about 80% lexicon with Tariana; however, their grammatical structure shows a number of significant differences.4
Several languages of the East Tucano subgroup are spoken on the Vaupés — Tucano, Tuyuca/Yuruti, Guanano/Piratapuya, Desano/Siriano, Carapana/Tatuyo, Macuna, Barasano/Taiwano and Waimaja/Bará. One Central Tucano language, Cubeo, also spoken on the Querarí river (a tributary of the Vaupés which constitutes the northern border of the Tucano area) and the Upper Aiari (see Barnes forthcoming and Aikhenvald forthcoming-b, for a further description of the Tucano language family). The East Tucano languages are closely related, but not mutually intellegible. The Tucano live along the Paca, Papurí, Vaupés and Tiquié rivers. In the Brazilian Vaupés, Tucano is gradually gaining ground as a lingua franca of the area.
Table 1, based on Grimes (1988), gives an idea of the numbers of those who identify themselves as belonging to East Tucano groups and to Tariana, and those who actually speak the corresponding language.

Table 1. The Brazilian Vaupés: languages and their speakers

Tucano Piratapuya Guanano Desano Cubeo Tuyuca Tariana

ethnic group

4500 1232

1000 1800 3000 723 1500

language speakers 4500 200

200

150 300 700 100

The three Makú languages spoken in the area are Dâw, Hupda-Yuhup and KakuaNukak (see Martins and Martins forthcoming).
Lingua francas spoken in the region are Língua Geral, or Nheengatu, and Tucano. Língua Geral is spoken in the whole region of the Upper Rio Negro (see Rodrigues 1986: 102, Bessa Freire 1983, Moore et al. 1994). On the Vaupés, it is only understood by older people.5 Língua Geral is a creolised version of Tupinambá (Tupí-Guaraní family) spread from the east coast of Brazil by white merchants and missionaries. It was the lingua franca of the whole Amazon region from the late 17th century up to the middle of the 19th century; its influence can still be seen in a few loan words in Tariana and other languages of the Vaupés (see §4.3, p.20). In the Vaupés area, it was gradually replaced by Tucano as a lingua franca

3 A number of other Arawak languages of the Upper and Middle Rio Negro region became extinct during the 19th and 20th centuries, e.g., Manao, Wirina, Wainuma, Yumana, Passe, Yabaana, Mandawaca (Mawaca), Amarizana (Koch-Grünberg 1911), Bahwana; see Aikhenvald (forthcoming-a). 4 Due to these differences, Tariana and Baniwa of Içana are not mutually intelligible; however, speakers can easily recognize numerous cognates and understand simple things in each other’s languages. Baniwa does not belong to the Vaupés linguistic area; however, as I have shown elsewhere (Aikhenvald forthcoming-b), it displays a number of linguistic similarities with the languages of the Vaupés which may be indicative of older contacts. 5 Interestingly, the Tariana term for Língua Geral is Ba\e, which implies that in the early days the Bare were identified with speakers of Língua Geral.

LW/T 07

10

Tariana

from the early 20th century, as a result of the language policy of Catholic missionaries and the civil authorities (cf. Story 10 below).
Indo-European languages are represented by Portuguese and Spanish. They are also gaining ground as lingua francas of the region, especially among younger people.6

3. Language attitudes and historical evidence. 3.1 Multilingualism and language attitudes. Multilingualism used to be — and to a great extent still is — a cultural norm over the whole Vaupés. Among the East Tucano peoples and the Tariana, marriage is exogamous. There are strict marriage rules, which are governed by language affiliation (see Sorensen 1967(1972), Aikhenvald 1996a). Marrying someone who belongs to the same language group is considered akin to incest. Jackson (1974: 62), referring to the linguistic attitudes of Bará, an East Tucano group of the Vaupés basin, reports being told: ‘My brothers are those who share a language with me’, and ‘We don’t marry our sisters’. Consequently language — which is acquired through patrilineal descent — is a badge of identity, together with the patrilineal descent. An Indian always identifies with their father’s tribe and language.
The main unit, both socially and linguistically, is a speech community, identified by one’s father’s language. Each settlement — whether longhouse or village — used to be traditionally multilingual because of these exogamous marriage rules. An individual generally knows between three and ten other languages of the region, including his mother’s language which would frequently coincide with his wife’s language, and in addition Portuguese and/or Spanish. Since language identity is a symbol of ethnic identity, languages — even the closest ones — are kept strictly apart (see Sorensen 1967(1972): 82). This creates a very strong impediment to lexical loans (in contrast to other multilingual situations, e.g., the village of Kupwar: Gumperz and Wilson 1971: 161-162).
Each tribe, identifiable by a distinct language (e.g. Tariana, Piratapuya, Tucano etc.), is divided into several subtribes, hierarchically organised depending on whether they are descendants of the first, second, third etc. son of an ancestor. The lower groups in the hierarchy are said to be ex-Makú, and called ‘underlings’, or ‘soldiers’, — due to the traditionally low status of the Makú groups in the Vaupés society. Their role is to serve the members of senior subtribes who are to be treated as elder brothers — for instance, lighting their cigars in the Cigar-smoking ritual (see §5.3.3). Each group — and apparently each subtribe — have their own versions of origin myths; there are dialectal differences between subtribes.7
The traditionally nomadic Makú peoples are not included in the marriage network; however, they are integrated into the economic exchange system — they produce arrow poison, and game, which they supply to the Tucano and the Tariana in exchange for the staple food, manioc (since they have no agriculture themselves). They are considered inferior by East Tucano and Tariana (see Martins 1994, Silverwood-Cope 1990) and do not intermarry with either East Tucano or Tariana. However, they do share a number of linguistic characteristics with other languages of the Vaupés region. They also share same important

6 The Yanomami — semi-nomadic hunters and gatherers who live in the jungle around the small tributaries of the Upper Rio Negro and sometimes travel as far westwards as the Vaupés region — are not culturally integrated with other peoples of the Upper Rio Negro, and do not form a part of the Içana-Vaupés linguistic area. They rarely interact with other tribes, being feared and avoided. 7 Janet Barnes (p.c.) reports that a ‘lower’ subtribe of Tuyuca which is said to have descended from the ‘tucanised’ Makú have a simpler system of evidentials than other Tuyuca varieties (cf. §4.2).

LW/T 07

11

Tariana

myths with the Tucano and the Tariana. Unlike the Tucano and the Tariana, they exhibit no inhibition against lexical loans (see Aikhenvald forthcoming-b).
Due to the obligatory multilingualism, there is a large degree of grammatical and phonological convergence among the indigenous languages of the Vaupés. The impact of these convergence phenomena is especially instructive in the case of Tariana. They are discernible as the result of ‘foreign’ influence, on comparing Tariana with Baniwa of Içana, a closely related North Arawak language. The linguistic diversity is accompanied by a lesser degree of cultural diversity — see §5.1.

3.2 Traditional evidence. There are indications that neither the Tucano nor the Tariana are the autochthonous population of the Vaupés (see Béteille 1998, on the complexity of the notion ‘indigenous’ population). According to Nimuendajú (1982: 168-171), the original inhabitants of the Vaupés area were the Makú tribes,8 and the East Tucano tribes entered the area later, from the West. The Tariana are the most recent arrivals; they must have come into the Vaupés basin from a tributary of the Içana river — probably, the Aiari (around the end of the 16th century according to Brüzzi 1977, Koch-Grünberg 1911, and Nimuendajú 1982). This migration route is reflected in Tariana myths, according to which the Tariana people originated from a ‘hole’ at the waterfall of Apui (Tariana Miaka-pani ‘the rapid of Apui, lit. the rapid of the old ones’ (ancient-CL:RAPID)), on the Aiari river where they used to live together with the Baniwa, and with the Cubeo (also see Story 1 below). When the Tariana came out of the hole, covered with blood, they heard strong thunder;9 this explains the autodenomination of the Tariana as ‘Children of the Blood of Thunder’ (Tucano Büxpo di põrá, Tariana Iri-ne (blood-PL)). Numerous stories about the wars between the Tariana and the Guanano, and between the Tariana and the Desano, provide ethnohistorical evidence concerning the Tariana invasion of the Vaupés (see Brüzzi 1977). The Desano, as the inhabitants of the main rivers, were among the first to have suffered from the invasion of the Tariana; according to Cândido Brito, as the result of the Desanos’ defeat, they became the ‘younger brothers’ of the Tariana — this is why the Tariana are not allowed to marry them.
The following tentative historical scenario can be suggested for the linguistic situation in the Vaupés during the past five hundred years. (i) Before 1500: The East Tucano tribes moved from the east into the Vaupés area, which was previously inhabited by Makú tribes; the East Tucano established dominance over the Makú. (The spread of some Tucano-speaking peoples to the Içana basin may have occurred at about the same time: see Aikhenvald forthcoming-c). The Baniwa of Içana were then living together with the Tariana in the Içana basin. (ii) Around 1600: the Tariana moved from the tributaries of the Içana river — thus splitting from the Baniwa of Içana — to the Vaupés region, in which the Tucano tribes were already established. This marked the beginning of the contact between East Tucano and Tariana; the contact between the Makú and the Tucano peoples was probably much older. (iii) Around 1750-80: the first contacts with Portuguese took place — this started the spread of Língua Geral as a lingua franca. (iv) Around 1900: Tucano started to gain ground as a lingua franca of the area, with some Tariana settlements beginning to use mainly Tucano (see §3.3). This tendency was exacerbated by the Salesian missionaries (who established themselves in the Vaupés in 1925)

8 It is usually assumed that a nomadic group of hunters and gatherers must be autochtonous, and more ‘advanced’ groups with agriculture must be newcomers (cf. Béteille 1998); however, there is no way in which this can be proved, especially in the area without any archeological support — like Northwest Amazonia. 9 According to another version, the Tariana appeared out of a drop of blood shed by their forefather, Thunder.

LW/T 07

12

Tariana

who considered the traditional multilingualism a kind of uncivilised ‘savagery’ and made a point of imposing a one-people-one -anguage policy through the system of boarding schools for children where only Tucano was used and all other languages were banned. This resulted in the growing endangerment of indigenous languages other than Tucano in the Vaupés region, as well as in almost complete obsolescence of Língua Geral.
Tariana place names (see Aikhenvald 1996c) constitute an important piece of evidence in favour of the comparatively recent character of multilingualism among the Tariana.10
Traditional Tariana place names fall into three groups: (i) names of places where Tariana live now, or have lived until recently — here called ‘actual’ place names; (ii) names of historical places associated with original dwelling sites and migrations of the Tariana — here called ‘historical’ place names, and (iii) names of places associated with traditional, strictly Tariana mythological characters and the creation of the world — here called ‘mythological’ place names.
These place names differ in quite a few important properties: whether they exist in the languages of the region, or just in Tariana; whether they are also named in Língua Geral or in Portuguese; and whether they are calque translations from one language to another if they have a name in languages other than Tariana. Finally, not all the place names have archaic features; not all of them can be derived from proper names. These properties are summarised in Table 2.
The ‘actual’ place names are calques in Tariana, Tucano and other East Tucano languages of the Vaupés. They are also translated into Língua Geral, or Portuguese; this is the name under which they appear on (Brazilian) maps. Thus, they reflect the actual linguistic situation — characterised by multilingualism — as well as the recent history, when Língua Geral was a lingua franca of the Vaupés. Some place names also have another, more recent name in Portuguese, often given by Catholic missionaries. Examples of these multilingual place names are given in Table 3.11

Table 2. Properties of Tariana place names

Property

‘Actual’ place

names

Multilingual

yes

Named in Língua Geral yes

and/or Portuguese

Calque translations

yes

Derivations from proper no

names

Grammatical archaisms none

‘Historical’ place names generally no sometimes
no no
possible

‘Mythological’ place names no no
no yes
possible

10 Jackson (1983: 100) suggests that the obligatory multilingualism in the Vaupés basin could be quite recent, and that it could have arisen as the result of pressure from white colonizers, as a means of protecting the national identity of distinct, previously hostile groups which had been forced to interact with each other more than before the invasion. For the time being we do not have enough evidence to either prove or disprove this hypothesis. 11 A useful list of ‘actual’ place names in Tucano and Portuguese and in Língua Geral is given in Brüzzi (1977: 49-50). This list was corrected, and Tariana equivalents supplied by the Brito family. Some of these place names also occur in biographical stories told by the speakers.

LW/T 07

13

Tariana

Table 3. Examples of multilingual ‘actual’ place names

Tariana Yema-phe

Tucano uxtíkapu$ri$

Língua Geral none

Iwi-taku

moá-noá

Juquira

Ikuri-taku úhuri-pweá none

Tuiri-taku umu$-ˆõá none

Mawa-kere wöhö-

none

nãxkãro

Translation

Portuguese

leaf of tobacco

Cigarro (old

(tobacco-

name)

CL:LEAF.LIKE) Nova Esperança

(new name)

point of salt

Juquira-ponta (old

name: hybrid with

Língua Geral);

Santa Rosa (new

name)

rapid of turtle

Jabuti

(jabuti-CL:RAPID)

point of pied crested Japú-ponta

oropendola

island of tirite (arumã Arumã

vine)

Place names of this group have no grammatical archaisms (cf. Aikhenvald 1996b). A place is named after a plant which grows in the place, or its physical property. For instance, Yemaphe ‘Cigarro’ is a biggish settlement on the Vaupés known for growing tobacco, and Iwitaku ‘Juquira-ponta’, recently renamed Santa Rosa, is known for a plant used in traditional extraction of salt (it is the place where most Wamiarikune live now). Ikuritaku ‘Jabuti’ (Portuguese ‘turtle’) is known for the concentration of turtles; Tuiritaku, where one of the oldest speakers of Tariana, Cândido, was born, is known for the concentration of pied crested oropendolas, and Mawakere is known for tirite (arumã vine), employed for making roofs. Both Tuiritaku and Mawakere are now abandoned (see §5.1, on the practice of abandoning villages).
‘Historical’ places are associated with sites where the Tariana lived in the ancient times and with their migrations; they figure in stories about the migrations of the Tariana, their subtribes and wars between them. Unlike ‘actual’ place names, ‘historical’ place names do not necessarily refer to places of settlements — instead, they often refer to memorable sites, such as stones or caves. These place names — exemplified in Table 4 — are mostly monolingual in Tariana. They ‘categorise’ the place with respect to its physical property, such as shape, or refer to an event which happened there, and contain linguistic archaisms. For instance, Masipiru-taku ‘the point of butterfly’ is a small peninsula on the Vaupés river which resembles a butterfly in its form, and Manaka-pina ‘valley of açai fruit’ is so named because of this type of fruit — the fruit of assai euterpe palm — which grows there. (It is not clear whether the Tariana have ever lived there, or only passed through these places on their journeys). Mawari-dapana ‘house of snake’ and Daru-dapana ‘house of arara-parrot’ are names of caves which are believed to be inhabited by the spirits of the corresponding beings. Tuiri-kere ‘Island of pied crested oropendola’ (Portuguese japú) is named after one of the Tariana leaders, called Pied crested oropendola; the Tariana did live there before they fought the Guanano and went further up the Vaupés.

Table 4. Examples of monolingual ‘historical’ place names

LW/T 07

14

Tariana

place names Miaka-pani Masipiru-taku

translation The rapid of ancients The point of butterfly

Manaka-pina Valley of Açai fruit

Mawari-dapana House of snake

Daru-dapana House of Arara-parrot

Tuiri-kere

Island of Japú-bird

comments Rapid of Apui, where the Tariana originated Peninsula on the Vaupés which the Tariana passed on their way from the Apui to the Vaupés Valley on the Vaupés river which the Tariana passed when they first arrived on the Vaupés Cave the Tariana passed on their way from the Apui to the Vaupés Cave the Tariana passed on their way from the Apui to the Vaupés Island on the Vaupés where warfare with the Guanano took place

‘Mythological’ places are associated with traditional, strictly Tariana mythological characters, and the creation of the world. These names exist only in Tariana. They often have archaic features — such as archaic derivational suffixes and possessive markers. Only ‘mythological’ place names are sometimes derived from proper names (e.g. Kali-pani ‘the rapid of Kali’ in Table 5) — they usually refer to rapids, caves, stones, and hardly ever to settlements.They are often associated with an event which occurred in this particular place.

Table 5. Examples of ‘mythological’ place names.

place name translation

structure

Iniri-yawa the hole of traira-fish traira.fish-CL:HOLE

Kali-pani the rapid of Kali

Kali-CL:RAPID

Kainiki-da the stone of manioc manioc-CL:ROUND

Waliru-na the mountain of evil evil.spirit-

spirit

CL:VERTICAL

Iˆere-tapu- spirit’s dream re

Iri-pua

river of blood

spirit-dream-POSS blood-CL:RIVER

comments Place where the mythological traira fish hid the son of Kali, one of creators of the world Place on the Querarí river where Kali lived The stone on the Querarí river where Kali gave manioc to the first people (see Story 2) Mountain on the Upper Rio Negro, near São Gabriel da Cachoeira, where Kali met his last wife, the daughter of Evil spirit (the mountain resembles a sleeping woman, and is popularly known as Bela Adormecida ‘Sleeping Beauty’) (see Story 2) Island on the Papurí river where the Tariana’s forefathers dreamt about the future River where the enemies ate up the grandfather of the Tariana

LW/T 07

15

Tariana

Place names referring to localities where Tariana live nowadays and to their historical migrations are multilingual, similar to ‘actual’ placenames.12 However, they are often not calque translations into the Tucano languages, and some of them do have archaic features (Aikhenvald 1996b). The most culturally important of these is Pa-whya-re-pani (IMPbreathe-POSS-CL:RAPID) ‘The rapid of magic breath’, the Tariana name for the Ipanoré rapid — where some Tucano-speaking subtribes of the Tariana still live. According to the traditions of various East Tucano peoples (Buchillet 1994), they emerged from the rapid of Ipanoré. According to the Tariana tradition, Ipanoré was where all the East Tucano tribes came together and arrived at various agreements; since the Tariana arrived ‘late’, they did not receive their portion of ‘magic breath’ — believed to be the source of magic power — which went mostly to the Desano.13
In a few cases where the Tariana still live in places associated with their historical migrations, these places may have two names in Tariana — one being a calque translation of a Tucano name, and the other being ‘Tariana proper’. One such example is Periquitos, which has two names in Tariana: Kerekere-pani ‘rapid of a sparrow’, calqued from Tucano Kai$pweá ‘sparrow-rapid’, and Tupiyari-numana ‘the mouth of lizard’ (after the form of a bay in this place).14

12 The most problematic place name of all is that of the Vaupés river itself. The name Vaupe (Uaupés), or Uape appears in several old lists of inhabitants of the Upper Rio Negro and Vaupés basin (Noronha in 1759, Sampaio in 1775, Ferreira in 1785, discussed in Brüzzi 1977:20ff), as a name of a tribe. No tribe with such name has been mentioned in later sources. It is still unclear whether the Uaupe were of a Tucano origin, as suggested by Brüzzi, or of an Arawak origin, or a mixture of both (see Wright 1992: 256). This name is not used by the indigenous population of the region, and is considered derogatory (Koch-Grünberg 1928; Beks&ta p.c.). It bears a certain similarity to the name of a legendary tuchaua Tariana, Buopé, who led the Tariana in their settlement on the Vaupés; however, there is insufficient evidence to support this comparison (also see Brüzzi 1977: 28-29). The names of the Vaupés river in East Tucano languages, and in Tariana, are of different structure and of different origin. The Tucano people call this river Dya Poxsa 'river of Makú'. This placename could be used as a piece of evidence in favour of the Makú being the first inhabitants of the region. (Note that there is another place, called Makwa\i, the river of Makú, in Tariana, a tributary of the Vaupés, close to Mitú in Colombia). The Tariana call the Vaupés Kaya\í; Arawak speaking groups of Baniwa of Içana call it Ukayá\i. That this is the same name is also corroborated by the rule of the loss of pretonic vowels in Tariana, cf. Baniwa apa-ita 'one (animate), Tariana pa-ita; Baniwa aìiã\i, Tariana ìiã\i 'man'. The etymology of this name is unclear. Brüzzi (1977: 13) suggests a derivation of Ucaya\i from Baniwa, Tariana uni 'water' in combination with Baniwa kawa\e, Tariana ka\e 'wind'. This is not acceptable, because of the depletion uni > u which is unlikely; there is also no evidence in favour of a process w>y. Possibly, this name contains a suffix -a\i used in hydronyms in Tariana. Tariana must have retained an older name of the Vaupés river, and did not adopt the Tucano one. 13Hence the name ‘The rapid of magic breath’. This agrees with the hypothesis that the Tariana are indeed the most recent arrivals to the region. 14 Just one place name combines the properties of an ‘actual’, of a ‘historical’ and of a ‘mythological’ place name: Iauarete (Tariana Yawhipani, from a combination of Yawi ‘jaguar’ and the suffix -hipani ‘rapid’), named after the adventures of a mythological character Yawi-wa\i (Jaguar-like one) who lived there and lost a battle to the forefathers of the Tariana. This name also contains an archaic suffix -hipani ‘rapid’ (cf. Baniwa of Içana hipani, hipana ‘rapid’); in spoken Tariana -hipani lost its initial syllable, and appears as a suffix -pani ‘rapid’ in place names. Iauarete is currently a large mission, a sort of semi-urban centre on the Vaupés whose population consists mainly of the Tucano-speaking Tariana.

LW/T 07

16

Tariana

The ‘monolingualism’ of ‘historical’ and ‘mythological’ place names —unexpected in an environment of obligatory multilingualism — suggests that the Tariana might have arrived in the Vaupés from a predominantly monolingual context, and that they have adopted multilingualism fairly recently.
The main consequence of the recent spread of the Tucano in the Brazilian Vaupés is the gradual undermining of the one-to-one identification between language and tribe. Language has gradually ceased to be an emblem of tribal identity, and the majority of languages other than Tucano have become endangered. The discrepancy between the number of those who belong to a tribe and those who actually speak the language is particularly marked in the case of Tariana (also see Story 10 below). The spread of Tucano is also leading to the gradual disappearance of one of the most fascinating multilingual areas of the world, and the areal phenomena associated with it.

3.3 Historical information about the Tariana, and their present state. The first information about the population of the Rio Negro and Vaupés, including the first mention of Tariana, goes back to the second half of the 18th century. The first source we have which gives some indication about the spread of the tribes of the Vaupés is ‘Roteiro da viagem da cidade do Pará até as últimas colonias dos domínios portuguezes em os Rios Amazonas e Negro’, by Vigário Geral, Dr. José Monteiro de Noronha (dated 1759: see Brüzzi 1977: 2031). Another early source is ‘Diário da viagem que em visita e correição das povoações da Capitania de S. José do Rio Negro’, by Francisco Xavier Ribeiro da Sampaio (1774-1775) who mentioned the Tariana, the Desano, the Guanano and the Uaupé on the Vaupés, and on the Papurí river. He also was the first historian to have observed the existence of social hierarchies in the Vaupés region. Alexandre Rodrigues Ferreira (‘Diário da viagem Philosophica pela Capitania de S. José do Rio Negro’, in 1775-6), also signalled the Cariana (Tariana?) on the Papurí, and the Uaupé on the Vaupés river. Wallace (1853) mentions the Tariana in São Joaquim on the Vaupés river; and Martius (1867, vol.1: 567) noted the existence of the Tariana at São Jeronymo on the Vaupés — characterising them as ‘Nehmer, Räuber’ (‘takers, robbers’).
A detailed account of the spread and early history of contacts of the Tariana is given by Koch-Grünberg (1911: 49ff). He also points out the existence of two Tariana groups on the Vaupés: one in Ipanoré and the other in Iauarete.15 The report that the Tariana knew gold is repeated in several sources, contributing to the idea that the Tariana in particular were highly civilised and constituted a kind of elite among the indigenous population. According to Cândido Brito, they indeed used to get gold from the Andes. Tariana has two words for gold which do not appear to be loans (hiwaru ‘red gold’ and pa:ku ‘white gold’).
The Tariana (and other tribes of the Vaupés) were involved in the ‘rubber boom’ in the late 19th century. Hemming (1987: 315) describes the depopulation and depression of the whole region of the Upper Rio Negro in the mid-19th century, due to epidemics. When in

Unlike other historical and mythological place names, Iauarete also has a name in Tucano (see Brüzzi 1977: 50) and in Língua Geral — this can be explained by the unusual status of this settlement which is the centre of the Tucano-speaking Tariana. 15 He reports that the mission of São Jeronimo was built in Ipanoré in the second half of the 18th century, by Carmelites. This mission was visited by Johann Natterer in July 1831, by Wallace in 1852 and by Spruce in 1853. The Ipanoré mission was rebuilt by Franciscans in 1880-1883 (see Koch-Grünberg 1911: 35). At that time, there were 330 inhabitants (62 houses), almost all of them Tariana. The mission of São Antonio in Iauarete then had 402 people. The missionaries were expelled from the region in 1883, and the Indians returned to the lifestyle of their ancestors in longhouses. Permanent Salesian missions were established in 1925, which resulted in the disintegration of the Vaupés culture (see above).

LW/T 07

17

Tariana

1850 the province of Amazonas was separated from Pará, the attention of the governors of the new stage turned to the tributaries of the Upper Rio Negro, and among them the Vaupés (with its tributaries, the Tiquié and the Papurí), where there still was a considerable Indian population, among them the Tariana. This period is marked by numerous attacks by the government on the ‘nomadic’ tribes of the region, including the Hohôdene (Baniwa) and Makú. A new wave in baptism of the Indians started in 1852, with the appointment of Frei Gregório José Maria de Bene, who reportedly baptised a third of the estimated 2300 Indians in the Vaupés basin. Traders and governors used the rivalries between the tribes to capture Indian slaves; Indians were urged to leave their villages and to move to the main rivers. Wallace (1853) reports that the Tariana assisted in capturing Indians of other tribes for traders; it appears that the Tariana were used for these purposes because of their high status among Indians of the region (also see Hemming 1987:319).
According to Koch-Grünberg (1911:51), the Tariana language started to be ousted from everyday use in Iauarete as early as the beginning of the twentieth century.16 The gradual spread of Tucano as a lingua franca started at the end of the 19th century (Giacone 1962:7). This process was speeded up by Salesian missionaries, who were trying to fit the peoples of the Vaupés into the norm ‘one people - one language’. The tragic overtones of the ‘language loss’ among the Tariana is reflected in Story 10, The Tariana Language, told by Graciliano Brito.
At present, Tariana is a highly endangered language spoken in just two locations — Santa Rosa and Periquitos — by representatives of one subgroup, who call themselves Wamia-riku-ne (1PL-only-AFF:LOCN-PL?) ‘the remaining ones’ (lit. we-the only ones) (see §4, and §5.2.1).17

4. The Tariana language 4.1 The names of the language. The Tariana refer to themselves as Tariá, Tariana or Tariana; here -na is a suffix used in names of people).18 Another autodenomination of the Tariana is Iri-ne (blood-PL) ‘the ones of the blood’; this name relates to the Tariana origin myth (see §3.2 and note 9). In Tariana, the Tariana language is referred to as waku ‘our speech’, or wa-yarupe ‘our thing’, or taria yarupe ‘Tariana’s thing’. The Tucano-speaking Tariana do not use the term Iri-ne; calling the Tariana Diroa (‘blood’) (see Moreira and Moreira 1994).

16 ‘The male Tarianas of Yauareté speak only Tucano among themselves, which is the language of their mothers and daughters, since exogamy is strict in all the tribes of the Vaupés, i.e. a wife is taken from another tribe, very often from far away. However, when they go on a visit to other Tariana villages, at the reception and conversations, they use Tariana which is conceived as a more appropriate ceremonial language, a kind of ‘salon language’, whereas Tucano is used in everyday affairs or during trips. The younger generation has already forgotten many Tariana words, and this is the best proof that this sonorant language [i.e. Tariana] is gradually under way, whereas Tucano is spreading more and more, and has already become a kind of ‘Língua geral’ in the Lower and Upper Caiary-Vaupés and its tributaries Tiquié and Papurí, for tribes of different languages’ (Koch-Grünberg 1911: 51, my translation). 17 The Tucano-speaking Tariana still preserve some origin myths. Information from the Tucano-speaking Tariana groups is valuable for determining differences in myths and stories between subtribes; however it cannot be completely relied upon. An important work based on Kaline tradition (third group in Tariana hierarchy: see §5.2.1) is Moreira and Moreira (1994); however, one can only rely on what is confirmed by other sources (such as Brüzzi 1977; 1994; Biocca 1965; Amorim 1987; Stradelli 1890). 18 According to Brüzzi (1977: 100), this suffix could be a loan from Língua Geral.

LW/T 07

18

Tariana

Two other names are used to describe the Tariana in the literature. (i) The denomination Iˆene (iˆe-ne ‘evil spirit-PL’; lit’ ‘demons’) is a pejorative name for the Wamiarikune subgroup of the Tariana, given to the Wamiarikune ancestors by their envious ‘elder brothers’ because of their ‘impertinence’ (some of the controversies between the Wamiarikune and other Tariana subgroups are described in Story 1). Koch-Grünberg (1911) reported that the Yurupary-tapuya19 (‘people of the evil spirit’, in Nheengatu) — also known as Iyäine, or iyemi ‘evil spirits’ — used to be a ‘subtribe’ of Tariana which was very low on the tribal hierarchy (also see Coudreau 1886-1887, vol. 2: 160, 163).20 (ii) The name Yawi, or Yavi ‘jaguar’ was mentioned by Coudreau (1886-1887, vol. 2: 474-6), and was — correctly — refuted by Koch-Grünberg (1911:50); this term is only used to refer to certain type of shamans (see §5.3.2, Table 9).

4.2 Previous studies of the language. The first short word lists in Tariana were collected by Wallace (1872/1853) and Martius (1867). Koch-Grünberg (1911) published a longish wordlist, accompanied by a few phrases and a list of Tariana tribes — these data are very interesting, but are full of mistakes. Brüzzi (1961) published a reliable list of over hundred words in Tariana. Brüzzi (1977) presented a list of Tariana subtribes, their location, and a very detailed description of Tariana-Tucano cultural characteristics. A short sketchy grammar of Tariana was written by Giacone (1962), based on work with Anibal Muniz, from Periquitos (the grandfather of Eliseu Muniz: see above) conducted mostly in the thirties.21 Various aspects of the Tariana grammar have been discussed in my publications, in a typological, areal and historical perspective — see Aikhenvald (1994a, b, 1996a and forthcoming-a to h); a detailed reference grammar of Tariana (Aikhenvald in prep.) and a dictionary (Aikhenvald and the Brito family in prep.) are in preparation.
Little is known about the dialects of Tariana. The surviving varieties of the language — spoken in Santa Rosa and in Periquitos — display minor phonological and lexical differences; for instance, the initial d in cross-referencing pronominal prefixes in Santa Rosa corresponds to r in Periquitos. The Tariana of Periquitos are reported to ‘mix their language with Tucano’. It is likely that there were more dialectal differences in the past between the hierarchically organised subgroups of the Tariana (see §5.2.1); however, since the language is no longer spoken by most subgroups, this is impossible to prove.22
The language spoken by the representatives of different generations displays significant morphosyntactic differences. The traditional narratives contain grammatical archaisms, such as switch-reference enclitic -kanada ‘after:DIFFERENT.SUBJECT’; unusual forms of the proximate demonstrative: feminine hui$ka, non-feminine hi%ka; and morphological causatives of some transitive verbs which refer to traditionally important activities performed during the Offering ritual or the Cigar-smoking ritual, e.g. -ˆapa ‘bless’, -sita ‘smoke’, -

19 Loukotka (1968:134) lists Iyäine, Yurupary-tapuya, and Kumandene (sic!) as one and the same tribe, distinct from the actual Tariana (which he also calls Yavi, following Coudreau). 20 This information has been confirmed by Padre Casimiro Beks&ta (p.c.) and Rodrigues (1986: 68). 21 Like most works of this author, it is valuable as a historical source but contains numerous errors and misinterpretations. A longish word-list in Tariana was collected by Alva Wheeler in the early sixties (parts of it were published in Huber and Reed 1992). This list contains numerous errors and wrong translations. Since it was collected in the area of Ipanoré where Tariana ceased to be spoken long ago, the Britone, whom I asked to check Wheeler’s data, volunteered the explanation that he must have worked with a semi-speaker who had ‘fooled’ him. 22 According to Koch-Grünberg (1911: 51), there were dialectal differences between Tariana of Iauarete and Tariana of Ipanoré (when the language was still spoken there).

LW/T 07

19

Tariana

perita ‘lick’ — see §5.3.3. Stories about animals, or actual experiences of people in the jungle with evil spirits and so on, as well as some other stories recurrent in the region (e.g. Story 6) told by younger people are grammatically simpler and contain numerous Tucano-like patterns such as converbial clauses and participle constructions.
The Tariana are very aware of differences in the choice of lexemes and even grammatical morphemes by different generations. This is how Graciliano Brito put it: ‘There are several ways of speaking our language. We (the younger generation) speak it one way, and our father speaks it in another way, and when he tells us stories about how people were in the old days (payape-se-ne ‘long.ago-LOC-PL’), it comes out in yet another way’.

4.3 The linguistic profile of Tariana. Tariana combines a few features inherited from protoArawak, with areal influences from East Tucano, and some independent innovations. Independent innovations in Tariana include grammatical phenomena divergent from those found in closely related languages (e.g., Baniwa of Içana), but not explainable in terms of the influence of East Tucano languages. There has also been a certain amount of language attrition in phonology, grammatical structure and lexicon.
Tariana is highly polysynthetic, basically head-marking, but with elements of dependent-marking — the latter being due to Tucano influence (since most Arawak languages are entirely head-marking).
Tariana has 25 consonants and 6 vowels. There is a series of aspirated stops, and preaspirated nasals and a glide (historically derived from a sequence with h). One of the six vowels, I, is rare. The vowels a, i, e and u have long and nasal counterparts, while o has only a nasal counterpart. The emergence of I and o, the two vowels with a limited distribution, is most probably due to the Tucano influence.
Accent is contrastive and of a pitch type — another result of Tucano influence. There is an extensive set of phonological processes which operate within a morpheme and across affix boundaries, such as aspiration floating, h-metathesis and vowel fusion. At least some of them — such as nasalisation spread and the allophonic variation of d and r, y and ˆ, y and dy — are due to the influence of Tucano. Syllable structure is (C)V(h). Besides accent, translaryngeal vowel harmony, aspiration and nasalisation delimit the boundaries of a phonological word.
Similarly to most Arawak languages, Tariana has numerous suffixes and just a few prefixes. Many verbal and nominal categories are expressed with enclitics which, unlike suffixes, have a secondary stress; there are no phonological processes which apply across clitic boundaries.
Tariana has lost the proto-Arawak morphological split-ergativity marked through crossreferencing affixes — as retained in Baniwa of Içana and Warekena (see further discussion in Aikhenvald 1995b):
A=Sa - cross-referencing prefixes O=So - cross-referencing enclitics where A is the subject of a transitive verb, O is the object of a transitive verb, Sa is the subject of an intransitive active verb, So is the subject of an intransitive stative verb (see Dixon 1994: 70). Tariana has retained the proto-Arawak cross-referencing prefixes but lost the crossreferencing enclitics.23 Tariana does preserve the common Arawak division of verbs into transitive and intransitive active, which take prefixes cross-referencing A/Sa (these are also used to mark possessor on inalienably possessed nouns), and intransitive stative, which do not take cross-referencing markers. A/Sa/So expressed with an NP can be marked with ‘agentive’

23 The loss of cross-referencing enclitics is rather widespread in the Arawak languages, and is not necessarily related to language obsolescence (cf. the loss of cross-referenencing enclitics in the Xinguan Arawak languages: Aikhenvald forthcoming-a).

LW/T 07

20

Tariana

case if it is in focus. Person, number and gender of A/Sa are neutralised in negative forms — marked with the prefix ma- and with the suffix -kade — since there is only one prefix position per verb. A third class of predicates — expressing feelings, physical states, etc. — does not take cross-referencing markers, and mark their subject with the non-subject case. A member of any word class can occupy the predicate slot, in which case they behave similarly to stative (prefixless) verbs. However, verbs have more morphological possibilities than members of other word classes used as predicates: for instance, only verbs can form imperatives.
Tariana verb has a vast array of meanings related to tense, aspect, mood and modality. Modalities include frustrative (‘do in vain’), apprehensive (‘lest’), and admirative. There are several dozen clitics used to describe varying facets of the action, some of which have highly specific meanings — they include ‘do early’, ‘spill water’, ‘wag a tail in a friendly manner’, ‘step on something and feel sharp pain’. Most of these originate in verbal roots, and were calqued from Tucano — see Aikhenvald (forthcoming-f).
Evidentiality is, cross-linguistically, one of the most unusual features of Tariana (cf. Aikhenvald and Dixon 1998). There are four evidentiality specifications which indicate the source of information obtained — visual, non-visual, inferred and secondhand. For instance, in describing an event such as ‘The jaguar killed a man’ use of the visual evidential would imply that the speaker saw this event happening. The non-visual evidential would be used if the speaker heard the noise of a man fighting the jaguar (or smelt the blood). The secondhand evidential would be used if someone told the speaker of the event, while the inferred evidential might be employed if the speaker had encountered a jaguar covered with human blood. Only visual, non-visual and inferred are distinguished in interrogative clauses.
A complicated system of serial verb constructions is used to express aspectual, directional and other meanings (see Aikhenvald forthcoming-d). The causative serial verb constructions are typologically quite unusual — both verbs (which have different agents) are marked for the same subject; this is shown in (1).

(1) du-a

du-hˆa ìiãri-nuku

3sgf-make

3sgf-eat man-TOP.NON.A/S

‘She fed (lit. make-eat) the man.’ (lit. she-made she-ate the man).

Tariana also has a passive derivation (which is strikingly similar to the passive in Tucano), and several types of causatives. When a number of clauses are put together, each subordinate clause is marked for ‘same subject’, or for ‘different subject’; this switchreference marking is very similar to that found in the Tucano languages (cf. Ramirez 1997: 264; Barnes forthcoming).
Besides verbs, nouns and derived adjectives are also open classes, while underived adjectives form a closed class (with about 30 members). Adjectives share some properties with nouns, some with stative verbs, and have some properties of their own. Adverbs and time-words are semi-closed classes. Closed classes include demonstratives, interrogativesdistributives, quantifiers etc. The most unusual of these is the gestural deictic khi ‘this size’ which involves an actual demonstration of the shape or size of an object.
Unlike in most languages of the world, nouns in Tariana are not only derivationally, but also inflectionally complex. They can take up to 15 structural positions (one of which is a prefix position). These include classifiers, tense (future and past), extralocality, contrastitivity, cases and various other affixes. (2) exemplifies an inflectionally complex noun (see Aikhenvald forthcoming-h) (- indicates affix boundaries, = stands for clitic boundaries).

(2) nu-phe-ru-ma-pe=yana-pe=tupe=miki-ite=ne=se=misini=nuku

LW/T 07

21

1sg-older.sibling-FEMININE-CL:FEM-PL=PEJORATIVEPL=DIM:PL=NOM.PAST:PLCL:ANIMATE=INS=CONTRASTIVE=ALSO=TOP.NON.A/S ‘with the person belonging to my little bad older sisters, too’

Tariana

The highly polysynthetic structure of Tariana nouns is an independent innovation of the language (neither Arawak, nor Tucano languages have this property).
Tariana has a very complicated system of over forty classifiers which are used as noun class markers, noun classifiers, numeral classifiers and verbal classifiers; a slightly different system of classifiers is used with modifiers from closed classes (see Aikhenvald forthcomingi). Example (3) illustrates a classifier -dapana ‘house, habitat’ (underlined) with an adjective, a numeral, on a demonstrative, in a possessive construction, and on a verb:

(3) ha-dapana

pa-dapana

pani-si

DEM:INAN-CL:HAB

one-CL:HAB house-NPOSS

nu-ya-dapana

hanu-dapana

1sg-POSS-CL:HAB big-CL:HAB

heku

na-ni-ni-dapana-mahka

wood 3pl-make-TOP.ADV-CL:HAB-REC.P.NON.VIS.

‘This one big house of mine is made of wood.’

An item is often introduced with a noun, and then referred to with a classifier throughout a narrative — in this way classifiers are more frequent in discourse than actual nouns.
The two-way gender opposition (feminine vs. the rest) is used in personal pronouns (just for third singular and all the plural forms) and verbal cross-referencing. Classifiers are virtually an open class, since any noun with an inanimate referent can be used as a ‘repeater’ (or ‘self-classifier’). Repeaters can be used to mark agreement with a topical noun; grammaticalised classifiers are used for unmarked agreement. Slightly different sets of classifiers are used with members of closed classes (see Aikhenvald 1994a).
Tariana distinguishes alienable and inalienable possession which interacts with possessive classifiers. Tariana has lost some elements of possession marking found in almost every Arawak language — the non-possessed forms of body parts and kinship nouns and the possessive suffixes on alienably possessed nouns. Traces of possessive suffixes are found in archaic ‘mythological’ placenames (see p. 14 on Pawhyarepani).
The Tucano influence on Tariana noun morphology can be illustrated with phenomena present in East Tucano and absent from other Arawak languages of the region — such as vocative forms of kinship nouns, use of classifiers with demonstratives, analytic marking of kinship possession, a three-term number system for nouns with an inanimate referent (collective, or unmarked, singular and plural), and special plural forms for kinship nouns.
Tariana acquired its case marking under the Tucano influence (see Aikhenvald 1996a, forthcming-b,c). Personal pronouns with an animate referent distinguish subject and nonsubject cases. Any non-subject topical constituent is marked with an enclitic -nuku. A focalised subject is marked with a suffix -ne, which developed from instrumental/comitative ne; the two morphemes, however, are synchronically distinguishable: cf. nuha-ne (I-AG) ‘I (as a focussed subject)’, nu-ine (1sg-INS) ‘with me’. One case (-se) covers all the locational meanings (locative, directional, elative). These case markers are optional and can combine with the marker -nuku ‘non-subject topical constituent’ if the constituent is topical (thus yielding a peculiar instance of ‘double case marking’: see Aikhenvald forthcoming-h).
Most North Arawak languages — like most other South American Indian languages — avoid sentences with two full NPs, especially when one of them is a free pronoun. Free

LW/T 07

22

Tariana

pronouns are mainly restricted to emphatic function. In contrast, Tariana, similarly to the East Tucano languages, makes wide use of personal pronouns.
There has been considerable structural levelling of Tariana to accord with East Tucano syntactic structures and discourse techniques. A striking feature of syntactic organisation of the languages of the Vaupés is a strong verb-final tendency; this is found in East Tucano, in Tariana, and in the Makú languages of the area. Other North Arawak languages of the region show a verb-medial tendency.
Unlike other North Arawak languages, Tariana and Tucano tend to use a ‘resuming’ phrase: ‘so he/she/they did’ at the beginning of a new paragraph; e.g. Tucano tojo (so) weegI (do-3sg.masc), Tariana kay di-ni (so 3sg.non.fem-do) ‘then, thus, and so, lit. so he did’ is used to point out a consequence, or the result of an action.

Tariana and Tucano have long chains of juxtaposed clauses, and use relative verbal forms (‘participles’) to mark the predicate of a subordinate clause. Other North Arawak languages prefer sequencing verbal clitics (similar to medial verbs in Papuan languages, cf. Aikhenvald 1995a, 1998b and forthcoming-b, on sequencing clitics in Bare and Warekena). Tariana also uses the sequential clitic -ka, to mark the predicate of a complement clause (and this is used most often in narratives told by old speakers).24 Thus, Tariana combines both ‘Tucano-like’ and ‘North-Arawak-like’ strategies of complementation.
Tariana has also undergone a number of lexical shifts under East Tucano influence; for instance, one word — ke:ri — is used to refer to both ‘sun’ and ‘moon’, similar to muhipu $ in Tucano. Other North Arawak languages have two distinct words for these, e.g. Baniwa of Içana ke:Ji ‘moon’, kamui ‘sun’. Tariana iri ‘blood’ has acquired the meaning of ‘sap’ (hence: rubber, plastic) under the influence of East Tucano di.25 Other North Arawak languages have different words for ‘blood’ and ‘sap’, e.g. Baniwa of Içana iri ‘blood’, dzeka ‘sap, rubber, plastic’ (see Aikhenvald 1996a).
Tariana has also lost some important semantic oppositions present in Baniwa but absent from Tucano. One such example are the words for ‘dying’. Baniwa has two words for ‘die’: an Sa verb -dzami ‘to die as the result of an illness; to be (terminally) ill’ and So verb mariume ‘to die suddenly’. Tariana has only the cognate of the first one, -yãmi. (The root marie- is preserved only in marieri ‘a type of shaman’: see Table 9). Tucano languages have also just one verb ‘to die’.
Numerous identical derivations in Tucano languages and Tariana involve loan cultural items; these include ‘hospital’, ‘watch’, ‘plane’, ‘airstrip’, e.g. Tucano Ihko-wi’i (medicinehouse) ‘hospital’, Tariana di-tape-dapana (3sgnf-medicine-CL:HOUSE) ‘hospital’, Guanano pahia nomia, Tariana pai isadu ‘nun; lit. father-woman/wife’. Tariana terms for ‘father’ and ‘mother’ underwent ‘levelling’ in agreement with Tucano patterns. In Baniwa the word for mother is -ha-dua, where -dua is a feminine suffix also found in other kinship terms, such as kesi-dua (relative-feminine) ‘female relative’. The Baniwa word for father is -niJi. In Tucano languages ‘father’ and ‘mother’ have the same root, and contain masculine and feminine suffixes, e.g. Tucano pa-cI$ ‘father’, pa-cõ ‘mother’; Cubeo jipa-cI ‘father’, jipa-co ‘mother’. In Tariana, the term for ‘mother’ is (-)ha-dua; it contains the root -ha and the feminine suffix -dua (both are cognate with Baniwa). The term for ‘father’, -ha-niri, is the

24 A subordinating enclitic -ka is also found in four East Tucano languages (Carapana, Tatuyo, Waimaja and Yuruti); it is not clear whether or not it was spread by contact. 25 Distinct words for ‘blood’ and ‘sap’ are found in West Tucano languages Siona, Secoya and Koreguaje, and in Central Tucano Tanimuca-Retuama and in Cubeo. Dâw and HupdaYuhup also use just one term for ‘moon, sun’; whereas Nadëb has two different words (see Aikhenvald 1996a).

LW/T 07

23

Tariana

result of a reanalysis: -ha- is the same root as that found in ‘mother’, while -niri — historically a cognate of Baniwa term for ‘father’— is effectively a masculine suffix. This suffix is also used in a number of kinship terms, such as -sa-niri (spouse-MASC) ‘husband’, uphe-niri (underlying form: upi-ha-niri: before-father-MASC) ‘widower’. Thus, the pair ‘father’ - ‘mother’ has the same morphological structure in Tariana and in the Tucano languages: parent-masculine and parent-feminine respectively.
As mentioned above, the languages of the Vaupés area have a strong cultural inhibition against lexical loans viewed as ‘language mixing’ (a ‘crime’ comparable to incest). However, this does not mean that loanwords are non-existent, only that they are few. A few loanwords from Língua Geral probably came into Tariana in the end of the 19th century, e.g. Tariana bue-ta ‘teach, learn’ (Nheengatu yumue$ ‘teach, learn’), yarana ‘white man’ (Nheengatu yara ‘master’), surara ‘soldier, underling’ (Nheengatu surara ‘soldier’) (Nheengatú data are from Tatevin 1910). The few Tucano loans include tõke$ ‘firefly’, -besita ‘choose’, -boleta ‘defeather’, -bata ‘swing’. The only preposition te ‘until’ (also used as a subordinating conjunction) could be an old borrowing from Portuguese até ‘until’.
Tariana is an obsolescent language, since it is not being learnt by children. The younger generation of Tariana speakers prefer to use Tucano when speaking among themselves or to their wives. They consistently use Tariana only when speaking to the members of their father’s family. In phonology, the language attrition phenomena in Tariana are reflected in excessive variability of certain inherited phonemes with a low functional load. In particular, aspirated stops, nasals and bilabial glide alternate with their unaspirated counterparts. Long vowels tend to freely interchange with short vowels. There is also a considerable degree of variation and hypercorrection in applying phonological boundary processes.
In morphology, there are some signs of reduction. The irregular possessive form of the inalienably possessed pani-si ‘house’, i.e. -pana (present in every North-Arawak language of the region: Aikhenvald forthcoming-c), is tending to fall out of use. Panisi ‘house’ is treated as alienably possessed; note that the word for ‘house’, wi’i, is alienably possessed in East Tucano languages. Irregular nu-pana is replaced by a construction with a possessive classifier, e.g., one frequently hears nu-ya-dapana (1sg-POSS-CL:HAB) instead of nu-pana. The latter form is acknowledged as acceptable but only rarely used. Some speakers tend to treat the noun panisi as inalienably possessed. The form nuha panisi ‘my house’ (I - house) can sometimes be heard. Some verbal categories are falling out of use; for instance, the reciprocal/reflexive -kaka is rarely used by younger people (who prefer to use a serial verb construction instead — Aikhenvald forthcoming-e). Its use with a reflexive meaning has been almost completely forgotten. In addition, the competence of speakers differs as far as the aspect, aktionsart and switch-reference marking clitics are concerned.
Syntactic reduction is rather drastic. A Tucano-like clause chaining strategy with the predicate of the subordinate clause in participle form tends to oust the Arawak-like one, with sequential forms of predicates of subordinate clause. Cleft constructions bear the influence of Portuguese ‘it is me who...’, with an interrogative pronoun.
Lexical obsolescence and loss differ from one speaker to another. All the speakers had difficulties in remembering kinship terms for cousins and uncles, especially the suppletive and semi-suppletive vocative forms. Descriptive terms were often used for birds and animals, and their ‘right’ names were remembered later. Lexical obsolescence goes together with the obsolescence of cultural knowledge (such as traditional sacred names: see §5.3.5).

5. Cultural background. Here I summarise the main facts concerning the traditional life and beliefs of the Tariana. §5.1 discusses the environment, means of subsistence and material culture. The social organisation, kinship and marriage system are dealt with in §5.2. Religion, taboos, initiation and other ceremonies are considered in §5.3.

LW/T 07

24

Tariana

5.1 Environment, means of subsistence and material culture. On the Vaupés, the Tariana and the Tucano speaking peoples live in several discontinuous areas, along the main river and its tributaries. They display great cultural similarity,26 and a complicated network of interrelations by marriage (see Sorensen 1967/1972, Jackson 1974, 1976, Aikhenvald 1996a). This cultural homogeneity in the Vaupés is realised through (a) shared means of subsistence, food and ways of life, as well as (b) shared stories and rites, and traditional social structure, with a minimal division of ‘labour’ between tribes (see Galvão 1979, for the differences in pottery and basket-weaving techniques between Tucano and Arawak-speaking groups).
All the Vaupés tribes, with the exception of the Makú, are sedentary. Descent is strictly patrilineal, and the main means of subsistence is slash-and-burn agriculture, hunting and fishing. The shifting of a dwelling place (presumably due to the exhaustion of the soil) used to happen about once a generation. The old place was usually abandoned, with the population of its longhouse moving to another location. The ostensive reason for movements was said to be ‘sorcery’, or ‘evil breath’ (Tariana hiwya-si, breathe-NOM) of enemy shamans.27 For instance, Tuiritaku, also known as Japú-ponta (see Table 3), was the place where the Britos lived before. They then moved to Iwi-taku (Juquira-ponta, also known as Santa Rosa) because ‘someone had opened a pot of fever (adaki-aphi ‘fever-CL:HOLLOW) with their evil breath, and people started dying’.
In the Vaupés cultural area28 the main means of subsistence is bitter manioc; its preparation is women’s responsibility. During the dry season men clear and burn parts of forest to make new gardens — usually of a round shape. Every married woman has a garden of her own, and she shares the products of her garden with those who helped her clear and burn it. Bitter manioc is harvested, soaked in pools, or rivers, for a few days, then grated and pushed through a cylindrical squeezer (hirina) to extract the poisonous ‘juice’. Manioc flour is prepared with large round sieves (yupiìi). It is then roasted to produce manioc flour, used for baking manioc bread (pe:the) and making a kind of manioc broth, i.e. manioc flour mixed with water (kawhi napusutanipe ‘mixed manioc flour’, Portuguese chibé).
Men are responsible for getting protein, i.e. for hunting and fishing, while women look after children, sweep the inside of houses, gather food from gardens and from the jungle and do the cooking. Men help women make gardens, do the ceremonial cooking (of meat) and build houses. Women often accompany their husbands on long fishing or hunting expeditions which last for several days (described with a serial verb construction as dima di-hˆa diemhani, lit. he.slept.he.ate.he.walked, — see §5.3.4, on taboos associated with their success).
Indians forage in the forest, and also plant various fruit trees, e.g. pineapples, bananas, açai (fruit of the assai euterpe palm, Euterpe oleracea), mirití (fruit of the fiber mauritia palm, Mauritia flexuosa), pupunha (fruit of the spiny peachpalm, Guilielma speciosa), bacaba (fruit of palms of genus Oenocarpus, Oenocarpus distichus), umarí (fruit of the spiny andira, Andira spinulosa), and ingá (fruit of Inga, from mimosa family). Açai, bacaba, and pupunha are used to prepare sweet, mildly alcoholic beverages. A culturally important traditional

26 The cultural homogeneity of the Vaupés region has been pointed out by almost all the scholars and lay observers who have visited it (e.g., Goldman 1948, Goldman 1979; ReichelDolmatoff 1971, Sorensen 1967(1972), Brüzzi 1977; Biocca 1965, Jackson 1974, 1976, Galvão 1979). Detailed descriptions of the material and spiritual culture of the Tucanospeaking peoples in the Vaupés can be found in Brüzzi (1977), S. Hugh Jones (1979), C. Hugh-Jones (1979), Jackson (1983) and Reichel-Dolmatoff (1971, 1986). 27 The Tariana term for an abandoned settlement is panisa\u (panisi ‘house’ plus suffix a\u ). 28 This area could be extended to comprise the basin of the Içana river — see the discussion in Aikhenvald (forthcoming-b and c).

LW/T 07

25

Tariana

beverage, caxiri (payaru) — made from different sorts of manioc and fermented with saliva (see Brüzzi 1977; Harner 1984) — is consumed during the feasts which accompany the clearing of the forest and burning the cleared patches for new gardens; caxirí is also used at ‘offering’ feasts (see §5.3.3). Further traditional foods include banana mash (ˆumuku, Portuguese mingão) and pepperpot sauce (ãsyapi, Portuguese quinhapira). Numerous varieties of edible leaf-cutting ants are considered a great delicacy.
The structure of the Tariana year (kamu) is shown in Table 6. The year is divided into 20 periods (called ke:ri ‘moon, sun’, or ke:ri-pi (moon-CL:LONG)) linked to flood or drought, the appearance of stars and constellations, and, possibly, phases of the moon. They are divided into four groups: 1-12 relating to the ‘big flood’, or wet season (when the food is plentiful); 13-14 for the short ‘dry season’ (when the food is getting scarce); 15-16 relating to a short ‘flood’ (when the food is very scarce); and 17-20 for another dry season when food is getting more plentiful. These periods are not fixed — for instance, one ‘month’, yuru-kamu, usually coincides with a part of August, but may extend into September.
In hunting and fishing, the Tariana use animal traps (nawetanipe), and fish nets (mepuku, Portuguese cacuri). Fish are often stunned with fish-poison (kuna) and then caught with fish-baskets (tudá, Portuguese puçá); the same baskets are used to catch fish during periods of spawning. Fish and game are preserved by being smoked. Fishing with traps is usually done at night. Men employ blow-gun and bow; arrows are tipped with the poison curare (manufactured by the Makú). Women weave baskets and hammocks out of cotton or tucum plant, and make ceramic pots. Tucano-type pots — made out of clay (surupe, Portuguese tuyuca) found along the river banks, or river beds (Brüzzi 1977: 165) — are black, not oxygenised and usually undecorated. In contrast, the Baniwa make more sophisticated white pots with red paintings on them. Ceramic ‘ovens’, or frying pans (puari, Portuguese forno) are also made out of clay by women. The Tariana and the Tucano employ the same wood-workig techniques for making canoes and paddles. Benches (e:di, Portuguese banco Tucano) — made exclusively by the Tucano — are manufactured of a single piece of wood, and painted in red or black. The peoples of the Vaupés area and the Baniwa produce a similar kind of flutes, and other ritual objects — such as cigar-holders (yemapu: see §5.3.3, p. 35): they also share long flutes used at the offering feast (yapuratu), and smaller flutes which consist of several separate parts (karisu).

LW/T 07

26

Tariana

Table 6. Traditional divisions of the year

name

translation

1. ye:

Armadillo

2. ya@ka

Shrimp

3. yawi i-ìinuma
4. yawi makite 5. hyupaki iri

Jaguar’s mouth (jaguar INDFmouth) Whole jaguar (jaguar large+CL:AN) Son of a spade (spade INDF+son)

6. hyupaki 7. kuphe-kayama-re

Spade Smoking grid for fish (fishsmoking.grid-POSS)

8. walipere iri 9. walipere 10. ˆewi

Son of Walipere (Pleades) Pleiades
Otter

approximate time Mid-February
End February to mid-March Mid-March to early April
Early April to mid-April Mid-April to early May
Early May to mid-May Mid-May to late May
End of May to mid-June Mid-June to last ten days of June Last ten days of June to early July

characteristics Beginning of wet season; abundance of edible leafcutting ants (kasiteru, da@ne, pisi) Fish start spawning, edible frogs (paiìi) sing Fish are spawning, rivers are full, rain alternates with heat Fish spawn, rivers are flooded Edible frogs sing, there is plenty of fish, it is rainy and muddy Fish is getting more scarce It is still raining; fish stop spawning; there are no frogs; time to fish white aracú (tari) in small ponds. Drizzle, there are waves of cold, sloths appear.
It rains a little; one star of the constellation called ‘Otter’ appears

season
u:ˆane ‘flood’ (plenty of food)

LW/T 07

27

Tariana

11. ˆewi i-puna 12. yare

Road of an otter (otter INDF-road)
Scorpion

Early July to mid July Mid-July to late July

A little rain; another star of the constellation of ‘Otter’ appears The wet season ends; one starts work in the gardens

LW/T 07

28

Tariana

13. yuru-kamu, pana-re

Time of fish yuru

Around August

14. ma:ri 15. pisyari
16. ãpi, ãpyari

Heron

Around September

Time of black saúva ants (leaf-cutting ants of the genus Atta) (písi) Plant ãpi

Around October Around November

17. hawaya-kamu Summer of ingá-fruit December

18. pipiri-kamu

Summer of pupunha- Early to mid-January fruit

19. kamheru-kamu 20. ye$pu-kamu

Summer of cucurafruit Summer of small cucura-fruit

Mid to late January Early to mid-February

Cicada sings; one hunts paca and curassow. There are some fish. One burns and cleans sites for future gardens and starts planting
No fish; it starts raining a little Black leaf-cutting ants come; there are just a few fish

Kamu-yapi (heatcycle) ‘dry season’; (little food)

Toads called muritu start singing; it rains, and fish are scarce
Rain dries up; best time to make gardens; time for ingá-fruit Dry season; time to harvest pupunha, cucura and small cucura

Uˆane ‘wet season’ (also called ‘small wet season’) (little food)
Kamu-yapi ‘dry season’ (some food)

LW/T 07

29

Tariana

Traditional garments were abandoned by the Tariana in the early 1930s. Men used a penis-cover (paramari) made of tururi-bark; women used a short apron adorned with seeds (kudama). Especially elaborate garments were used for celebrations, when both men and women also used longish aprons, adorned with paintings and seeds (paramarikha). Traditional male adornments included an elaborate headdress made of tall parrot feathers (daruphema) and a headdress made of smaller feathers (talama), as well as necklaces made of long and flat seeds (yakasolo) and of jaguar teeth (yawi-ye-kha (jaguar-toothCL:CURVILINEAR)). Nowadays women use skirts; older women, especially in the Colombian parts of the Vaupés and in some non-Protestant villages of the Içana, do not wear tops.
Table 7 features the division of the day in Tariana. In the olden days, people used to get up and bathe in the small hours (halite ipeya). There was just one large meal, usually towards the end of the afternoon, with frequent snacks at other times. Numerous taboos concern behaviour at night and especially at midnight (de:pi pamuˆa) when the evil spirits (Table 10) are believed to be dangerously active.

Table 7. Structure of the day in Tariana

Name

Time

halite ipeya

‘small hours: before light’ (3-4 a.m.)

halia dinu

‘when it becomes light, and Venus appears’ (lit.’light comes’) (5-6 a.m.)

halia diˆu dinu ‘when it becomes lighter, after Venus is in the sky’ (lit. light goes up)

halia diruku dinu ‘it becomes still lighter’

halia diwasa

‘it is almost fully light’ (lit. ‘light jumps’) (6 a.m.)

halia diswa

‘the dawn has broken’ (lit. ‘light has settled’)

hekwa

‘near midday’ (around 11 a.m.)

hekwa maˆa

‘midday’ (around noon)

hekwa ipumi

‘afternoon’ (1-2 p.m.)

de:kina, daiki

‘afternoon’ (3 p.m.)

de:kina wika

‘late afternoon’

dainu

‘general term for the light part of the day’

kadawa diswa ‘when it starts getting dark’ (lit. ‘darkness settles down’)

de:pita

‘beginning of the night’ (getting darker)

de:pi

‘night’ (general term for the dark part of the day)

de:pi pamuˆa

‘middle of the night’

The longhouse (Tariana panisi, Tucano wi’i) is a permanent building, thatched with the leaves of caraná palm (Mauritia carana; also see Brüzzi 1977: 158-160);29 an alternative name for a longhouse in Tariana is na-rapa-ni-dapana ‘dancing house’ (Tucano baxsá-wi’i ‘dancing house’). Its structure, with the name for each part, is shown in Diagram 1. A house is divided into four main ‘rooms’, referred to with a classifier -dawa ‘CLASSIFIER:ROOM’: see Aikhenvald 1994b). There is one ‘room’ for unmarried men, one for unmarried women, and two large divisions for married couples. In the middle of the house there is a large fireplace where the communal food is cooked (see Reichel-Dolmatoff 1971, on the importance of sharing food in the Vaupés culture). There are two separate entrances, one for

29 According to the account by Galvão (1979:169), traditional longhouses were rectangular, with a round roof. The structure of a traditional Tucano-style longhouse was outlined by C. Hugh-Jones (1979:47); the earliest descriptions of longhouses in Iauarete and on the Içana were given by Koch-Grünberg (1909-10, 1:69, 284, 323).

LW/T 07

30

Tariana

men, and one for women. The dead were traditionally buried inside the house, next to the door (cf. Harner 1984: 167, on similar practices among the Jivaro).30
A temporary hut (talima, known as tapiri in regional Portuguese) — a small nonpermanent house built for spending a night in the jungle during a hunting expedition — consists of four poles, for hanging hammocks, with a leaf covering, and is reminiscent of bark shelters used as houses by the Makú, or by the Australian Aborigines.
The furniture consists of hammocks (amakú) and of Tucano-style benches (e:di). Hammocks are used for sleeping at night and sitting or dozing during day. To make love, spouses or lovers go to a woman’s garden (if she has one); otherwise they do it in a hammock (thus, the verb kwa ‘hang’ is also used with the meaning ‘sleep together’).

5.2 Social organisation. Kinship and marriage 5.2.1 Social organisation. Descriptions of the social organisation of the peoples of the Vaupés area can be found in Goldman (1979), C. Hugh-Jones (1979), S. Hugh-Jones (1979), Sorensen (1967/1972), Jackson (1974, 1976, 1983); Galvão (1979), and Brüzzi (1977); additional information was obtained from my Tariana teachers and various other people of the region (including some non-Tariana-speaking Tariana).
The traditional settlement patterns were multifamily longhouses and patrilineal sibs. As mentioned above, the process of replacing traditional longhouses by individual family houses began in the Brazilean part of the Vaupés region in the 1920s. There are no longhouses left in Brazilian territory; a local descent group is now necessarily split into Western-type nuclear families.31
As was said above, each tribe, identifiable by a distinct language (e.g. Tariana, Piratapuya, Tucano etc.), is divided into several subtribes hierarchically organised depending on whether they are descendants of the first, second, third etc. son of the ancestor (see below). The lower groups in the hierarchy are sometimes said to be ex-Makú; exogamous marriages are preferrably arranged between hierarchically equivalent groups. Historically, the Tariana

30 This practice was abandoned by the Tariana a few generations ago; it is still preserved in some Baniwa villages (Candelário da Silva, p.c.). 31 The basic units are classified by Jackson (1974, 1976) as (i) local descent groups, which includes one’s co-agnates and would usually occupy the same longhouse; (ii) sibs, i.e. named groups which would occupy one or more longhouses/settlements along the river; (iii) language groups (aggregates), or ‘tribes’, where the membership is determined by the rules of patrilineal descent, and members share a ‘father’s language’; (iv) phratry is an unnamed unit of various language-aggregates; members of a phratry do not intermarry and call each other ‘brothers’.

LW/T 07

31

Tariana

consisted of ten such subgroups. Different subtribes used different sets of sacred names (‘blessing names’: see §5.3.5); there are also differences in at least some origin myths.32 Since the language has been lost by all the subtribes except one, the Wamiarikune, it is now impossible to know whether there had ever been any dialectal differences between the groups.

32 For instance, in the story of the origin myth by descendants of a senior subtribe, Kaline, reflected in Morreira and Morreira (1994) and Biocca (1965), Tariana forefathers were alternately two and three, while in the version told by the Wamia\ikune they were always two.

LW/T 07

32

Tariana

Diagram 1. The structure of a Tariana longhouse. Numbers refer to different parts of the house; they are explained below by the Brito family.

1: ãìa

na-kwa-ni-dawa

ãìa

ma-sa-do-peni

na-kwa

man:PL 3pl-hang-TOP.ADV-CL:ROOM man:PL NEG-spouse-FEM-PL:AN 3pl-hang

‘A ‘room’ where men hang in hammocks. Unmarried men hang in hammocks’

2: pani-si

i-wa-da-se

i:na

ma-sa-niri-peni

nakwa

house-NPOSS INDF-belly-CL:ROUND-LOC woman:PL NEG-spouse-MASC-PL:AN

3pl-hang

‘Inside the house unmarried women hang in their hammocks’

3, 4: hi-kwisi

pani-si

ithirikuna ka-sa-do-peni

na-kwa

DEM:AN-CL:CORNER house-NPOSS near

REL-spouse-FEM-PL:AN 3pl-hang

‘In this place married people hang in their hammocks’

5: pani-si

pamuˆa-maˆa

hanu-syawa-ka

na-kuka

house-NPOSS middle-IN.MIDDLE big-CL:FIRE-SEQ 3pl-light

halia-bala-pidana

de:pita-nuku

white-EVERYWHERE-REM.P.REP night+AFF-TOP.NON.A/S

ãsyapi

syawa ithirikuna na-hˆa-ni-kayama-re

pepper+CL:HOLLOW fire

near

3pl-eat-TOP.ADV-smoking.grid-POSS

‘They light a big fire in the middle of the house, to light everything at night, and (put) a pepperpot near fire (with) a smoking grid’.

6: amaku yapise na-ni-nipe

na-yã syawa-pe-pidana

hammock under 3pl-do-NOM 3pl-stay fire-PL-REM.P.REP

‘Under a hammock there used to be fires’

7: nawiki-yawa

people-CL:HOLE

‘grave(s)’

8, 9: yakolekama ‘door’

hi-naka

phe-ri

pa-mha

DEM:AN-PRES.VIS IMP+enter-REL

IMP+go-PRES.NON.VIS

LW/T 07 ‘This is where one enters’

33

Tariana

LW/T 07

34

Tariana

The following ten subgroups of Tariana are arranged in the order of seniority. Some are named after a mythological being they descend from, and some after a totemic animal; the etymology of some names is unknown. Names ending in -ne are plural (-ne is the Tariana plural animate marker: for instance, the Britos are called Brito-ne; this marker is also used in the name Iri-ne — see p. 10).33 1.Kwenaka (descendants of the first son; meaning unknown); 2. Iìirimhene (descendants of the second son; meaning unknown); 3. Kali-ne (possibly, descendants of Kali, the mythological hero-creator: Kali-PL); 4. Paipene (meaning unknown); 5. Kumadene (Ducks; people of the Duck); 6. Mali-ne (Guans); 7. Kunuli-whi (feather of Kúnuli bird); 8. Phiìi-kawa, Phiìi-kawa-pu (group of agoutis); or Phiìi-ne ‘Agoutis’; or Phiìi-kawa-pupe ‘big feet of agouti’. 9. Yawyari (?people of jaguar). 10. Wa-mia-riku-ne (1pl-only-LOCN:AFF-PL) ‘we, the only/last ones’.

5.2.2 Relations with neighbours. The patterns of swidden agriculture require access to extensive territory, and the fight for resources may indeed explain the raiding and feuding, memories of which live on (e.g., the wars between Tucano peoples and the Tariana). It appears from myths told by the Wamiarikune that their relationship with other Tariana subtribes had always been rather hostile — cf. Story 1 below.
The Tariana’s relations with the Makú is a mixture of contempt and fear: since the Makú know the secret of the arrow-poison, curare, and are jungle dwellers, they are believed to possess the secrets of the magic ‘evil breath’. The Desano are also feared and, at the same time, despised: they are widely known to be sorcerers and are believed to be capable of causing all sorts of evil. At the same time, they are considered ‘younger brothers’ of the Tariana and are assigned a lower status; the Tariana cannot marry them.
The Tariana do not seem to have particularly friendly feelings towards the Baniwa of Içana (referred to as Uhu$-nawiki ‘Hohôdene’, or Maya-naku-ne (?middle-on-PL ‘people of the middle’?)), said to have always been cannibals who used to live ‘in caves’. The Tariana had some contact with the Warekena (the group now known as Guarequena in Venezuela, or as Warena/Old Warekena on the Xié river in Brazil — see §2) while the Warekena lived in the Vaupés basin; due to a ‘conflict’, the Tariana drove the Warekena away from the Vaupés, from where they were forced to move to the Xié river.34 A group the Tariana seem to be particularly afraid of are the Makiritare said to live upstream towards the Orinoco river basin; they are supposed to be very unfriendly, to possess very strong poisons and magic powers and to consume the dead bodies of their friends and enemies.35

33 A similar hierarchy of subtribes was given by Brüzzi (1977: 101-103). However, the hierarchical relations between the subtribes may have been different in the past. According to Story 1 in this collection — one of the origin stories told by Cândido Brito — once upon a time the Wamia\ikune possessed the Yurupary flute (pi\i) (§5.3.3) which elder brothers did not have, and which gave them the right to a higher status. The names of subtribes Ka\i, Kwenaka, Piìia (cf. Phiìi-ne) are also quoted by Biocca (1965: 255) — who does not put them in any hierarchical order. 34 This information comes from Tariana traditional stories, and has been confirmed by Padre Casimíro Beks&ta. 35 The name Makiritare is the autodenomination of Dekwana, a Carib group (see Derbyshire forthcoming); however, this description is reminiscent of some rituals of the Yanomami.

LW/T 07

35

Tariana

Every Tucano group used to have a group of Makú ‘associated’ with them (cf. Martins and Martins forthcoming, Silverwood-Cope 1990) — for instance, the Hupda are known as Makú of Tucano, and the Kakua (or Bará) are also known as Makú of Cubeo, or Makú of Guanano. The Tariana do not have ‘Makú’ of their own; however, I was told that back in the olden days they used to have ‘underlings’ (na-kholena ‘their servants’, or surarane ‘soldiers’) of their own who would ‘light cigars’ for them in the cigar-smoking ritual (see §5.3.3) — a group of very small people called mayhene (lit. ‘small beetles’). In the account provided by Cândido Brito, the Mayhene got ‘fed up’ and moved upstream the Rio Negro, and probably still live somewhere around Manaus. 5.2.3 Kinship system and marriage. The Tariana and Tucano classificatory kinship systems are a variation of a basic Dravidian type (Sorensen 1967(1972):85; Goehner, West and Merrifield 1985: 59). The basic distinction is between cross and parallel cousins; members of ego’s generation are either parallel cousins considered classificatory siblings, or crosscousins; only cross-cousins are regarded as marriageable. (This distinction is often described as ‘agnatic’, or ‘one’s own group’, contrasting with affine, or ‘other’s group’: Jackson 1983: 106-112). The kinship terminology distinguishes five generations, with the sex of relatives being marked for each generation (cf. Jackson 1983: 106). A member of an exogamous patrilineal phratry is eligible to marry a person from another exogamous phratry which is identified as speaking a different language.
Similar to Tucano peoples, the Tariana practice bilateral cross-cousin marriage. Thus, one’s mother is often from the same language group as one’s wife (see Sorensen 1967(1972)). This principle is explained by Jackson (1976:76) as ‘marriage alliance’, i.e. a tendency to fortify already existing links between the two affinally related kins.36
Since marriage implies the loss of a female ‘producer’, this loss has to be replaced; and according to Goldman (1979:136ff), this accounts for the principle of ‘sister exchange’ — when a man typically obtains a wife by exchanging his sister (or a female relative of the same generation) for another man’s real sister. Traditionally, marriages used to be arranged by parents (see Brüzzi 1977, and Goldman 1979). The party which accompanied the future bridegroom used to come to the settlement of the future bride, and the courtship began — ending with a traditional ‘capture’ of a wife, after which the bridegroom had to pay in exchange for the bride. Apparently, this custom is no longer followed.
Older brothers are supposed to get married before younger ones (the same applies to elder sisters). There are often not enough women for every man — the theme of an unmarried young man ‘not loved by women’ is pervasive in Tariana narratives (cf. Story 8 below). A widower had a preferential right to get married before his elder son; and he can give his

36 This is indeed the case with some members of the Brito family (see Table 11), but not with other members: Cândido’s wife Maria is Piratapuya, and so is Juvino’s wife Glória (she, however, does not speak Piratapuya). The wives of Graciliano, Ismael and the late Francisco are Tucano. Cândido’s mother, Maria Âlvare, was Guanano, and so is the wife of his elder brother Roberto. The wife of his younger brother (mother of Rafael, one of my earlier consultants), Leonardo, is Cubeo, while Rafael has just married a Tucano woman. Manoel, the elder brother of Cândido’s father Paulino, was married to a Piratapuya, and so were two of his three sons; the third son was married to a Tucano woman. In principle, all the combinations of marriageable tribe and languages should be possible. However, in practice this is not so. Some tribes are considered ‘brothers’, or ‘younger brothers’; then the marriage between their representatives is prohibited: for instance, the Tariana cannot marry the Desano. Other restrictions, among the Tucano peoples, include the absence of marriages between the Tucano and the Barasano, or the Guanano and the Piratapuya (C. Hugh-Jones 1979, S. Hugh-Jones 1979; Jackson 1983: 106ff).

LW/T 07

36

Tariana

daughter away in a process similar to ‘sister exchange’.37 A widow (uphedo, from upe-hado (past-parent-feminine)) should marry a younger brother of her late husband, thus perpetuating the family. (Tariana has a special term referring to a widow(er) getting remarried, -henita; traditionally, if a woman did not like her husband or his family, she could simply run away — see C. Hugh-Jones 1979, Jackson 1983, Goldman 1979; if her husband failed to get her back and she married someone else, the term -henita would not be applicable.) There is no term for step-parents; the term for a step-child is nu-tawhe nuri (or nu-itu) (1sg-bring.up 1sg+son (or 1sg-daughter), lit. son/daughter I bring up). First-born children are the most important — husband and wife used to address each other using the sacred names of their first-born children (the Tariana term for a first-born child is pheru-si).
An elder brother or an elder sister is entitled to respect if they behave properly (also see Jackson 1983: 112-116). In numerous Tariana stories the elder sister is the one who misbehaves, provoking chaos and disaster. ‘Wrong’ marriages may also lead to a disaster — this is reflected in Story 6 below (known in Tucano as Namakuru: Jackson 1983: 114), in which a widowed mother got remarried, taking an evil spirit ˆaki (see Table 10) as a husband.
The kinship terms are given in Table 8. They have irregular plural forms and vocative forms (analysed in detail in Aikhenvald in prep.).

5.3 Ceremonies and beliefs. 5.3.1 General remarks: the Tariana pantheon. The Tariana share numerous beliefs, ceremonies and superstitions with other peoples of the Vaupés region, and also with the Baniwa of Içana. Here I will not attempt an exhaustive description of Tariana and Tucano ritual life; my intention is to highlight the most striking features necessary for understanding the Tariana stories.
Tariana religion is animistic; due to the efforts of the Catholic church traditional religious concepts are now intertwined with Christianity. The creator of the Tariana and of the whole world is believed to be Yapi-riku-ri (ˆapirikuri) (lit. bone-LOC-REL) (cf. Baniwa Yapi-Jiku-Ji ‘the one who is on the bone’, Tucano O’ã-kI (bone-son) ‘son of the bone’). He is also known as Wanari Yapirikuri: wanari means ‘the American snake bird (Anhinga anhinga, Portuguese carará), and Yapirikuri is believed to appear disguised as this bird. He is sometimes identified with the Christian God, e.g. Yapi-riku-ri di-ˆami-kada (3sgnf-die-CL:DAY) ‘Good Friday; lit. the day when Yapirikuri died’. Story 2 below tells about the flood and the fire which Yapirikuri decided to inflict upon the world, because people were ‘bad and cannibals’ — it is reminiscent of the Biblical flood (however, the Tariana are conscious of this similarity and try and keep the stories apart).
Kali is the creator and the master of manioc, while Kui (possibly related to Baniwa Kuwai: Brüzzi 1994) is the master of various types of snuff and the protector of shamans. He is also the owner of the Yurupary flute (piri i-minari ‘flute INDF-master-MASC). The reason why it is prohibited for women to see the Yurupary flute is that both Yapirikuri and Kui dislike women (ka-duiha ka-na ‘REL-dislike REL-want) — who had ‘sinned’ by having allowed the Moon (Ke:ri) to copulate with them. Ancient people of the ‘olden days’ are called Hipada nawiki (‘stone people’) since the traces of their adventures are still there, in the form of stones on the rapids around the Vaupés.

37 Traditional marriage customs are now falling into disuse. Twenty-year olds and teenagers prefer to marry white people, or ‘caboclos’ (part-whites/part-Indians) from the regional centers, of a higher social status than themselves. Marriages are often arranged by young people themselves (though the rules of exogamy are, roughly, observed, if the marriage is between two indigenous people). The marriage principles outlined above do not apply for Makú groups, who do not constitute part of the cultural area; they are considered inferior in every way, and ridiculed, partly, for ‘marrying their own siblings’.

LW/T 07

37

Tariana

LW/T 07

38

Tariana

Table 8. Tariana kinship system

Numbers in brackets refer to comments to Table 8 given below.

Agnates

+2 FF/MF nu-hwe-ri (1sg-grandparent-MASC) (1)

FM/MM hido

+1 FOB, F ha-niri (2)

MB nu-khi-ri (5)

FYB nu-nami

MZ ha-do-theru

M ha-do(a) (3)

FZ nu-kwi-ru (4)

O OB nu-phe-ri (6)

MBS/FZS nu-tedua-ri

YB nu-we-ri (6)

MBD/FZD nu-tedua-ru

OZ nu-phe-ru (6)

YZ nu-we-do (6)

-1 S nu-ri (7); ByS nu-idoa-ri (7) ZS, ZD nu-wasado (9) (masc.ego) BS paidoa-ri (fem.ego) D nu-itu (8) BD nu-idua-ru (fem.ego) (8)
-2 SS, DS/ZSS nu-daki-ri (10) SD, DD/ZSD nu-daki-ru (10)

Affines (11)
WF, HF nu-hˆawe-ri (14) WM, HM nu-hˆawe-ru (14)
W nu-sa-do H nu-sa-niri. HB nu-si-ri (12) HZ, BWZ nu-sa-ru (12) WZ nu-nidua WB nu-dalina (13) DH nu-sima-ri (15) DW nurinu < nu-ri-inu (1sg-son-wife)

B - brother; D - daughter; F - father; H - husband; M - mother; O - older; S - son; W - wife; Y - younger; Z - sister.

LW/T 07

39

Tariana

Comments to Table 8. General: Most kinship nouns are inalienably possessed; they must take a possessive prefix. In Table 8 they are given with 1sg prefix nu- ‘my’. Some terms, such as hadoa ‘mother’, can also be treated as alienably possessed and then are used without a prefix. (1) These terms are used to refer to grandparents, great-grandparents etc.; the suffix -peri (OLD:MASC), -peru (OLD:FEM) is used for ancestors who are ‘long gone’, i.e. either have been dead for a long time, or are ‘distant’ in generation. (2) The term ha-niri (parent-MASC) is used to refer to one’s father, father’s elder brother, as well as grandfather’s elder brother’s sons. However, one’s own father is distinguished from the rest in the vocative form: vocative form for one’s father is paí — which does not appear to be a loan — and for the rest paiphé (see §4.3, p.20, on how the term ha-niri underwent restructuring under Tucano influence). The plural, ha-niri-nipe, refers to the generation of one’s classificatory fathers. (3) The term ha-do(a) (parent-FEM) is also used to refer to father’s brother’s wives, as the female counterpart of ha-niri. (4) The term for a father’s sister, nu-kwi-ru, has the same vocative form as ‘wife’s mother’ (nukui). (5) The term for mother’s brother is also used to refer to the husband of masculine ego’s father’s sister. (6) Terms for elder brother and elder sister are also used to refer to one’s father’s elder brother’s children, and also to one’s mother’s elder sister’s and mother’s younger sister’s children; terms for younger brother and younger sister are used to refer to one’s father younger brother’s children; plural forms nu-phe-ri-nipe, nu-wene-ne are used to refer to all parallel cousins and siblings (elder and younger, respectively). (7) The term nuri is also used to refer to the son of the husband’s brother. The term nuidoa-ri is used to refer to masculine ego’s brother’s son. The term paidoa-ri is used to refer to the son of feminine ego’s brother. (8) The term nuitu is also used to refer to one’s brother’s daughter and husband’s brother’s daughter. The term nu-idua-ru is used to refer to feminine ego’s brother’s daughter. (9) There is no gender distinction in the reference term for ZD/ZS; the gender distinction is made in vocative forms: ZS is tethu, while ZS is tesí. (10) The gender distinction is neutralised in the vocative form daké. (11) The generic term nu-dalipa-ki-pe is used to refer to wife’s or husband’s relatives of the same generation as ego. There is also a generic term for agnatic relative, masc. nu-kesi-ni, fem. nu-kesi-dua. (12) Unlike the Bará (Jackson 1983: 112), the Tariana do not distinguish FZS/FZD and MZS/MZD. The term nu-sa-ru is used for husband’s sister and sister of brother’s wife. The term nu-si-ri is used for husband’s brother and husband of brother’s wife sister. (13) The term for wife’s brother, nu-darina, is also sometimes used as a generic term for wife’s relatives. One’s brother’s wife can be referred to descriptively as nu-phe-ri-sa-do (1sg-younger.sibling-MASC+INDF-spouse-FEM) ‘elder brother’s spouse’ (or nu-we-ri-sado 1sg-younger.sibling-MASC+INDF-spouse-FEM ‘younger brother’s wife’). (14) The vocative forms for wife’s or husband’s father are the same as for mother’s brother and father’s sister respectively (see 4 above; Baniwa has the same term for ‘father’s sister’ and ‘mother-in-law’: nu-kwi-ru (Oliveira 1985) (note that the term nu-kwiru in Tariana means ‘father’s sister’). The plural nu-hˆawe-ri-nipe is used to refer to all the wife’s or husband’s older generation relatives. (15) The term ‘daughter’s husband’ nu-sima-ri has the same vocative form as sister’s son (tesí), and ‘son’s wife’ nurinu has the same vocative form as sister’s daughter (tethú).

LW/T 07

40

Tariana

The White People (yarana) appear in the origin myth as one of the Tariana subgroups; it says that, due to their ‘knowledge’, they managed to get hold of the gun and clothing while other groups (e.g. Tariana, Cubeo, Desano, Piratapuya) were helpless, ‘like children’ (see Hugh-Jones 1988, on how white people were incorporated into the mythological cycle of the East Tucano group Barasano). The mythical ‘snake people’, or ‘fish-people’ (kuphe-ne), are also conceived of as ‘white’ (cf. similar observations in HughJones 1988, for Barasano, and in Harner 1984: 154-5, for Jivaro). They are ‘in charge’ of fishing and, sometimes, hunting. They belong to the other world (pa-ehkwapi ‘one/other38CL:WORLD) and typically appear disguised as big handsome white women or men. They lure unsuccessful hunters (husaite, Portuguese panema), or ‘men not loved by women’ (ina meninite) to ‘live’ with them in their huge beautiful underwater houses; when they come back to the earth they bring nothing but misfortune to their relatives (cf. Story 8 below). The ‘snake people’ are also the ones who take away girls who menstruate for the first time and dare to run away from their seclusion in order to have a wash — see Story 5 below. The ‘snake people’ can be helpful to a human being; Story 9 shows how a ‘snake man’ allowed a destitute widow to get fish from a secret stream, on condition that she should not take too many; but once the allowed quantity was exceeded, the whole village was destroyed.

5.3.2 Shamans. Shamans — see Table 9 — are divided into six groups, according to their strength and ability to inflict illnesses (kaiperi di-a ‘illness he-gives’) and to cure them (kaiperi di-susu ‘illness he-sucks’); note that the first is the highest type and the sixth is the lowest. They sniff different kinds of snuff (generic wheru, hipatu ‘snuff’). Shamans of a ‘higher’ category can do anything the lower category can do; however, each has their specialisation — for instance, the ‘beginner’, sakaka (number 6 in Table 9) specialises in ‘attracting women’. Shamans of types 1 and 2 are sometimes also called yawi ‘jaguar’ because of their ability of ‘turning into jaguars and eating people’ (see §4.1, on Yawi as one of erroneous names for the Tariana). These shamans also have the power of opening ‘the pot of fever’ (mentioned in §5.1, p. 21) so as to make their enemies fall ill and die.
Other people with some magic powers (outside the hierarchy of shamans) are ka-ˆapa (REL-bless) ‘blesser’ (i.e. a person with the power to bless the tar of certain trees, and to bless people so that some illnesses go away), yaku-si mina-ri (INDF-talk-NPOSS masterMASC) ‘master of speech; a magician who does not sniff snuff but can foresee the future’, ditape-kani (3sgnf-cure-AGENTIVE.NOM) ‘curer; someone who can cure diseases’, and ma:ru ‘the master of ritual dances’.

5.3.3 Initiation. Feasts and rituals. When a girl menstruates for the first time (hi$tuka) she is put for three days into an enclosure, where she has to eat certain types of fruit but not fish, game or pepper, and is forbidden to bathe. After three days she is let out, beaten, bathed and painted by an old woman, and an offering feast (see below) is organised. A boy, once he reaches puberty, is supposed to spend some time in the jungle proving he can hunt and fast; after that he returns to the village, gets beaten, bathed and painted by an old man, and participates in an offering feast. Female initiation is still practiced, while male initiation was abandoned several decades back. These initiation rites are similar across the Upper Rio

38 Tariana uses the same item in the meaning of ‘one’ and ‘other, another’.

LW/T 07

41

Tariana

Negro; cf. the description of the male initiation of Candelário da Silva, the last speaker of Bare, in Aikhenvald (1995a: 52-54).39

39 For the description of female and male initiation in Tucano cultures, see Jackson (1983) and S. Hugh-Jones (1979).

LW/T 07

42

Tariana

Table 9. Classification of shamans and their powers

type 1. Wahiwa marieri

type of snuff sniffed keri hi-ni-na (moon INDF+copulateTOP.ADV-CL:VERT) lit. ‘moon’s penis’

2. Adaki yawikiri (lit. fever Yawikiri)

kerawiki

3. Yawikiri (or kerawi yawikiri)

kerawiki

4. Marawa yawikiri 5. Yatu mina-ri (snuff master-MASC) or yatu yawikiri 6. Sakaka

marawatI yatu
-

powers can cure and inflict illnesses and undo the effect of any ‘evil breath’; can transform into a jaguar (yawi-maka-pe nhe (jaguarCL:CLOTH-PL 3pl+enter)) ‘enter jaguar skins’ and ‘eat’ people (yawi ka-hˆa: ‘be.jaguar REL-eat’); have the power to ‘open the pot of fever’ (adakiaphi). can cure and inflict illnesses, do the ‘blessing’; undo the effect of the ‘evil breath’ inflicted by shamans of lower or equivalent status. can bless ‘tar’, cure and inflict some illnesses. knows the language of ‘snake people’, can cure some illnesses; knows the secret of wiri ‘aphrodisiac’.

The Tariana term for an old man or woman who is performing the initiation ritual is ditudeta-kasi (this term is often translated as ‘godmother’, or ‘godfather’); the child to whom the ritual is done is called nuri-da (1sg+son-CL:ROUND) (translated as ‘godchild’).
The Offering ritual (known in Portuguese as Dabucuri festival, Tariana na-walita-nipe (3pl-offer-NOM)) is usually organised by one village or longhouse if they have surplus of produce, or as a part of the rite of initiation. The village or longhouse where the feast is going to take place is responsible for making manioc beer (Portuguese caxiri), while the others provide the food (see Reichel-Dolmatoff 1971, and especially the description in Brüzzi 1977: 303-304). After ritual dances organised by ma:ru ‘the master of ceremony’, kahpi (a strongish variety of manioc beer) is distributed, and drinking carries on until the next day — this is why another term for the offering festival is pa-ira-ni-kada (IMP-drink-TOP.ADVCL:DAY) ‘day of drinking’. Drinking involves vomiting (inducing oneself to vomit), to be able to fully enjoy the feast. In the morning of the third day the cigar-smoking ritual takes place, to mark the end of the feast. Male members of a low-ranking sib light two big cigars (yema) each of which is held in a forked cigar-holder (yemapu). The most important males (usually, the most powerful shamans) of the two participating groups (the ‘host’ group and the ‘guest’ group) offer the cigars to each other to smoke (na-siteta-kaka, 3pl-smoke+CAUSREC, ‘make each other smoke’); after that the cigars are passed from more important to less important men. The shamans and the important men alternate in reciting episodes from origin stories (further details are in Brüzzi 1977: 312). Cigar-smoking is accompanied by putting snuff on one another’s tongue and licking it from there (na-perita-kaka (3pl-lick+CAUSREC) ‘make each other lick’).40
A subtype of ‘offering’ feast (offering of fruit, but not of meat or fish) involves the sacred flutes (piri) known as Yurupary flutes (Tucano mi$ri, Baniwa Kuwai; see S. HughJones 1979; Jackson 1983: 188-191; Brüzzi 1977: 313-315, on the geographical spread of the Yurupary cult and its characterisation as a cultural feature of the Içana-Vaupés region). Women are not allowed to see the flutes (and have to run away inside the longhouse as soon as they hear the sound of them); a woman who has seen a Yurupary flute must die (cf. Story 4 below).
5.3.4 Taboos and fears. There are numerous taboos concerning a man’s behaviour in the jungle. A hunter, if he wants to be successful, cannot have sex, or even think about women, before he goes on a hunting trip. Otherwise he may fall victim to the evil spirit ˆamu who might appear to him in the image of a ‘white woman’ (i.e. snake-woman, or ‘fish-woman’: kuphe i-sa-do (fish INDF-spouse-FEM: see §5.3.1) and devour him, or ‘take his heart away’.
Similar sets of taboos apply to women who know the secret of making pots. For three days before they go to a far away place (usually a clearing in the jungle), they are not supposed to have sex, eat, drink, defecate, or urinate: otherwise the pots will break (Olívia Brito and Maria Brito, p.c.). Nowadays, very few women know these secrets, so female taboos are falling into disuse.
The taboos concerning women’s behaviour are linked to the traditional fear of women’s menstrual blood (widespread in numerous other cultures across the world). Menstrual blood is believed to be the result of women’s ‘misbehaviour’ with the Moon (ke:ri ka-sa-do (moon REL-spouse-FEM) ‘moon marries [them]’). Similar to other Tucano origin myths, the Tariana origin myths mention an ‘ancestor’ woman believed to be the first to use the Yurupary flute, which she subsequently lost; however, this story is not well remembered. Since women continually ‘misbehave’ and cannot even see the Yurupary flute, they are often
40 This is not mentioned by Brüzzi.

LW/T 07

44

Tariana

referred to as ma-nihta-kadite (NEG-think/reason-NEG+CL:AN) ‘the ones who do not think’.41
Various other taboos are linked to the ‘likes’ and ‘dislikes’ of evil spirits listed in Table 10. The most important of the evil spirits, ˆamu, is known to have a liking for the blood of the first menstruation; this is the reason why girls who menstruate for the first time (hi$tukite ‘menstruate.for.the.first.time-THEMATIC+CL:AN’) have to be kept in seclusion and maintain dietary restrictions — lest ˆamu comes and devours them. The evil spirits are especially dangerous at nighttime — for instance, one is not supposed to make any appointments with another person after dark lest the evil spirit learns about it and comes and eats a person up, disguised as the other person. The fear of getting close to ‘beings who are not “like us”’ is reflected in numerous stories about people living together with evil spirits, or snake-people, and striking deals with spirits of the jungle; all this involves moving into ‘the other world’ (pa-ehkwapi) which is always ominous and not recommendable.42 (Also see Aikhenvald and Dixon 1998, for some putative correlations between the various taboos and restrictions, and linguistic phenomena, in Tariana).

Table 10. Hierarchy of evil spirits of the jungle Evil spirits of the jungle are called awakada-peni (jungle-PL:AN) ‘the jungle ones’.
The first two in the hierarchy below, ˆamu and waliru, are considered awakadapeni yekana ‘chiefs of the jungle ones’. The third term, ˆaki, is often used as a cover term for all the evil spirits of the jungle (possibly, to avoid the mention of ˆamu and waliru, lest they come).

1. ˆamu is a dangerous spirit who can take the shape of a white woman (snake-woman), or a jaguar and rob the ‘heart’ (-kare ) of a person; hates small children crying, pregnant or menstruating women, and reacts adversely to the smell of burnt food in the forest — when people smoke fish or game — as well as to any people who eat cold food at night; can provoke wind and thunder. The only way of getting away from him is with the help of tar blessed by a shaman ka-ˆapa (see §5.3.2) 2. waliru is also a dangerous spirit, usually stronger than a man; can appear in the shape of a person or an animal; but a man can override him by saying an obscenity. 3. ˆaki is a minor spirit who can take the shape of a person (for instance, if someone breaks the taboo and marks the exact time at night, it is quite possible that his doppleganger, a ˆaki in human disguise, will come in his stead and devour others by sucking the brain out of their head); a man is often stronger than a ˆaki. It often appears as a peculiar animal, e.g. a white deer. A variety of ˆaki is kapiìiri wãpi (lit. body of an arrow bone?), a very tall and thin being. 4. ka-wana ka-hˆa (lit. REL-call REL-eat) is a type of evil spirit who is usually harmless but scares women and children with his horrifying cry. 5. salu ‘large armadillo’, Portuguese tamandoa bandeira, is a minor spirit in the disguise of an animal; regarded as a ‘servant’ of ˆamu and waliru. 6. hurinari ‘wild cat’, Portuguese jaguatirica, is a minor spirit in the disguise of an animal; regarded as a ‘servant’ of ˆamu and waliru and is ‘weaker’ than salu.

41 Tariana has several verbs for thinking: -(a)nihta ‘think, reason’, -awada ‘think of, remember’ and -himeta ‘think, feel, have presentiments’. 42 The traditional practice of infanticide of twins is probably linked to these fears: Stephen Hugh-Jones (p.c.) suggested that since animals, not humans, have several children simultaneously, human twins must be killed (or left to die) as someone from ‘the other world’.

LW/T 07

45

Tariana

5.3.5 Naming and names. All the Tariana have a Portuguese given name and a Portuguese family name; the given name is used to refer to the people when they are absent; kinship terms are used for address. Similarly to other peoples of the Vaupés region, the Tariana have a closed set of traditional personal sacred names called ‘names of blessing’ (Tariana paˆapa-nipe i-pitana (IMP-bless-NOM INDF-name) ‘blessing name’, Tucano baxseke wame ‘spirit name’). ‘Names of blessing’ are given to children (not to babies); they used to be employed in ‘spells’ and ‘blessings’, especially when children were sick. Personal names are a separate subclass of nouns (they have vocative forms, and no plurals).
The list of names of the Brito family (as far back as my consultants could remember) is given in Table 11 below (the names of my consultants are in bold). Women’s children are not ‘named’, because they belong to a different language group and do not count as Tariana.43
Only some of the sacred names have a translation: Kumatharo means ‘female duck’; Tuiri means ‘japú bird’, Serewhari means ‘lilac-tailed parrotlet’, and Kumada means ‘male duck’. It is unclear on what principle people are given names.44
Table 11. Names of the Brito family (Wamiarikune subtribe) (Christian names of my consultants are in bold).
Antônio (masc.) (Tudawhiri) had two children: Manoel (masc.) (Papheka) and Paulino (masc.) (Kumada).
Manoel (Papheka) had four children: Júlia (fem) (Kumatharo); Juse (masc.) (Menaka); Eduardo (masc.) (Tuiri; died young); Ricardo (masc.) (Serewhari)
Júlia’s children: do not count as Tariana (and receive no name)
Juse’s children: Joaninha (fem.) (Balida), Clementina (fem.) (Kumatharo), Luisa (fem.) (Kaisado), Madalena (fem.) (Balida), João (masc.) (Tuiri), Sebastião (masc.) (Menaka), Crispiliano (masc.) (Papheka), Maria (fem.) (Kumatharo)
Ricardo’s children: Pedrina (fem.) (Balida), Raimundo (masc.) (Papheka), Emilio (masc.) (Kumada), Erminha (fem.) (Kumatharo), Manoel (masc.) (Menaka), Tiago (masc.) (Kuda)
Paulino (Kumada) had four children: Roberto (masc.) (Papheka); Cândido (masc.) (Menaka); Ermina (fem) (?, died young); Leonardo (masc.) (Kumada)
43 Currently, these names are rarely used and my consultants remembered them with difficulty. The following names are mentioned by Moreira and Moreira (1994: 61-62) as ‘sacred names’ of the Kaline subgroup (see §5.2.1); similar names also used by the Wamia\ikune are given in brackets: female: Bari (cf. Wamia\ikune Ba\ida), Nana, Anasãro (cf. Wamia\ikune Anaisado), Siesaro; male: Kedari, Kuenakin, Yawi, Kari, Baya, BayakanI, Ku’ta (cf. Wamia\ikune Kuda), Sãmi, Sãmida, Tariakanõ, Kui, Paramahanõ, U’hui. At least some of these names sound Tucano (e.g. BayakanI, U’hui) (cf. Brüzzi 1977), which is understandable in view of the fact that the Moreiras and their subtribe have completely lost the language. 44 I was given a name, Kumatha\o, ‘ female duck’, only during the fourth field trip, and my son Michael was named Tui\i ‘pied crested oropendola’, ‘to keep us safe during our trips because we fly a lot’.

LW/T 07

46

Tariana

Roberto’s children: Celestina (fem.) (Balida), Jorge (masc.) (Kumada), João (masc.)

(Menaka)

Cândido’s children: Ismael (masc.) (Tuiri), Olivia (fem.) (Kumatharo), Graciliano

(masc.) (Menaka), Francisco (masc.) (Kumada), Juvino (masc.) (Kuda),

Lurdes

(fem.) (Balida), Luis (masc.) (Serewhari, died young), Jusé (masc.)

(Kumada)

Leonardo’s children: Rafael (masc.) (Serewhali), Clarisse (fem.) (?), Gabriel (masc.) (Tuiri), Maria-Ester (fem.) (Balida), Fatima (fem.) (?), Vanilde (fem.)
(Kumatharo)

Ismael’s children: Jaquelene (fem.) (Balida), Jacimara (fem.) (Kumatharo), Osmar (masc.) (Menaka);

Olivia’s children: Laura (fem.) (Kumatharo);

Graciliano’s children: Caro (fem.) (?), Rosinete (fem.) (Balida), Rosimar (masc.) (Tuiri), Nazare (fem.) (Kumatharo), Kelli (fem.) (Anasado);

Fransisco’s children: Francileni (fem.) (Balida), Francismar (fem.) (Tuiri); Gracileni (fem.) (Kumatharo)

Juvino’s children: Elio (masc.) (Kumada), Jocimar (masc.) (Papheka), Jocivaldo (masc.) (Menaka), Jocifran (masc.) (Kuda), Janaine (fem.) (Kumatharo)

6. The present collection. The stories in this collection were selected from a corpus of over hundred and thirty Tariana stories — told by various members of the Brito family during the period of 1991 - 1997. I have tried to provide a sample of different genres of stories told by each member of the Brito family, and to include stories which are culturally significant.
Story 1, ‘The Tariana’, told by Cândido Brito, describes the early migrations of the ancestors of the Tariana, as well as the relationships of the Wamiarikune subtribe with other, senior, Tariana subtribes.
Story 2, ‘The Deeds of the Creator’, also told by Cândido Brito, tells about the creation of the world, the flood, and the origin of manioc. Story 3 is a traditional narrative about the origin of tobacco, snuff and fire, also told by Cândido Brito. Story 4, ‘The Secret Flute’, also told by Cândido Brito, shows what can happen if a woman chances to catch a glimpse of the magic Yurupary flute — which women are forbidden to see. Story 5, ‘A Menstruating Girl’, told by Juvino Brito, relates the fate of a girl who had her first menstruation and failed to observe the taboos.
Story 6, ‘How Children Turned into Guans’, told by Olívia Brito, is a widespread story in the region: it is about a widow who married a devil (thus violating marriage rules) and had a child by him, and was consequently abandoned by her children who had killed the devil and his child and then turned into guan-birds and flew away, abandoning her. Similar stories are told by the Tucano (known as Namakuru: Jackson 1983: 114) and by the Baniwa — my corpus of the Hohôdene dialect of Baniwa contains a similar story told by the late Marcília Rodrígues.
Story 7, ‘Evil Spirits’, told by Graciliano Brito, illustrates a popular belief about how one should not make any appointments at any particular hour after dark lest a ˆaki (see Table 10) comes in human guise and devours one of the people involved.

LW/T 07

47

Tariana

Story 8, ‘A Man and a Snake’, told by Juvino Brito, is a representative of a series of stories about young men disliked by women — and desperate to get married — who end up under the spell of ‘white’ snake women, bringing disaster to their family. Story 9, ‘A Widow’, told by Jusé Brito, is about how human beings can benefit from contacts with snake people; however, if the orders given by snake people are violated, a disaster is bound to happen.
Story 10, ‘The Tariana Language’, told by Graciliano Brito, is a bitter account of how the Tariana lost their language due to the language policy of the Catholic church in the early twentieth century, and what this loss signifies to the Tariana people.
A final note about the organisation of the texts in this collection is in order. All the texts are supplied with an interlinear morpheme gloss, and then translated into English. Homophonous morphemes (e.g. -nha ‘pausal marker; interrogative present visual; imperative (containing doubt)’) are differentiated by their glosses. ‘+’ is used to indicate fused morphemes, e.g. direta ‘he ordered’ is glossed as 3sgnf+need+CAUS, its underlying form being di- (3sgnf) -ira (need) -ita (CAUS). Portmanteau morphemes are glossed with a ‘:’, for instance, -peni ‘plural animate’, or ha ‘demonstrative animate’. A ‘.’ is used in cases problematic from the point of view of morphemic analysis, e.g. thuya ‘all.NON.INVID’ (‘all non-individuated’), thuime ‘all.INDIV’ (‘all individuated’). As mentioned above (p. 18), Tariana has several kinds of causatives, among them two morphological causatives, marked with -i and with -ta (see Aikhenvald forthcoming-g). When these cooccur, they are treated as separate morphemes except for the cases where one cannot occur without the other, e.g. ireta (underlying form -ira-ita ‘need-CAUS’), but not *ire (underlying form ira-i). Further details will appear in Aikhenvald (in prep.). All grammatical morphemes are glossed in small caps while lexical morphemes are glossed in lower case.

LW/T 07

48

Story 1. The Tariana. Author: Cândido Brito

Tariana

(1) ma: wa-sape wa-wa let’s 1pl-speak 1pl-try

hi$-naku45 this-TOP.NON.A/S

(2) pedalia-pe na-sape-tha-nhina

hiku-naka

old-PL 3pl-speak-FR-REM.P.SEC.Hthis-PRES.VIS

‘Let’s try to speak (about this). This is what the old people told.’

(3) ai-nhina

wali-kasu ka-nawika

wa-sita

here-REM.P.SEC.H new-INT REL-be.people 1pl-finish

(4) wa-ya-hipe 1pl-POSS-LAND

wa-de-nhina 1pl-have-REM.P.SEC.H46

(5) di-a-nhina

yapura wika kepitana-sina

3sgnf-go-REM.P.SEC.H Yapura top REL+name-REM.P.NON.VIS

‘In the beginning we lived here on our land. Its name was “on top of Yapura.”’

(6) nu-whe-ri-nipe

ne-sina

1pl-grandparent-MASC-PL then- REM.P.NON.VIS

na-yã 3pl-live

(7) na-yã thuya

hi$

phenisi-ne

3pl-live all.NON.INDIV DEM:AN first.born-AG

(8) maka-phari-pe large-GROUP-PL

na-yã-sina

na-yã-sina

3pl-live-REM.P.NON.VIS 3pl-live-REM.P.NON.VIS

Our grandparents lived there, lived all the first-born (ones), large groups lived (there).’

(9) ne-nuku

na-yã naha na-piryana

alia-sina

then-TOP.NON.A/S 3pl-live they 3pl-Yurupary.flute:POSS47 EX-REM.P.NON.VIS

(10) naha na-piryana-ne-sina they 3pl-Yurupary.flute:POSS-INS48-REM.P.NON.VIS

na-yã 3pl-live

‘They lived there, there were the Yurupary flutes, they lived with the Yurupary flute.’

(11) nu-hwe49-ri-nipe

naha phenisi-misini

kaya-sina

45 -naku is a variant of -nuku ‘topical non-subject’ attested in Cândido’s speech. 46 The tense-evidential marker used as ‘unmarked’ in most narratives is the remote past tense inferred, -pidana; other evidentials are also used if the way the information was obtained is important for the speaker. 47 The noun pi\i ‘Yurupary flute’ is one of the few archaic nouns in Tariana which take a possessive suffix when possessed (cf. -\e in Pawhya-\e-pani, p. 14). 48 The -ne case has instrumental and comitative meaning (see Aikhenvald 1994b). 49 Note that realisations wh and hw, hm and mh, hn and nh, hk and kh, hp and ph are, in most cases, free variants; see Aikhenvald (in prep.).

LW/T 07

49

1sg-grandparent-MASC-PL they first.born-ALSO

Tariana so-REM.P.NON.VIS

(12) na:-de-sina

kay na-ni-ka

3pl-have-REM.P.NON.VIS so 3pl-do-SEQ

na-ka

naha50

3pl-see they

phenisi first.born

‘My grandparents, they also were like first born, they had (the Yurupary flute), so the first born ones saw (it).’

(13) na-kwisa-sina 3pl-hate-REM.P.NON.VIS

waha we

phenisi-maka-naka first.born-IN.SPITE-PRES.VIS

(14) hi$

wa-piryana

na-de-naka

na:51-pidana

DEM:AN 1pl-Yurupary.flute:POSS 3pl-have-PRES.VIS 3pl+say-REM.P.REP

‘They hated (us), though we are the firstborn ones, they have our instrument, they said.’

(15) na:-ni 3pl-do

na-yena nema na-de-naka 3pl-exceed 3pl+stand 3pl-have-PRES.VIS

(16) hi$-nuku

hi$

wa-weni-ne

DEM:AN-TOP.NON.A/S DEM:AN 1pl-younger.brother-PL

(17) phenisi

ka-de kaya na:-sina

na-sape

first.born:PL REL-have like 3pl+say-REM.P.NON.VIS 3pl-speak

‘These younger brothers have too much, they are like the first borns, they said.’

(18) diha-sawa-peni-tha-sina

me$da

he-GROUP-PL:AN-FR-REM.P.NON.VIS indeed

‘They are of the same tribe.’

(19) ai$-naku

wa-na na-ka-ka

na-kwisa

here-TOP.NON.A/S 1pl-OBJ 3pl-see-SEQ 3pl-hate

(20) kayu naha na-meriku-nhina so they 3pl-make.noise-REM.P.SEC.H

‘So they hated us, they muttered thus.’

(21) hi$

wa-thanina-se-nuku

DEM:AN 1pl-beginning-LOC-TOP.NON.A/S

kaya-nhina so-REM.P.SEC.H

(22) nu-a-ka iìirimhene

nu-phe

na:-nhina

50 In this and many other cases the third person pronoun is used as a specificity marker. 51 Long vowels are often replaced with short vowels, hence variants na: and na (3pl+go, say; underlying form na-a), or ku:phe and kuphe ‘fish’. In one case e alternates with a in an unstressed syllable: -pidana ‘remote past inferred’ is often realised as -pidena.

LW/T 07
1sg-say-SEQ Iìirimhene

50 1sg-elder.brother:VOC

3pl+say-REM.P.SEC.H

Tariana

(23) waha we

na-na nu-eri

wa-wana-ka

3pl-OBJ 1sg-younger.brother:VOC 1pl-call-SEQ

‘In the beginning it was this way, I am saying, the Iìirimhene subtribe (of Tariana) called us ‘elder brother’, while we called them younger brother.’

(24) hi$-se

nu-inipe-se

DEM:AN-LOC 1sg-son-CONTR

na-na nu-eri 3pl-OBJ 1sg-younger.brother:VOC

(25) na:-na-ka-pita

naha nu-phe

na:-naka

3pl-call-SEQ-REP they 1sg-elder.brother:VOC 3pl+say-PRES.VIS

‘My children are calling them again ‘younger brother!’, they say ‘elder brother!’

(26) ka:sina-nuku

hi$

inipe-se

now+ADV-TOP.NON.A/S DEM:AN child-CONTR

(27) na-mara

na:-naka

3pl-descend 3pl+say-PRES.VIS

dake grandson:VOC

‘Now their children say ‘grandchild!’’

(28) hiku-thanina so-LONG.PAST52

na-ni 3pl-do

na-yã pedalia-pe-se 3pl-live old-PL-CONTR

(29) na-ni 3pl-do

na-yã hi$

na-piryana-ne

3pl-live DEM:AN 3pl-Yurupary.flute:POSS-INS

(30) na-nalita-kaka-nhina 3pl-quarrel-REC-REM.P.SEC.H

‘This is how is was, the old ones did, they quarreled because of the Yurupary flute.’

(31) na-nalita-kaka naha pathida-peni alia-pidana 3pl-quarrel-REC they equal-PL:AN EXIST-REM.P.REP

‘They quarrelled, there were two equals’ (equal ‘chiefs’).

(32) diha kepitana-pidana

Tudawhiri

he REL+name-REM.P.REP Tudawhiri

(33) Tudawhiri-pidana Tudawhiri-REM.P.REP

kepitana REL+name

kwaka what

wa-whe-ri 1pl-grandparent-MASC

‘His name was Tudawhiri, he was our grandfather.’

(34) diha kwenaka-sina

kepitana

diha phenisi

52 The clitic -thanina does not have any evidentiality specification.

LW/T 07 he Kwenaka-REM.P.NON.VIS

51 REL+name

Tariana he first.born

‘The name of the first born was Kwenaka.’

(35) di:-ne-pidana 3sgnf-INS-REM.P.REP

na

na-nalita-kaka

3pl+go 3pl-quarrel-REC

(36) hi$

kwaka

DEM:AN what

piri

i-pumina

Yurupary.flute INDF-after

‘They quarreled with him because of the Yurupary flute.’

(37) na-nalita-kaka payaru na-ira-pidana 3pl-quarrel-REC caxiri 3pl-drink-REM.P.REP

(38) na:-siwa

ma:si53-peri na-sape-pidana

3pl-be together bad-COLL

3pl-speak-REM.P.REP

(39) thawasi na-sape-pidana discussion 3pl-speak-REM.P.REP

‘They quarreled, they drank caxiri (manioc beer), they said bad things to each other.’

(40) haw ma:si-peri pi-sape-ka

pi-ni-thama

phia

yes bad-COLL 2sg-speak-SEQ 2sg-do-FR+PRES.NON.VIS54 you

(41) di-a-pidana

wa-whe-ri-ne

3sgnf-say-REM.P.REP 1pl-grandparent-MASC-AG

‘Yes, you are saying bad things in vain, said our grandfather’

(42) waha pathida-peni-naka

kasina-nuku

we equal-PL:AN-PRES.VIS now+ADV-TOP.NON.A/S

(43) waha diha-nuku

wa-nalita wa-wa

we this-TOP.NON.A/S 1pl-quarrel 1pl-try

(44) di-a-pidana

di-nalita-hna

3sgnf-say-REM.P.REP 3sgnf-quarrel-PAUS

‘We are now equal, we shall try to quarrel about this one (the flute), he said and quarreled.’

(45) di-nalita

kiaku

3sgnf-quarrel strong

di-nalita

te pediwa-pidana

3sgnf-quarrel until be.annoyed-REM.P.REP

‘He quarreled, he quarreled strongly until he became annoyed.’

53 s alternates with è and with ì before front vowels; hence variation ma:si/ma:ìi/ma:èi ‘bad’. 54 The underlying form for -thama is -tha ‘frustrative’ + -mha ‘present non-visual’.

LW/T 07
(46) ne NEG

wa-na 1pl-OBJ

52
makade-mha NEG+go+NEG-PRES.NON.VIS

Tariana
di-a-pidana 3sgnf-say-REM.P.REP

‘It’s no good for us, he said.’

(47) mawina-wata

wika-se di-uka-weri

pineapple-CL:BUSH over-LOC 3sgnf-arrive-SMASH

(48) di-sue-pidana

di-ˆu

3sgnf-stay+CAUS-REM.P.REP 3sgnf-get up

di-wha-pidana 3sgnf-fall-REM.P.REP

(49) di-ya-nha 3sgnf-cry-PAUS

ne-pidana then-REM.P.REP

di-sa-do

du-a-nha

3sgnf-spouse-FEM 3sgf-say-PAUS

(50) nu-na-ka

pi-ˆa pi-ˆa-ka

1sg-OBJ-SEQ 2sg-hit 2sg-hit-SEQ

phia kani-hna you where-INTER.PRES.VIS

(51) pi-kwida-pada

phia pathidite-nuku

du-a-pidana

2sg-suffer-CONTREXP you equal+CL:AN-TOP.NON.A/S 3sgf-say-REM.P.REP

‘He threw him over a bush of pineapple, he got up, he cried, then his wife said to him: ‘You were hitting me, how come now you have to suffer from your equal?’

(52) ira-mha

pa-seri-ka-pana

di-a-pidana

need-PRES.NON.VIS IMP-spread-DECL-ALL 3sgnf-say-REM.P.REP

(53) puale-mha

ira pa-yã wa-na

elsewhere-PRES.NON.VIS need IMP-live 1pl-OBJ

(54) di-a-pidana

di-sape

hi$

wa-whe-ri

3sgnf-say-REM.P.REP 3sgnf-speak DEM:AN 1pl-grandparent-MASC

‘We have to spread, he said, we have to live elsewhere, said our grandfather.’

(55) haw na:-pidana

di-wene-ne

di-a-pidana

yes 3pl+say-REM.P.REP 3sgnf-younger.brother-PL 3sgnf-say-REM.P.REP

(56) na:pi

di-a-pidana

naha thuya-pidana

na-musu

3pl+with 3sgnf-say-REM.P.REP they all.NON.INDIV-REM.P.REP 3pl-go.out

(57) pa-kada-nuku one-CL:DAY-TOP.NON.A/S

na-musu-ka na-musu-pidana

3pl-go.out-SEQ

3pl-go.out-REM.P.REP

(58) na-musu 3pl-go.out

nesa 3pl+go.up

na: 3pl+go

‘Yes, said his younger brothers, he went with them, all of them left, the same day they went and went upstream.’

(59) hi$

yapura

DEM:AN Yapura

wika alia-thama

wa-ya-hipe

top EXIST-FR+PRES.NON.VIS 1pl-POSS-land

LW/T 07

53

Tariana

(60) nuha nu-kisi-pe-ne

ka-yã naha na-yeka-naka

I 1sg-parent-PL-AG REL-live they 3pl-know-PRES.VIS

‘Our land was over Yapura, my relatives who live there know.’

(61) i-ya-hipe-na

ahi$ waha

2pl-POSS-LAND-REM.P.VIS here we

wa-wapa-tha 1pl-attend-FR

(62) wa-kwa ihya-ne-naka

ma-dia-kade

1pl-stay you-AG-PRES.VIS NEG-return-NEG

(63) i-yema i-yeka-naka

na:

na-sape-naka

2pl-stand 2pl-know-PRES.VIS 3pl+say 3pl-speak-PRES.VIS

‘We shall attend to your land, you will not return, they say.’

(64) na:

na-sape-naka

ne-nuku

haw ne-yaphini-naka

3pl+say 3pl-speak-PRES.VIS then-TOP.NON.A/S yes then-thing-PRES.VIS

(66) wa-yã wa-na whameta-naka

wha-ne

1pl-live 1pl-OBJ 1pl+think-PRES.VIS we-AG

‘They said, yes, then; we thought, this is how things are for us.’

(67) ne-ma-dia-kade-mha

waha wa-yeka ˆama-piu

NEG-NEG-return-NEG-PRES.NON.VISwe 1pl-can two-TIME

(68) wa-na whepa kasina-misini

kayi na:-ka

na-sape

1pl-OBJ 1pl+answer now+ADV-ALSO so 3pl+say-REC.P.VIS 3pl-speak

‘We can not return the second time, we answered, they have said so now.’

(69) wa-whe-ri-nipe

nhesa

1pl-grandfather-PL 3pl+go.upstream

na-nhina 3pl+go-REM.P.SEC.H

‘Our grandfathers went upstream (to Alto Cayary, i.e. Vaupés).’

(70) hi$

duari-numa-na

DEM:AN Duali-mouth-AFF

kepitana-ri

ololeana

REL+name-CONV Ololeana

(71) kepitana-ri

nhesa

na

puperi-pani-nuku

REL+name-CONV 3pl+go.upstream 3pl+go bacaba-CL:RAPID-TOP.NON.A/S

(72) manaka-pina

na-ri-nuku

na-hwa nema

açai.fruit-CL:LAND 3pl+say-CONV-TOP.NON.A/S 3pl-stay 3pl+stand

‘They went upstream by the mouth of Duali to the place called Ololeana to the Rapid of

Bacaba fruit, they stayed at the place called ‘the land of Açai fruit’.’

(73) pasi another
CL:POINT

na-yena nesa

na-nhina

masipiru-taku

3pl-go off 3pl+go.upstream 3pl+say-REM.P.SEC.H

butterfly-

LW/T 07

54

Tariana

(74) na-hwa nema-nhina

paìi nesa

na-nhina

3pl-stay 3pl+stand-REM.P.SEC.H another 3pl+go.upstream 3pl+go-REM.P.SEC.H

(75) tuiri-kere

na-hwa nema ne:ni na-hwa nema

oropendola-CL:ISLAND 3pl-stay 3pl+stand there 3pl-stay 3pl+stand

‘Another family went up to the Butterfly point, and stayed there. Another went to the Japu-island and stayed, there they stayed.’

(76) ai$ hi$

nu-whe-ri-nipe

na-seri-ka

then DEM:AN 1sg-grandparent-MASC-PL 3pl-spread-SEQ

(77) naka

nema-nhina

3pl+arrive 3pl+stand-REM.P.SEC.H

‘Then my grandfathers having spread, they arrived and stayed.’

(78) ne ka-ni-kani

i-daki-ne

waha

then REL-do-PAST.REL:PL INDF-grandchild-PL we

alia-naka EXIST-PRES.VIS

(79) wa-yã-naka

wa-pinita-ka

1pl-live-PRES.VIS 1pl-follow-SEQ

‘So we are grandchildren of those who did so, we live after [them] (lit. having followed them).’

(80) wa

hiku-na

waha taria

wa-yã-thanina

1pl+say so-REM.P.VIS we Tariana 1pl-live-LONG.PAST

(81) hi$

panuma-pe

sede-thanina

DEM:AN Guanano-PL NEG.EX-LONG.PAST

‘So we lived, we, Tariana, when there were no Guanano.’

(82) di-yekwe-se-se

nha nã-ya-thanina

nu-a-ka

3sgnf-acima-LOC-CONTR they 3pl-live-LONG.PAST 1sg-say-SEQ

(83) nuha waha ne-nhina

kewhida-na waha Taria-sawa

I we then-REM.P.SEC.H REL+head-AFF we Tariana-CL:GROUP

(84) tuiri-kere-na

kewhida-na-nha

waha wa-yã-hni

oropendola-CL:ISLAND-REM.P.VIS REL+head-AFF-PAUS we 1pl-live-ANT

‘They lived upstream, I am saying, and we, the Tarianas, were at the headwaters, we lived up the end of the Oropendola (Japú) island.’

(85) hipay-kewhida-na-nhina

kewhida-na whyume-nhina

land-REL+head-AFF-REM.P.SEC.H REL+head-AFF last-REM.P.SEC.H

‘This was the headwaters of the land, the last bit (of where Tarianas lived) it was.’

LW/T 07
(86) khida-na ready-REM.P.VIS

na: 3pl+say

55
na-sape 3pl-tell

pedalia-pe old-PL

Tariana

‘This is all (what) old people tell.’

Story 2. The Deeds of the Creator. Author: Cândido Brito

Yapirikuri di-ni-mi Yapirikuri 3sgnf-do-NOM ‘What Yapirikuri did’55

(1) yapirikuri di-ni-mi

i-na

nu-kalite nu-keˆa-de

Yapirikuri3sg-do-NOM 2pl-OBJ 1sg-tell 1sg-start-FUT

‘I shall tell you about what Yapirikuri did.’

(2) wali-kasu-nuku

yapirikuri di-ni-pidana

new-INT-TOP.NON.A/S Yapirikuri3sgnf-do-REM.P.REP

‘In the beginning Yapirikuri made this world.’

(3) ha-ehkwapi-nuku

ma:ìi-peni

alia

DEM:INAN-CL:WORLD-TOP.NON.A/S bad-PL:AN EX

(4) na-yena-niki

nawiki ka-hˆa

3pl-exceed-COMPL people REL-eat

‘There were bad ones, who ate people.’

(5) na-na-pidana

hama di-wa

hi$

yapirikuri

3pl-OBJ-REM.P.REP tired

3sgnf-become DEM:AN Yapirikuri

‘Yapirikuri grew tired of them.’

(6) ira-mha need-PRES.NON.VIS

pa:mie-ta

thuy-niki u:ni-ne

IMP+float+CAUS-CAUS all-COMPL water-INS

(7) di-a-pidena56

diha yapirikuri

3sgnf-say-REM.P.REP he Yapirikuri

‘It is necessary to drown them all, said Yapirikuri.’

(8) kay-di-ni-sita

di-amie-ta-pidena-hna

so-3sgnf-do-AFTER 3sgnf-float+CAUS-CAUS-REM.P.REP-PAUS

(9) ha-ehkwapi-nuku

di-amia

thuy

di-a

DEM:INAN-world-TOP.NON.A/S 3sgnf-float

all

3sgnf-go

55 The title in Tariana is supplied only if suggested by the speakers. For Yapi\iku\i, see §5.3.1. 56 -pidena is a variant of -pidana ‘remote past inferred’.

LW/T 07

56

Tariana

‘After he did so, he drowned the whole world, and all the world floated.’

(10) ne-kwaka hiku-ri

sede

NEG-what appear-CONV NEG.EX

(11) hyapa hiku-pidena

pa-na-ya

mountain appear-REM.P.REP one-CL:VERT-EMPH

‘Nothing appeared, only one hill appeared.’

(12) diha-na-se-pidana

na-waka hi$

ˆaki

he-CL:VERT-LOC-REM.P.REP 3pl-join DEM:AN wild animal

(13) kanapada-pidana how.many-REM.P.REP

na-waka aini 3pl-join wasp

thuya

kepiria

all.NON.INDIV bird

(14) na-waka-kani 3pl-join-PAST.REL.PL

hˆakasi ma-keta-kade

food

NEG-meet-NEG

(15) na-yãmi thui na-hna 3pl-die all 3pl+go-PAUS

‘On this hill all the animals came together, whichever they are, wasps, birds; the ones who joined did not find any food, all of them died.’

(16) pa:pi-keri-seri-pidana

di-ema-ka

one+CL:LONG-moon-SINGL-REM.P.REP 3sgnf-stand-SEQ

diha u:ni he water

(17) di-sita 3sgnf-finish

di-wa 3sgnf-enter

di-ruku

di-a-pidana-ta

3sgnf-go down 3sgnf-go-REM.P.REP-REP

(18) diha u:ni te di-wha di-swa-pidana he water until 3sgnf-fall 3sgnf-stay-REM.P.REP

‘After the water remained there for a month, it began to go down until it stopped.’

(19) pa:pi

keri-pidana

ka:muy-pita

one+CL:LONG moon-REM.P.REP summer-REP

(20) ka:muy di-emeta-pita summer 3sgnf-stay+CAUS-REP

hi$ yapirikuri-ya-ya this Yapirikuri-EMPH-EMPH

‘There was one month of summer heat again, this very Yapirikuri made summer.’

(21) wali-kasu-nuku

hiku-pana-pidana

new-INT-TOP.NON.A/S appear-ALL-REM.P.REP

(22) ha-ehkwapi-pidana DEM:INAN-CL:WORLD-REM.P.REP

di-yã

yapirikuri

3sgnf-live Yapirikuri

LW/T 07

57

‘In the beginning appeared the whole world, Yapirikuri lived [there].’

Tariana

(23) di-ni-pidana

ka:muy di-eme-ta

di-sita

3sgnf-do-REM.P.REP summer 3sgnf-stay+CAUS-CAUS 3sgnf-finish

(24) dhemeta-pidana-ta 3sgnf+burn-REM.P.REP-REP

disa 3sgnf+go.up

di-nu-pidana 3sgnf-come-REM.P.REP

(25) syawa fire

u:ni water

ye:da-se downstream-LOC

‘He made summer heat, he burnt, again and fire went up from downstream, it went upstream, burning.’

(26) lama-pidana burn-REM.P.REP

disa

di-nu-pita

3sgnf+go.upstream 3sgnf-come-REP

(27) ha-ehkwapi-nuku

di-peya-pidana

nawiki

DEM:INAN-CL:WORLD-TOP.NON.A/S 3sgnf-before-REM.P.REP people

(28) di-peya

syawa

3sgnf-before fire

di-nu-naka

wa-na

3sgnf-come-PRES.VIS 1pl-OBJ

(29) di-a-pidana

di-kalite di-peya

3sgnf-say-REM.P.REP 3sgnf-tell 3sgnf-before

‘He said before that, before the world, before the people: ‘Fire is coming to us.’’

(30) thuya all.NON.INDIV

ha-ehkwapeni-nuku DEM:INAN-CL:WORLD+PL:AN-TOP.NON.A/S

(31) nawiki-nuku people-TOP.NON.A/S

di-kalite di-peya-ka-pidana 3sgnf-tell 3sgnf-before-SEQ-REM.P.REP

(32) naha diwese-pidana

lama

thuy

they then-REM.P.REP flame all

na 3pl+go

‘He had told all the people before, then they all burnt.’

(33) naha nawiki lama-pidana they people burn-REM.P.REP

thuy na

syawa-ne

all 3pl+go fire-INS

(34) lama burn

thui di-a all 3sgnf-go

‘All the people burnt in fire, everything burnt.’

(35) diha ka:li ma:ìite he Kali bad+CL:AN

diha-yana alia-pidana

di-wapa

he-PEJ EX-REM.P.REP 3sgnf-wait

LW/T 07

58

Tariana

‘The bad one, Kali,57 was there waiting.’

(36) k:ani-tha-sina

di-dawa

di-a

where-FR-REM.P.NON.VIS 3sgnf-hide

3sgnf-go

(37) hipe waliku-se-pidana

di-he

earth inside-LOC-REM.P.REP 3sgnf-enter

di-a

na:-na

3sgnf-go 3pl+say-REM.P.VIS

‘It is not known where he was hiding, they said he hid himself underneath the earth.’

(38) diha lama he flame

disa 3sgnf+go.up

di-a-pidana 3sgnf-go-REM.P.REP

(39) te uni until water

yepua-se headwaters

ha-ehkwapi-nuku DEM:INAN-CL:WORLD-TOP.NON.A/S

‘The flame was going up, up to the headwaters.’

(40) lama-pidana burn-REM.P.REP

hi$

syawa

DEM:AN fire

lama-kaˆami

di-ka

burn-SEQ-AFTER:DS 3sgnf-see

‘The fire was burning, after the fire burnt out he saw (that all was burnt).’

(41) kanapada-da-pe

yamina-tha-sina

di-a

how.many-CL:ROUND-PL day-FR-REM.P.NON.VIS 3sgnf-go

(42) di-nu-pidena

yapirikuri-pita

3sgnf-come-REM.P.REP Yapirikuri-REP

(43) ha-ehkwapi-nuku

di-nu-ka

DEM:INAN-CL:WORLD-TOP.NON.A/S 3sgnf-come-SEQ

di-ka-hna 3sgnf-see-PAUS

(44) di-ka-pidana

kwana-sika

nawiki ketemi

3sgnf-see-REM.P.REP INTER-PRES.INFR people rest

‘Nobody knows how many days passed. Yapirikuri came to the world again. He came to see how many people remained.’

(45) di-a

di-ka-ka-pidana

3sgnf-go 3sgnf-see-SEQ-REM.P.REP

(46) diha kali-yãna kiniki di-pana-ka-pidana he Kali-PEJ maniva 3sgnf-plant-SEQ-REM.P.REP

(47) hi$

kiniki-pena-nuku

DEM:AN maniva-NOM.FUT-TOP.NON.A/S

57 See §5.3.1.

LW/T 07

59

Tariana

(48) dhita-pidana

dhe

3sgnf+take-REM.P.REP 3sgnf+enter

di-a

kiniki

3sgnf-go maniva

(49) hunay potato

ãwhi de:ri mawina-pidana yam banana pineapple-REM.P.REP

(50) dhita 3sgnf+take

dhe 3sgnf-enter

di-a 3sgnf-go

‘He went to see that the mischieveous Kali was planting what was to become maniva (bitter manioc), he took and put inside [the ground] maniva, potato, yam, banana, pineapple.’

(51) diha-naku-pidana he-TOP.NON.A/S-REM.P.REP

lama-mi-nuku flame-DER-TOP.NON.A/S

(52) di-pana-ka-pidana 3sgnf-plant-SEQ-REM.P.REP

di-na

di-keta-pidana-ta

3sgnf-OBJ 3sgnf-meet-REM.P.REP-REP

(53) di-keta 3sgnf-meet

di-na 3sgnf-OBJ

di-a-pidana

hi$

yapirikuri

3sgnf-say-REM.P.REP DEM:AN Yapirikuri

(54) phia alia-naka

kasina-nuku

di-a-pidana

you EX-PRES.VIS now+ADV-TOP.NON.A/S 3sgnf-say-REM.P.REP

(55) napi

pi-sapeta pi-hˆa-mhade

di-a-pidana

3pl+with 2sg-suffer 2sg-eat-PROB.FUT 3sgnf-say-REM.P.REP

(56) phia-tha-sika

ai$-nuku

pi-dia-pada

you-FR-PRES.INFR here-TOP.NON.A/S 2sg-return-CONTREXP

(57) di-kalite-pidana

hi$-nuku

3sgnf-tell-REM.P.REP DEM:AN-TOP.NON.A/S

(58) kasina-nuku

pi-dia-naka

phia hanipa

now+ADV-TOP.NON.A/S 2sg-stay-PRES.VIS you big+CL:CLOSED.SPACE

(59) pi-sapeta napi

nawiki-nuku

2sg-suffer 3pl+with people-TOP.NON.A/S

(60) di-a-pidana

kay diha di-sita

3sgnf-say-REM.P.REP so he 3sgnf-finish

pi-hˆa-mhade

piha

2sg-eat-PROB.FUT you

(61) hi$

iìiri-nuku

DEM:AN animal-TOP.NON.A/S

hi$-naka DEM:AN-PRES.VIS

(62) pi-hˆa-karu-pena

na-dia-naka

2sg-eat-PURP-NOM.FUT 3sgnf-return-PRES.VIS

di-a-pidana 3sgnf-say-REM.P.REP

‘While he (Kali) was planting the burnt place, Yapirikuri met him again, met him and said to him: ‘You exist now’, he said, ‘you will suffer with respect to [getting] food with them (i.e. with people)’, he said, ‘you did stay here, didn’t you’, he said to him, ‘now you are

LW/T 07

60

Tariana

staying, you will suffer a lot with people [with whom] you will eat’, he said. Having done so, he said: ‘Here are the animals to be your food. They are coming back.’’

(63) ne:ri hema a:pia

pu:we iìiri

thuya

deer tapir

wild pig monkey game all.NON.INDIV

(64) hi$

kara

kuiìi

yaìiri

DEM:AN REL+fly curassow guan

ãsine agami

(65) di-pitaneta-pidana 3sgnf-name+CAUS-REM.P.REP
TOP.NON.A/S

thui-niki all-COMPL

naha iìiri-nuku they game-

‘All the animals, deer, tapir, wild pigs, monkeys, the ones who fly — curassow, guan, agami — he gave names to all the game.’

(66) di-pumi-se

di-a-pidana

hi$

ku:phe-nuku

3sgnf-after-LOC 3sgnf-say-REM.P.REP DEM:AN fish-TOP.NON.A/S

(67) hi$

katu

kuriri

keranipe

DEM:AN piraiba sorubim pacú.branco

(68) kasama tari pacú.preto aracú

yapa

iniri

daruyu-pidana

tucunare traira pirarucú-REM.P.REP

(69) di-pitaneta

diha-pidana

3sgnf-name+CAUS he-REM.P.REP

di-pitaneta 3sgnf-name+CAUS

(70) hi$

ku:phe kasina

DEM:AN fish

now

kepitana-karu-pena-nuku REL+name-PURP-NOM.FUT-TOP.NON.A/S

‘Then he gave name to the fish - piraiba, sorubim, pacú branco, pacú preto, aracú, tucunare, traira, pirarucú, so that they have a name.’

(71) di-pitaneta-pidana di-sita-pidana 3sgnf-name+CAUS 3sgnf-finish-REM.P.REP

(72) hi$

haiku-nuku

di-pana

DEM:AN tree-TOP.NON.A/S 3sgnf-plant

‘He finished naming them, he planted this tree.’

(73) phia pi-sapeta pi-hˆa-mhade

hi$-nuku

you 2sg-suffer 2sg-eat-PROB.FUT DEM:AN-TOP.NON.A/S

(74) haiku-nuku

pi-uka

tree-TOP.NON.A/S 2sg-arrive

pi-sapeta 2sg-suffer

(75) ka:muy-ka

pika

pi-pana pi-hˆa-mhade

napi

summer-SEQ 2sg+see 2sg-plant 2sg-eat-PROB.FUT 3pl+with

LW/T 07

61

Tariana

(76) phia pi-dia-naka

kasina-nuku

di-a-pidana

you 2sg-return-PRES.VIS now+ADV-TOP.NON.A/S 3sgnf-say-REM.P.REP

(79) di-kalite-pidana

di-na

3sgnf-tell-REM.P.REP 3sgnf-OBJ

di-kwisa-ka-pidana 3sgnf-scold58-SEQ-REM.P.REP

“You will suffer eating from this tree, when it is summer, you will see, and plant and stay with them (i.e. people) now’, he told him, scolding him.’

(80) kay di-a

di-a-pidana

di-na

so 3sgnf-say 3sgnf-say-REM.P.REP 3sgnf-OBJ

(81) di-sue-ta-pidana

di-dia-pidena

diha

nawiki

3sgnf-stay+CAUS-CAUS-REM.P.REP 3sgnf-remain-REM.P.REP he people

(82) i-thani-pena-ka-pidena

diha

INDF-near-NOM.FUT-SEQ-REM.P.REP he

(83) hˆa-ka-si

na:pi

ka-de-pena-pidena

eat-TH-NOM 3pl+with REL-have-NOM.FUT-REM.P.REP

di-dia diha 3sgnf-stay he

‘So he told him, and let him stay, he (Kali) remained near the people, he remained for people to have food.’

(84) di-ni

hi$

kali-pani-nuku

diha pani-si

3sgnf-do DEM:AN Kali-rapids-TOP.NON.A/S he house-NPOSS

(85) di-de-pidana

maliìi-na-mha

3sgnf-have-REM.P.REP Maliìi-CL:VERT-PRES.NON.VIS

kepitana REL+name

(86) diha-na

hyapa

he-CL:VERT hill

diha-na-se-pidana

di-yã diha

he-CL:VERT-LOC-REM.P.REP 3sgnf-live he

‘He did (it), he has a house in Kalipani (Kali rapids, Rapids above Querarí), the name of this hill is Maliìi, on this hill he lives.’

(87) di:rukuitaka diha kainiki-da

di-hwa-na

3sgnf+near he manioc-CL:ROUND 3sgnf-stay-REM.P.VIS

(88) nu-ka-na 1sg-see-REM.P.VIS

nuha kasina-misini diha-da-nuku I now+ADV-TOO he-CL:ROUND-TOP.NON.A/S

(89) ne-pidana then-REM.P.REP

di-yã

di-yã-nhi

3sgnf-live 3sgnf-live-ANT

‘Near it there was a stone called Kainikida, I saw it now, too; so he lived there.’

58 The verb -kwisa means ‘scold’; a serial verb construction -ka -kwisa (see scold) means ‘hate’.

LW/T 07

(90) di-yã

kiniki

3sgnf-live maniva

62
dinipe 3sgnf+children

i-api INDF-with

Tariana

(91) di-hpani

di-api di-hˆa-pidena

di-yã-nhi

3sgnf-work 3sgnf-with 3sgnf+eat-REM.P.REP 3sgnf+stay-ANT

‘He lived there with his children, working and eating with him [his son].’

(92) ne dirinu

ne

ma:-kade-pidana

then 3sgnf+son+ wife

NEG

NEG+go-NEG-REM.P.REP

(93) inasu-ite-pidana

nu-a-ka

nuha

lazy-CL:AN-REM.P.REP 1sg-say-SEQ I

(94) ne-mehpani-kadite

alia-pidana

nuha nu-a-ka

NEG-NEG+work-NEG+CL:AN EX-REM.P.REP I 1sg-say-SEQ

‘His daughter-in-law (lit. son’s wife) was no good, she was lazy, I am saying, not working, I am saying.’

(95) kasina-nuku

di-a-pidana

di-nu-khani-pidana

now+ADV-TOP.NON.A/S 3sgnf-go-REM.P.REP 3sgnf-come-AWAY-REM.P.REP

(96) wyaka-se hˆa-ka-si

di-nu-ka

far-LOC eat-TH-NOM 3sgnf-come-SEQ

di-uma-pidana 3sgnf-seek-REM.P.REP

‘Now he (Kali) went, he went away, he went far away to look for food.’

(97) kay-ka-pidana so-SEQ-REM.P.REP

di-ni-niki 3sgnf-do-COMPL

nu-a-ka

di-na

1sg-say-SEQ 3sgnf-OBJ

(98) diri-nuku

di-na-ka

3sgnf+son-TOP.NON.A/S 3sgnf-want-DECL

di-ka-pidana 3sgnf-see-REM.P.REP

‘He did so, I am saying, just to see how the son will manage.’

(99) kay di-ni

pi-na

hˆa-ka-si

nu-sue-ta-de

so 3sgnf-do 2sg-OBJ eat-TH-NOM 1sg-stay+CAUS-CAUS-FUT

(100) di-a-pidana

dirinu-nuku

3sgnf-say-REM.P.REP 3sgnf+son+wife-TOP.NON.A/S

‘I shall leave you the food’, he said to his daughter-in-law.’

(101) haw di-a-tha-pidana yes 3sgnf-say-FR-REM.P.REP

di-sue-ta 3sgnf-stay+CAUS-CAUS

(102) hi$

di-kawana pa-dokholari-nuku

DEM:AN 3sgnf-leg IMP-joint-TOP.NON.A/S

(103) pa-kawana pa-dokholari-nuku

di-sueta-tha-pidana

IMP-leg IMP-joint-TOP.NON.A/S 3sgnf-stay+CAUS-CAUS-FR-REM.P.REP

LW/T 07

63

(104) diha di-a-pidena

duha du-a-pidena-hna

he 3sgnf-say-REM.P.REP she 3sgf-say-REM.P.REP-PAUS

Tariana

(105) phia ha-niri59

nu-na nu-ite-seka

dhipa

you parent-MASC 1sg-OBJ 1sg-POSS:AN-PRES.INFR 3sgnf-take

(106) dhima

du-a-pidana

du-kalite du-sa-niri-nuku

3sgnf-hear,try 3sgf-say-REM.P.REP 3sgf-tell 3sgf-spouse-MASC-TOP.NON.A/S

‘Yes, he said, and he put (in vain) the joint of his leg, put the joint of his leg (near hers),

and she said, ‘Your father tried to grab my sexual organ,60 she said to her husband.’

(107) kay du-a-ka

dhima

duha du-sa-niri

so 3sgf-say-SEQ 3sgnf+hear she 3sgf-spouse-MASC

(108) keru-pidana

di-yena

di-a

ha-niri-naku

angry-REM.P.REP 3sgnf-become 3sgnf-go parent-MASC-TOP.NON.A/S

‘When her husband heard her say so, he became angry at his father.’

(109) di-dia-ka 3sgnf-return-SEQ

di-uka

di-kwisa-pidana

diri-hna

3sgnf-chegar 3sgnf-scold-REM.P.REP son-PAUS

‘When he (father) returned, the son scolded him.’

(110) phia pai

nu-sa-do-nuku

hi$ku-pidaka

you Dad:VOC 1sg-spouse-FEM-TOP.NON.A/S so-REC.P.SEC.H

(111) pi-ni

phia phipa-pidaka

phima

phia

2sg-do you 2sg+take-REC.P.SEC.H 2sg+hear,try you

(112) di-a-pidana

di-pumina

di-kwisa-pidana

3sgnf-say-REM.P.REP 3sgnf-punish 3sgnf-scold-REM.P.REP

‘After that he scolded him, [sating] ‘You, Dad, (reportedly) have done like this to my wife, you (reportedly) have tried to grab [her]’, he said, punishing him by scolding.’

(113) kay di-ni-ka

thepe di-wa-pidana

so 3sgnf-do-SEQ annoyed 3sgnf-become-REM.P.REP

(114) diha kali di-nu-khani-pidana he Kali 3sgnf-come-AWAY-REM.P.REP

(115) na-na di-dawa-pidana-niki 3pl-OBJ 3sgnf-hide-REM.P.REP-COMPL

de:pi night

59 Kinship terms ‘father’ and ‘mother’ sometimes take possessive prefixes (e.g. nu-ha-ni\i 1sg-parent-MASC ‘my father’), and sometimes do not (e.g. nuha ha-ni\i I parent-MASC ‘my father’). 60 Lit. ‘mine’, ‘my (animate) thing’; this is a widespread euphemism used to refer to one’s sexual organs.

LW/T 07

64

Tariana

‘After he did this, Kali became annoyed and went away, he hid himself from them at night.’

(116) kay di-ni

diha-da-nuku

so 3sgnf-do he-CL:ROUND-TOP.NON.A/S

(117) di-sue-ta-ka-tha-pidana 3sgnf-stay+CAUS-CAUS-SEQ-FR61-REM.P.REP

hˆa-ka-si eat-TH-NOM

(118) di-sue-ta-ka

ya:hari na:nite

3sgnf-stay+CAUS-CAUS-DECL small.toad 3pl+say+TOP.ADV+CL:AN

(119) di-sueta-pidana 3sgnf-stay+CAUS-CAUS-REM.P.REP

‘Having done so, he put the round one (i.e. manioc) (to no avail), having put out food, he put a small toad [there].’62

(120) nu-dia-ka

nu-nu hi$

ya:hari

1sg-return-SEQ 1sg-come DEM:AN small.toad

(121) kayu-mhade like-PROB.FUT

pi:ma

nuha

emit.sound

I

di-a-pidana 3sgnf-say-REM.P.REP

(122) ne

diha-da-nuku

nuha

then

he-CL:ROUND-TOP.NON.A/S

I

(123) nu-sue-ta-ni-da-nuku 1sg-stay+CAUS-CAUS-TOP.ADV-CL:ROUND-TOP.NON.A/S

(124) pi-mare-niki 2sg-swallow+CAUS-COMPL

di-a-pidana 3sgnf-say-REM.P.REP

‘When I come back, I will emit a sound like this small toad (does),’ he said, ‘then you swallow the round one which I put [here].’

(125) diha yapirikuri-ˆaˆa-pidena he Yapirikuri-PEJ-REM.P.REP

di-na 3sgnf-OBJ

(126) di-maˆe-ta-nha 3sgnf-cheat+CAUS-CAUS-PAUS

‘Yapirikuri, the bad one, cheated him.’

(127) kay diha di-a-ka

dhima

so he 3sgnf-say-SEQ 3sgnf+hear

wanari yapirikuri wanari yapirikuri

61 The use of frustrative shows that Kali’s efforts to provide his son and his wife with food will not acheive the result he intended. 62 Here, just like in Story 3, the mythical being does not give things to people in an obvious way: they always appear in ‘disguise’.

LW/T 07

65

Tariana

(128) na:nite-pidana

di-mayana

3pl+say+TOP.ADV+CL:AN-REM.P.REP 3pl-cheat

‘The one called Wanari Yapirikuri heard what he said, and he cheated.’

(129) diha di-a-mi

kayu-pidana

he 3sgnf-say-NOM so-REM.P.REP

dihmeriku 3sgnf+make.noise

(130) hi$

ya:hari

DEM:AN small.toad

kayu-pidana so-REM.P.REP

pi:ma emit.sound

‘He made the noise [Kali] was talking about, he emitted a sound similar to that of the small toad.’

(131) wowo-pidana

pima

wowo-REM.P.REP emit.sound

diha ya:hari hi$-nuku he small.toad DEM:AN-TOP.NON.A/S

(132) phima pi-a-nhi

diha-da-nuku

pi-mare-niki

2sg+hear 2sg-say-ANT he-CL:ROUND-TOP.NON.A/S 2sg-go.down+CAUS-COMPL

(133) di-a-pidana

diha-ki-pidena

pima

3sgnf-say-REM.P.REP he-so-REM.P.REP emit.sound

‘Wowo, sounded the toad. ‘When you hear it, swallow the round one, he said, and it sounded just like that.’

(134) wanari yapirikuri-ˆaˆa-pidana

di-mayana haw

wanari yapirikuri-PEJ-REM.P.REP3pl-cheat yes

‘Wanari Yapirikuri cheated.’

(135) di-a-pidena

di-mare-niki

hyukade-pidana

3sgnf-say-REM.P.REP 3sgnf-go.down+CAUS-COMPL not.appear-REM.P.REP

‘Yes, he (the son) said, and swallowed. Nothing happened.’

(136) yuwapiku mhesiki di-ˆami-pidana

di-a-nha

some.time hunger 3sgnf-die-REM.P.REP 3sgnf-go-PAUS

(137) ne-sede-pidana

di-hˆa-nipe

NEG-NEG.EX-REM.P.REP 3sgnf-eat-NOM

(138) ne-kwaka NEG-what

di-hˆa-nipe 3sgnf-eat-NOM

sede-pidana NEG.EX-REM.P.REP

‘Some time after he was starving. There was no food, no food whatsoever.’

(139) di-hˆa-nipe sede-ka

di-ka-pidena

3sgnf-eat-NOM NEG.EX-SEQ 3sgnf-see-REM.P.REP

(140) di-nu

di-uma-hna

LW/T 07

66

3sgnf-come3sgnf-look for-PAUS

Tariana

‘When he saw that there was no food, he went to look for it.’

(141) kani-se-ka

di-a

nuha

ha-niri

where-LOC-DECL 3sgnf-go parent-MASC parent-MASC

(142) di-a-pidana

ha-ehkwapi-nuku

3sgnf-say-REM.P.REP DEM:INAN-CL:WORLD TOP.NON.A/S

(143) di-uma-tha-pidana 3sgnf-look for-FR-REM.P.REP

ne-ma-keta-kade-pidana NEG-NEG-meet-NEG-REM.P.REP

(144) di-nu-pidana

di-dia

3sgnf-come-REM.P.REP 3sgnf-return

di-nu 3sgnf-come

‘Where is it that my father went’, he said. He looked over the whole world in vain, and did not find him, and came back.’

(145) ne-pidana then-REM.P.REP

di-keta-hna 3sgnf-meet-PAUS

diha ku:phe he fish

(146) dinu-nipe-nuku

di-keta-pidana

di-ne

di-yã-ka

3sgnf+kill-NOM-TOP.NON.A/S 3sgnf-meet-REM.P.REP 3sgnf-INS 3sgnf-live-SEQ

(147) diha ku:phe dinu-nipe-nuku

diha di-yeka-pidana

he fish

3sgnf+kill-NOM-TOP.NON.A/S he 3sgnf-know-REM.P.REP

‘Then he found his father’s fishing, he found it; when he lived with him, he knew [his way of] fishing.’

(148) diri

hi$$ kwaka

3sgnf+son DEM:AN what

di-ni

dinu

3sgnf-do 3sgnf+kill

(149) di-yã-ka

hi$

paika

3sgnf-stay-SEQ DEM:AN father:REF

di-a-pidana 3sgnf-say-REM.P.REP

‘He said, the son, ‘This is how my father fishes (lit. kills [fish]).’

(150) ne-pidena then-REM.P.REP

di-wapa-hna 3sgnf-wait-PAUS

‘So he waited.’

(151) mhãida piaka-pidana a.little now-REM.P.REP

diha di-mara he 3sgnf-go.downstream

(152) hiku-nha

di-rapa-pidana

appear-PAUS 3sgnf-sing-REM.P.REP

(153) di-mara

di-nu-hna

di-nu 3sgnf-come

LW/T 07

67

3sgnf+go.downstream 3sgnf-come-PAUS

Tariana

‘Soon after he (Kali) came downstream singing.’

(154) diha-naka

nuha ha-niri-ya-naka

di-a-pidana

he-PRES.VIS I parent-MASC-EMPH-PRES.VIS 3sgnf-say-REM.P.REP

‘This is really my father, he (the son) said.’

(155) di-wapa 3sgnf-wait

di-na 3sgnf-OBJ

‘He waited for him.’

(156) di-mara

di-nu-khe-pidena

dihmeta

3sgnf-go.downstream 3sgnf-come-IN.SPITE:SS-REM.P.REP 3sgnf+feel,think

(157) di-na 3sgnf-OBJ

dihmeta-pidena 3sgnf+feel,think-REM.P.REP

‘In spite of going downstream, Kali felt that he was there (lit. felt him).’

(158) di-dia di-rahta 3sgnf-stay 3sgnf-float

di-a-pidena 3sgnf-go-REM.P.REP

‘He stayed afloat.’

(159) ne-se-pidana

di-uka

then-LOC-REM.P.REP 3sgnf-arrive

di-nita tuiri-pupani-na-ne 3sgnf-push spear-arms-CL:VERT-INS

(160) diha wai di-ni-mi-se

diha iìiri

he trap 3sgnf-do-NOM-LOC he game

(161) di-hwa di-swa-pidena 3sgnf-fall 3sgnf-stay-REM.P.REP

di-swa 3sgnf-stay

(162) di-apita-tha di-ruku-i-ta-pidana 3sgnf-drag-FR 3sgnf-fall+CAUS-CAUS-REM.P.REP

‘Then he (Kali) pushed with a spear, there was game in the trap he had made, he tried to drag it down, and and made it fall (into the canoe).’

(163) ne-pidana then-REM.P.REP

di-kapuku 3sgnf-turn

disa 3sgnf+go.up

di-a 3sgnf-go

‘Then he turned around and went up.’

(164) di-na

ma-na-de63-pidana

di-ka

diri-nuku

3sgnf-OBJ NEG-want-NEG-REM.P.REP 3sgnf-see 3sgnf+son-TOP.NON.A/S

63Negative -de is a variant of negative -kade in rapid speech.

LW/T 07

68

Tariana

‘He did not want to see his son.’

(165) nuha ha-nirya-naka I parent-MASC+EMPH-PRES.VIS

di-a-pidena 3sgnf-say-REM.P.REP

‘It is my father, he (the son) said.’

(166) dyeku 3sgnf+run

di-a-pidana

di-hwa-thepi

3sgnf-go-REM.P.REP 3sgnf-fall-TO.WATER

di-a 3sgnf-go

(167) diha ita-whya-se

dhipa-pidana

he canoe-CL:CANOE-LOC 3sgnf+grab-REM.P.REP

‘He (son) ran, fell into water, grabbed the canoe.’

(168) pi-na

nu-pe-ka

nu-pe-sita

nhua

2sg-OBJ 1sg-leave-REC.P.VIS

1sg-leave-PERF

I

(169) di-a-pidana

di-na

3sgnf-say-REM.P.REP 3sgnf-OBJ

‘I have already abandoned you, said (the father) to him.’

(170) halemi all.the.time

di-ni-dhala

di-ruku-i-nipe

3sgnf-do-UNSTICK 3sgnf-fall-CAUS-ALL.TIME

di-na 3sgnf-OBJ

‘He let him unstick (off the canoe) and fall all the time.’

(171) kwe ma-ni-kade di-yeka-hna INT NEG-do-NEG 3sgnf-know-PAUS

‘He (the son) didn’t know what to do.’

(172) ita-whya

yapise-pidana

canoe-CL:CANOE under-REM.P.REP

(173) kapatu bodo

di-maìi-ka di-hwa 3sgnf-bad-TH 3sgnf-stay

de:ru hang

di-a-hna 3sgnf-go-PAUS

‘He turned into a bodo (type of sucker-fish), and was hanging underneath the canoe.’

(174) di-dena

disa

3sgnf-paddle 3sgnf+go.up

di-a-pidana 3sgnf-go-REM.P.REP

‘(His father) was paddling upstream.’

(175) hamia-ma-pidena

dihmeta-ka

heavy-EXC-REM.P.REP 3sgnf+think-SEQ

(176) kwaka-tha what-INTER.NON.VIS

diha di-a

dhipa

he 3sgnf-say 3sgnf+take

LW/T 07

69

‘He felt the weight. ‘What is it?’ he said and grabbed [it].’

Tariana

(177) diha ita-whya

i-kuda-nuku

he canoe-CL:CANOE INDF-body-TOP.NON.A/S

dhipa 3sgnf+grab

(178) di-uma-pidena

dhipa

3sg-look.for-REM.P.REP 3sgnf+grab

di-keta-pidena

di-na

3sgnf-meet-REM.P.REP 3sgnf-OBJ

(179) dhipa 3sgnf+grab

di-keta-pidena

dhita

3sgnf-meet-REM.P.REP 3sgnf+take

di-pala 3sgnf-put

(180) dhita 3sgnf+take

di-pala 3sgnf-put

disa 3sgnf+go.up

di-a 3sgnf-go

(181) hipa-kwa stone-CL:FLAT.SURFACE

di-keta-pidana

ne-pidana

3sgnf-meet-REM.P.REP then-REM.P.REP

(182) di-patu

di-uka

3sgnf-put.ashore 3sgnf-arrive

di-na 3sgnf-OBJ

di-kwisa-pidana 3sgnf-scold-REM.P.REP

‘He grabbed the canoe, searched [it], found and grabbed him, grabbed him, got him and went upstream, found a flat stone, put the canoe ashore and scolded him (the son).’

(183) neri

phia manihta-de-naka

hi$ku-ka-pena-ka

phia

son:VOC you NEG+think-NEG-PRES.VIS so-DECL-NOM.FUT-SEQ you

(184) ne-pa-kalite-ka NEG-IMP-speak-SEQ

haw ma-kade-ka

phia

yes NEG+say,do-NEG-SEQ you

(185) di-a-pidana

di-na

3sgnf-say-REM.P.REP 3sgnf-OBJ

di-kwisa 3sgnf-scold

‘He said, scolding him: ‘Son, you do not think going to be like this, when one tells you (what to do), you do not do [it].’

(186) di-ya:-pidana

diha diri

kayu di-a-ka

di-kwisa

3sgnf-cry-REM.P.REP he 3sgnf+son so 3sgnf-say-SEQ 3sgnf-scold

‘The son cried when he scolded him.’

(187) ne-pidana then-REM.P.REP

di-na

ira-ka-si

direta-daka

3sgnf-OBJ drink-TH-NOM 3sgnf+drink+CAUS-YET

‘Then he (Kali) still gave him a drink.’

(188) èome much

ka-kama-pidena

nesa

na:

REL-be.drunk-REM.P.REP 3pl+go.up 3pl+go

‘They went upstream very drunk.’

LW/T 07

70

Tariana

(189) kasina-nuku

phia pi-dia pi-a

now+ADV-TOP.NON.A/S you 2sg-return 2sg-go

(190) di-a-pidena

di-na

3sgnf-say-REM.P.REP 3sgnf-OBJ

“Now you can go back’, he (father) said to him.’

(191) nuha nu-a-de

pa:-da-de

nu-a

di-a-pidena

I 1sg-say-FUT one-CL:ROUND-FUT 1sg-go 3sgnf-say-REM.P.REP

‘I will go, will go the next day, he said.’

(192) diwese-se-nuku

naha yarana-kayu

then-LOC-TOP.NON.A/S they white.people-like

na-wa-nipe 3pl-count-NOM

(193) sede-nhina

ehkwapi-pe-nuku-pidena

na-wa

NEG.EX-REM.P.SEC.H day-PL-TOP.NON.A/S-REM.P.REP 3pl-count

(194) na-ya-nhi

diha-kada

3pl-stay-ANT he-CL:DAY

diha-kada-pidana he-CL:DAY-REM.P.REP

(195) na-wa na-yã-nhi 3pl-count 3pl-stay-ANT

‘At that time there was no counting like among white people, they counted day by day, one day, one [more] day, they counted.’

(196) haw di-a

di-a-pidana

diha ka:pina-pidena

yes 3sgnf-do 3sgnf-say-REM.P.REP he garden-REM.P.REP

(197) direta

diha

3sgnf+need+CAUS he

“Yes’, he said, and went; he (Kali) ordered to make a garden.’

(198) haw di-a

disa

yes 3sgnf-say 3sgnf+go.up

di-a-pidana

di-ni

3sgnf-go-REM.P.REP 3sgnf-do

(199) naha na-ˆa-mi-nuku they 3pl-hit-NOM-TOP.NON.A/S

(200) direta-mi

kayu-pidana

di-ni

diha

3sgnf+need+CAUS-NOM like-REM.P.REP 3sgnf-do he

‘Yes, he said, he went up, and made the one for them to harvest (garden), he (the son) did it according to the order.’

(201) pa-da one-CL:ROUND

yamina-pidena

di-uka-hna

day-REM.P.REP 3sgnf-arrive-PAUS

‘A day later he (father) arrived.’

LW/T 07

71

Tariana

(202) peme-kapi-kada-pe-pidana

ka:muy

one side-HAND-CL:DAY-PL-REM.P.REP summer

(203) dieme-ta-hna 3sgnf+stand+CAUS-CAUS-PAUS

‘Father made five days of summer heat.

(204) dy-uka-pidana

di-uka

di-ka

3sgnf-arrive-REM.P.REP 3sgnf-arrive-REM.P.REP 3sgnf-see

(205) kapina garden

pi-ni-nihka

phia neri

di-a-pidana

2sg-do-REC.P.INFR you son:VOC 3sgnf-go-REM.P.REP

‘He arrived, ‘You have made the garden, son’, he said.’

(206) nu-ni-ka

pai

di-a-pidana

1sg-do-REC.P.VIS Dad:VOC 3sgnf-go-REM.P.REP

“I have, Dad’, he (the son) said.’

(207) maìa-naka kasina wya-nuku

di-a-pidana

good-PRES.VIS now+ADV then-TOP.NON.A/S 3sgnf-go-REM.P.REP

‘Now it is good, he said.’

(208) wasã whamita-hna let’s 1pl+burn-IMPV

ikasu now

di-a-pidana 3sgnf-go-REM.P.REP

‘Now let’s burn (it), he said.’

(209) na:-pidana

dirinu

diha diha kali diha ha-niri

3pl+go-REM.P.REP 3sgnf+son+wife he he Kali he parent-MASC

‘There went the daughter-in-law, he himself, Kali and the father.’

(210) di-uka 3sgnf-arrive

di-kulira-pidana 3sgnf-dress.up-REM.P.REP

‘He (Kali) arrived and dressed up.’

(211) hinipuku i-thirikuna garden INDF-edge

di-kulira-pidana 3sgnf-dress.up-REM.P.REP

‘He dressed up himself at the edge of the garden.’

(212) nu-na ai$ i-wapa-daka nu-kulira-kasu

di-a-pidena

1sg-OBJ here 2pl-wait-YET 1sg-dress.up-INT3sgnf-say-REM.P.REP

“You wait for me to dress up’, he said.’

(213) daruphema

di-tutu wayapa

di-tutu

LW/T 07 feather.headdress

72 3sgnf-tie leg.adornment 3sgnf-tie

Tariana

(214) thuya-pidena

diha di-kulira-pidena

al.NON.INDIV-REM.P.REP he 3sgnf-dress.up-REM.P.REP

‘He tied a feather headdress, he tied a leg adornment, he dressed up with all [this].’

(215) yawi-na jaguar-CL:VERT

dhita-pidana

tuiri-pupani-na

dhita

3sgnf+take-REM.P.REP spear-arms-CL:VERT 3sgnf+take

(216) maìa-naka neri nuha pamuˆa-se-de

nuka

nuha

good-PRES.VIS son I middle-LOC-FUT 1sg+arrive

I

(217) di-a-pidana

haw di-a-pidana

3sgnf-say-REM.P.REP yes 3sgnf-say-REM.P.REP

‘He took the ritual stick, he took the spear. ‘It is good, son. I will stay in the middle of the garden’, he said. ‘Yes’, he (the son) said.’

(218) hi$-naka

di-swa mesape-naki

DEM:AN-PRES.VIS 3sgnf-stay turí-CL:BUNDLE

di-a-pidana 3sgnf-say-REM.P.REP

‘Here is a bundle of ‘turí’,64 he said.’

(219) ha-naki-nuku

ai$ hinipuku i-thirikuna

DEM:INAN-CL:BUNDLE-TOP.NON.A/S here garden INDF-edge

(220) pi-apita piha pi-a

pi-a

di-a-pidana

2sg-drag you 2sg-go 2sg-go 3sgnf-say-REM.P.REP

“Drag this bundle of turí to the edge of the garden’, he said.’

(221) haw pamuˆa-se-pidana

di-uka

yes middle-LOC-REM.P.REP 3sgnf-arrive

di-ema diha 3sgnf-stand he

“Yes’, he (father) remained standing in the middle of the garden.’

(222) dukuriphe-na-se

di-he-hala

imbauba-CL:VERT-LOC 3sgnf-enter-OPEN.SPACE

(223) di-uka 3sgnf-arrive

di-ema

di-ema-ka-pidana

diha

3sgnf-stand3sgnf-stand-DECL-REM.P.REP he

‘He entered into [a hole in an] imbauba-tree and stayed there.’

(224) haw di-a-pidana

di-uka

yes 3sgnf-say-REM.P.REP 3sgnf-arrive

di-ka 3sgnf-see

“Yes’, he said, and went to see there.’

64 Plant used for lighting fire.

LW/T 07

73

Tariana

(225) sede-pidana

mesape-naki

NEG.EX-REM.P.REP turí-CL:BUNDLE

‘There was no bundle of turí.’

(226) mawari-mia-pidana snake-ONLY-REM.P.REP

di-swa 3sgnf-stay

‘There was only a snake.’

(227) wade-pidena

di-hˆa-ka

me$da-pidana

di-perita

maybe-REM.P.REP 3sgnf-eat-SEQ indeed-REM.P.REP 3sgnf-lick

“It may eat (me) up, it is ‘licking its lips” [he thought].

(228) kay di-a

di-dia

so 3sgnf-go 3sgnf-return

di-nu-pita 3sgnf-come-AGAIN

‘So he returned.’

(229) pai

mesape-naki

ma-keta-de-mahka

nuha

Dad:VOC turí-CL:BUNDLE NEG-meet-NEG-REC.P.NON.VIS I

(230) di-a-pidena 3sgnf-say-REM.P.REP

mawari-mia-ka snake-ONLY-REC.P.VIS65

(231) di-swa

diha ne-nuku

di-a-pidena

3sgnf-say-REM.P.REP he then-TOP.NON.A/S 3sgnf-say-REM.P.REP

“Dad, I did not find the bundle of turí, there is only a snake there’, he said.’

(232) kweka-hna how-INTER.PRES.VIS
(233) pi-apita phia pi-a 2sg-drag you 2sg-go

karu

phia di-numa-se

be.afraid you 3sgnf-mouth-LOC

di-a-pidena

3sgnf-say-REM.P.REP

phipa 2sg+take

“Why are you afraid, take (it) by its mouth, and drag (it)’, he said.’

(234) haw di-a-pidana

direta-mi

kayu-pidana

yes 3sgnf-say-REM.P.REP 3sgnf+need+CAUS-NOM like-REM.P.REP

(235) di-apita 3sgnf-drag

diha-ya he-EMPH

“Yes’, he said, he dragged (the snake) according to the order.’

65 Lines 229 and 230 illustrate the difference between the non-visual and visual evidential: the non-visual evidential is used to refer to a bundle of turí — which the son did not see — and the visual evidential refers to the snake — which he did see, instead of the turí.

LW/T 07

(236) diha di-a-hna

di-apita

syawa

he 3sgnf-do-PAUS 3sgnf-drag

74 diha-pidana
he-REM.P.REP

Tariana hi$$
DEM:AN fire

(237) lama flame

hiku-pidana

kerapheda

appear-REM.P.REP glimmer

(238) lama flame

di-pinita-ka-pidana 3sgnf-follow-SEQ-REM.P.REP

‘He was dragging, and the flame appeared glimmering, the fire was following him.

(239) pi-ka

pi-api piha pi-a

mayakani pi-dia-kha

2sg-see 2sg-drag you 2sg-go straight 2sg-return-AWAY

(240) pi-a 2sg-go

di-a-pidena

na-na haw di-a-pidena

3sgnf-say-REM.P.REP 3pl-OBJ yes 3sgnf-say-REM.P.REP

“Make sure you drag, go on straight and return’, he said to them (the son and his wife). ‘Yes’, he (the son) said.’

(241) di-ni-mi kayu-pidena 3sgnf-do so-REM.P.REP

di-ni 3sgnf-do

‘He did as he (father) did.’

(242) di-apita 3sgnf-drag

diha lama-pidana he flame-REM.P.REP

‘He was dragging, and the flame was burning.’

(243) mhai$da pi-kapuku pi-ka

nu-na di-a-pidena

PROH 2sg-turn 2sg-see 1sg-OBJ 3sgnf-say-REM.P.REP

(244) i-ka-mhade

ihya

2pl-see-PROB.FUT you:pl

di-a-pidana 3sgnf-say-REM.P.REP

“Don’t look back at me’, he said, ‘you will probably look at me [but don’t]’.’

(245) diha di:reta-mi

kayu-tha-pidana

di-ni

diha ìiãri

he 3sgnf+need+CAUS-NOM so-FR-REM.P.REP 3sgnf-do he man

‘The man tried to do as he was told.’

(246) dirinu 3sgnf+son+wife

hi$

ina:

DEM:AN woman:PL

(247) manihta-kade-karu-pena NEG+think-NEG-PURP-NOM.FUT
(248) kasina-misini-nuku

apare-pidena

na-keˆa

elsewhere-REM.P.REP 3pl-start

kayu-maka nha ina:

manihta-kade

LW/T 07
now+ADV-ALSO-TOP.NON.A/S NEG

75

Tariana

so-AFF they woman:PL NEG+think-

(249) apare

di-thani-na-se

elsewhere 3sgnf-edge-AFF-LOC

nha kayu na-ni-mi they so 3pl-do-NOM

‘But the daughter-in-law, these women do not think, they always start by the other end, now too, so the women do not think, and in the begininng their deeds were like this.’

(250) wasã wa-dia wa:

di-a-pidana

let’s 1pl-return 1pl+go 3sgnf-say-REM.P.REP

(251) du-dia-ka

du-a

du-kapuku du-ka-pidana

dirinu

3sgf-return-SEQ 3sgf-go 3sgf-turn 3sgf-see-REM.P.REP 3sgnf+son+wife

‘Let’s return, he said (the son), when she was returning, she turned back to see, the daughter-in-law.’

(252) nu-hˆaweri

du-a-ka

du-kapuku

du-ka-pidana

1sg-father.in.law:VOC 3sgf-say-SEQ 3sgf-turn

3sgf-see-REM.P.REP

(253) di-na 3sgnf-OBJ

du-mesa-ka 3sgf-cherish-SEQ

“My father in law!’ she said, cherishing him.’

(254) lama flame

diha-liki

lama

he-CL:PLANTATION flame

thui-pidana all-REM.P.REP

‘All the plantation started burning, all was burning.’

(255) diha leka-pidana-hna

diha leka di-musu di-a-pidana

he split-REM.P.REP-PAUS he split 3sgnf-go.out 3sgnf-say-REM.P.REP

‘It (the imbauba tree) split, it split, and Kali came out.’

(256) pa! di-musu-kha pa! 3sgnf-go.out-AWAY

di-a-pidana 3sgnf-say-REM.P.REP

(257) mayakani-pidana di-dia-kha

di-a

straight-REM.P.REP 3sgnf-return-AWAY 3sgnf-go

‘Pa! He went out and returned straight home.’

(258) te pani-si-se

na-peya

until house-NPOSS-LOC 3pl-be first

alia-pidana

di-sita

EXIST-REM.P.REP 3sgnf-finish

(259) di-dia-pidena

di-uka

3sgnf-arrive-REM.P.REP 3sgnf-arrive

di-sita 3sgnf-finish

‘He was in the house before them, he had already returned.’

LW/T 07

76

(260) di-pumi-se-se-pidena 3sgnf-follow-LOC-CONTR-REM.P.REP

Tariana

diha diri

di-dia

he 3sgnf+son 3sgnf-return

(261) di-uka-hna

di-ka-pidana

harame di-a

3sgnf-arrive-PAUS 3sgnf-see-REM.P.REP be.scared 3sgnf-go

‘The son arrived after him, he was scared to see’

(262) ìo! nu-ha-niri se
oh! 1sg-parent-MASC

lama-ka flame-REC.P.VIS

di-a

diha hinipuku-

3sgnf-go he garden-LOC

(263) di-a-pidana

hanipa-pidana

dihmeta

3sgnf-say-REM.P.REP big+CL:CL.SP-REM.P.REP 3sgnf+think

diri-ne 3sgnf+son-AG

‘Oh! My father is burning in the garden, he said, the son thought a lot.’

(264) lama-nihka

ka:pina di-a

flame-REC.P.INFR

garden 3sgnf-go

(265) pai

lama-ka

Dad:VOC flame-REC.P.VIS

di-a

di-a-pidena

3sgnf-go 3sgnf-say-REM.P.REP

“The garden must be burning” (said Kali). “Dad, it is burning’, he (the son) said.’

(266) maìa-sika good-PRES.INFR

di-a-pidana 3sgnf-say-REM.P.REP

“It must be good’, he (Kali) said.’

(267) pa-da one-CL:ROUND

ya:mina kiniki pa-pada-pidana

day

maniva one-CL:PIECE-REM.P.REP

‘The next day there was one piece of manioc.’

(268) pamuˆa-maˆa pi-musu pi-a

pi-pana

middle-mid 2sg-go.out 2sg-go 2sg-plant

(269) diha-pada-nuku he-CL:PIECE-TOP.NON.A/S

di-a-pidana 3sgnf-say-REM.P.REP

“Go in the middle of the garden, plant this piece’, he (Kali) said.’

(270) haw di-a-pidana

diha direta-mi

kayu-pidena

yes 3sgnf-say-REM.P.REP he 3sgnf+need+CAUS-NOM so-REM.P.REP

(271) di-a-pidana

di-uka

3sgnf-say-REM.P.REP 3sgnf-arrive

di-pana

di-sita

3sgnf-plant 3sgnf-finish

‘Yes, he said, he did in agreement with what he said, he went and planted.’

(272) mhai$da pi-a

pi-ka

di-a-pidana

LW/T 07 PROH

2sg-go

77 2sg-see 3sgnf-say-REM.P.REP

Tariana

‘He (Kali) said, ‘Don’t look’.’

(273) di:reta-mi

kayu-pidana

3sgnf+need+CAUS-NOM so-REM.P.REP

di-ni 3sgnf-do

(274) madalina three+ADV

yamina wasã wa-ka waha

day

let’s 1pl-see we

(275) kwe-sika what-PRES.INFR

di-a

waha hinipuku di-a-pidana

3sgnf-go we garden 3sgnf-say-REM.P.REP

‘He did as his father told him to. Three days after he said, ‘Let’s go and see how our garden is’.’

(276) di-musu

di-a

kiniki-pã-pidana

di-ema-hna

3sgnf-go.out 3sgnf-go maniva-ALL-REM.P.REP 3sgnf-stand-PAUS

‘He went out — it was all full of manioc.’

(277) halia-piri-wani-pI-pidana

di-ema

time-CL:HARVEST-CL:ABSTR-AUG-REM.P.REP 3sgnf-stand

‘It was really in time for harvest.’

(278) alia-pidana

thui-niki

EX-REM.P.REP all-COMPL

hunay potato

ãwhi de:ri

ãsi

yam banana pepper

(279) kaliri sweet potato

alia-pidena

thui-niki

EXIST-REM.P.REP all-COMPL

di-pane 3sgnf-plant+CAUS

‘Everything was there — potato, yam, banana, pepper, sweet potato —, he planted everything.’

(280) maìa-naka kasina wya-nuku

di-a-pidana

good-PRES.VIS now+ADV then-TOP.NON.A/S 3sgnf-say-REM.P.REP

“Now it is good’, he (Kali) said.’

(281) ikasu-nuku

phia kaini

pi-nitu di-a-pidena

du-na

now-TOP.NON.A/S you manioc 2sg-tear 3sgnf-say-REM.P.REP 3sgf-OBJ

‘Now you tear the manioc, he said to her’

(282) haw du-a-pidena

dirinu

yes 3sgf-say-REM.P.REP 3sgf+son+wife

‘Yes, said the daughter-in-law.’

(283) du-nitu-pidana

du-nitu ne-se-pidana

diha di-ya

3sgf-pull-REM.P.REP 3sgf-pull then-LOC-REM.P.REPhe 3sgnf-skin

LW/T 07
(284) di-solo 3sgnf-leave

di-hwa 3sgnf-stay

78

di-a

hipe

3sgnf-go ground

waliku-se inside-LOC

Tariana

‘She tore (the manioc) out, and the peel came off and stayed in the ground.’

(285) maìa good

pa-khaka-ri

kayu-da-pe-se-pidana

IMP-peel-REL so-CL:ROUND-PL-CONTR-REM.P.REP

(286) di-musu-ka di-nu

diha kaini-da-pe

3sgnf-sair-SEQ 3sgnf-comehe manioc-CL:ROUND-PL

‘The manioc came out as if it were well peeled.’

(287) du-dia 3sgnf-return

duka 3sgf+arrive

diha-yeri he-aturá.basket66

(288) du-matara du-hwe-ta

du-a-pidana

3sgf-leave 3sgf-stay+CAUS-CAUS 3sgf-go-REM.P.REP

‘She returned, left the aturá-basket (with manioc).’

(289) tethu

phia hi$

kaini-nuku

pi-ni

daughter.in.law:VOC you DEM:AN manioc-TOP.NON.A/S 2sg-do

(290) pi-hˆa di-a-tha-pidana 2sg-eat 3sgnf-say-FR-REM.P.REP

“Daughter in law, you make (prepare) the manioc, then eat’, he said in vain.’

(291) mhai$siki kai-pu-pidena

du-na

hunger dor-AUG-REM.P.REP 3sgf-OBJ

‘She was very hungry.’

(292) di-kalite-tha-pidana 3sgnf-tell-FR-REM.P.REP

nu-a-ka 1sg-say-SEQ

‘He did try to tell her, I am saying.’

(293) kayu-maka-mha

nha-niri-nipe

kasina-misini-nuku

so-AFF-PRES.NON.VIS 3pl+parent-MASC-PL now+ADV-TOO-TOP.NON.A/S

(294) mhe$da pi-ni

nuitõ

PROH 2sg-do daughter:VOC

na:-ka 3pl+say-SEQ

(295) ne-mhema-kade-mha NEG-NEG+hear-NEG-PRES.NON.VIS

‘So parents say now, too: don’t do it, my daughter, and they do not listen.’

(296) kani

na:-ri

na:-mha-niki

66 A basket carried on the back and held by a strap across the forehead.

LW/T 07 where

79 3pl+go-CONV 3pl+go-PRES.NON.VIS-COMPL

Tariana

‘They go where they go (i.e. they have their own way).’

(297) diha-niri di-kalite-ka-ya he-father 3sgnf-tell-SEQ-EMPH

i:na women:PL

(298) kani where

na:ri

na:-mha-niki

3pl+say-CONV 3pl+go-PRES.NON.VIS-COMPL

‘The father does tell the women (what to do), but they go everywhere.’

(299) a:pare di-thanina-se elsewhere 3sgnf-edge+ADV-LOC

nha kay-na-ni-mi-pidana they so-3pl-do-NOM-REM.P.REP

(300) hi$

na:

na-sape-na

hi$

pedalia-pe

DEM:AN 3pl+say 3pl-tell-REM.P.VIS DEM:AN old-PL

‘They (women) did so from the very beginning, as old people say.’

(301) kayu-maka na-ka

hi$

ina:

so-AFF 3pl+go-SEQ DEM:AN woman:PL

pa-kalite-ka IMP-tell-SEQ

(302) mhema-kade-naka NEG+hear-NEG-PRES.VIS

na: 3pl+go

‘So they go, and do not listen to what they are told.’

(303) haw duha

du-hˆa-pidana-niki

yes she

3sgf-eat-REM.P.REP-COMPL

‘So she ate (it).’

(304) ne-pidena then-REM.P.REP

di-ya

di-maìi-ka

thui di-hwa di-a

3sgnf-skin 3sgnf-bad-TH all 3sgnf-fall 3sgnf-go

(305) diha di-dia-pidana

thui di-a

di-ya

he 3sgnf-return-REM.P.REP all 3sgnf-go 3sgnf-skin

(306) alia-peri-mia

di-tuka

EX-PL:INAN-ONLY 3sgnf-break

di-dia-niki 3sgnf-return-COMPL

‘Then the peel turned back onto the manioc, it became covered with peel again.’

(307) na-khaka-tha-pidena 3pl-peel/scratch-FR-REM.P.REP

ne-ma-sita-de-pidena NEG-NEG-finish-NEG-REM.P.REP

‘They tried to peel it, but did not manage.’

(308) ka:-pidana

de:pi

na-ka

na-hwa-niki

LW/T 07 so-REM.P.REP

night

80 3pl+go-SEQ

3pl-stay-COMPL

Tariana

‘They were staying doing this till it was night.’

(309) ne pa-kalite-ka mhema-ka-de-naka

ihia di-a-pidana

NEG IMP-tell-SEQ NEG+hear-NEG-PRES.VIS you:pl 3sgnf-say-REM.P.REP

‘He said, ‘You do not listen to what you are told.’

(310) kasina wya-nuku

ira-mha

now+ADV then-TOP.NON.A/S need-PRES.NON.VIS

pa:-khani IMP+go-AWAY

(311) di-a-pidana

di-a-pidana

di-mara

3sgnf-say-REM.P.REP 3sgnf-say-REM.P.REP 3sgnf-float.down

(312) di-nu-hna

na-na di-dawa-pidana-niki

3sgnf-come-PAUS 3pl-OBJ 3sgnf-hide-REM.P.REP-COMPL

“Now I have to go away’ he said, he said and went downstream, he hid from them.’

(313) di-mara 3sgnf-float.down

di-nu

diha kali-pani

3sgnf-comehe Kali-CL:RAPID

(314) ka-yã-kali

di-mara

REL-live-PAST.REL 3sgnf-float.down

di-nu

te ikuri-na

3sgnf-cometill turtle-CL:VERT

‘He floated downstream from Kali rapids where he lived up to the hill of Turtle.’

(315) ne-pidena then-REM.P.REP

ikuri turtle

itu-nuku daughter-TOP.NON.A/S

(316) di-keta-pidana

na-wana na-whe-ta-pidana

3sgnf-meet-REM.P.REP 3pl-call 3pl-stay+CAUS-CAUS-REM.P.REP

‘Then he met the daughter of the Turtle, they called him to stay there.’

(317) di-mara 3sgnf-float.down

di-nu 3sgnf-come

‘He was floating downstream.’

(318) nu-ine

pi-dia phia duhua-ka-sika

1sg-INSTR 2sg-stay you she-SEQ-PRES.INFR

(319) ma-nihta-kade NEG-think-NEG

duha kayu ne-ma-ni-kasu

nuha

she so NEG-NEG-do-INT I

(320) du-a-pidena

di-na

3sgf-say-REM.P.REP 3sgnf-OBJ

du-mayã-pidana 3sgf-cheat-REM.P.REP

‘Stay with me, she (son’s wife) apparently does not think, I won’t do like she did, said she, cheating him.’

LW/T 07

81

Tariana

(321) upi-mia-pidena old-ONLY-REM.P.REP

ne-misini du-ni-pidena then-TOO 3sgf-do-REM.P.REP

duha-pita she-REP

‘Then she also did the same thing.’

(322) pa-ita-pidana

ne-nuku

kenipe-pidana

one-CL:AN-REM.P.REP then-TOP.NON.A/S REL+child-REM.P.REP

(323) ìiãri-pidana man-REM.P.REP

hinipuku-se garden-LOC

du-a-ka 3sgf-go-SEQ

(324) ka:me-se-pidena

du-pala di-na

basket-LOC-REM.P.REP 3sgf-put 3sgnf-OBJ

‘Then he had a child with her, it was a boy; when she went to work in a garden, she put him into a basket.’

(325) ai-nuku

du-deka-tha-pidena

here-TOP.NON.A/S 3sgf-carry-FR-REM.P.REP

(326) ka:me-nuku

du-anapi

basket-TOP.NON.A/S 3sgf-put.on.back

‘There she carried [him], she put the basket on her back.’

(327) diha kali di-ka-ka

mawari i-numa-pI-pidana

he Kali 3sgnf-see-SEQ cobra INDF-mouth-AUG-REM.P.REP

‘When Kali saw (it), it was a mouth of a big snake.’

(328) mawari di-hwã-ka-pidena snake 3sgnf+bite-SEQ-REM.P.REP

dihya-tuki-nuku he-DIM-TOP.NON.A/S

(329) diha mawari di-hwã-ka-pidena he snake 3sgnf+bite-SEQ-REM.P.REP

(330) diha yanape di-ya-pidana

he child

3sgnf-cry-REM.P.REP

‘The snake was biting the child, biting, and the child cried.’

(331) nuha kayi-wani-pu-kasu I so-REALLY-AUG-INT

upi-mia-naka old-ONLY-PRES.VIS

(332) nu-na du-ni-naka

1sg-OBJ 3sgf-do-PRES.VIS

(333) ne-nuku

du-na

then-TOP.NON.A/S 3sgf-OBJ

hi$-misini di-a-nhina DEM:AN-TOO 3sgf-say-REM.P.SEC.H di-pe-nhina-niki 3sgnf-leave-REM.P.SEC.H-COMPL

(334) duha she

ikuri turtle

itu-nuku daughter-TOP.NON.A/S

LW/T 07

82

Tariana

“She is really acting in the same way, this one, too’ (he thought). Then he left her, the daughter of the Turtle.’

(335) ne-nhina

de:pi-pe di-dawa ne-misini-nuku

then-REM.P.SEC.H night-PL 3sgnf-hide then-TOO-TOP.NON.A/S

(336) du-na 3sgf-OBJ

di-dawa 3sgnf-hide

di-mara 3sgnf-float

di-nu 3sgnf-come

(337) te hi$

kali

until DEM:AN Kali

waliru-na evil.spirit-CL:VERT

‘Then at night he hid from her, he hid from her, and went floating downstream until the mountain of Evil Spirit.’67

(338) waliru itu-naku

di-keta-pita

evil.spirit daughter-TOP.NON.A/S 3sgnf-meet-REP

‘He met the daughter of the Evil spirit again.’

(339) duha-pidena

du-wana du-we-ta

di-na

she-REM.P.REP 3sgf-call 3sgf-stay+CAUS-CAUS 3sgnf-OBJ

(340) uni water

yeda downstream

di-a-ka-tha-pidena 3sgnf-say-FR-REM.P.REP

‘She called him to make him stay, he was trying to go downstream.’

(341) du-wane 3sgf-call+CAUS

du-we-ta-pidena 3sgf-stay+CAUS-CAUS-REM.P.REP

(342) ne-pidana then-REM.P.REP

diha di-dia-pidena-pita he 3sgnf-remain-REM.P.REP-again

‘She called him, then he remained again.’

(343) du-na ka-sa-do-pidena 3sgf-OBJ REL-spouse-FEM-REM.P.REP

(344) diha waliru itu-nuku ka-sa-do-pidena

diha kali

he evil.spirit daughter REL-spouse-FEM-REM.P.REP he Kali

‘He married her, Kali married the daughter of the Evil spirit.’

(345) di-hˆawe-ri

ya-dapana

diha kali ya-dapana

3sgnf-parent.in.law-MASC POSS-CL:HOUSE he Kali POSS-HOUSE

67 A hill near São Gabriel da Cachoeira popularly known as Bela Adormecida (‘A Sleeping Beauty’); cf. Table 5.

LW/T 07
(346) alia-pidana EXIST-REM.P.REP
PL

83
diha-na-pe he-CL:VERT-PL

Tariana
waha wa-ka-ni-na-pe we 1pl-see-TOP.ADV-CL:VERT-

(347) alia-pidena EXIST-REM.P.REP

ne-pidena diha kali

then

he Kali

di-dia-pidena 3sgnf-stay-REM.P.REP

‘The house of his father-in-law, Kali’s house is there, it is on the hills which we see. Then Kali stayed there.’

(348) khida-na ready-REM.P.VIS

na-sape-na

pedalia-pe

3pl-tell- REM.P.VIS old-PL

‘This is it. This is what old people tell’

Story 3. The Origin of Tobacco, Snuff and Fire. Author: Cândido Brito

(1) hi$-nhina

pedalia-pe na-pupani na-de-nhina

DEM:AN-REM.P.SEC.H old-PL 3pl-arms 3pl-have-REM.P.SEC.H

(2) khida-nhina

na-na hiku-nhi

ready-REM.P.SEC.H 3pl-OBJ appear-ANT

wali-kasu naha hiku-ka new-INT they appear-SEQ

‘The old people had arms. This is how it appeared to them, in the beginning, when they came into being.’

(3) hi$-nuku

waha thuya-nhina

wa-de-nhi

DEM:AN-TOP.NON.A/S we all.NON.INDIV-REM.P.SEC.H 1pl-have-ANT

(4) yawi-na

tuiri-pupani-na

yema-pu

jaguar-VERT spear-arms-CL:VERT cigar-CL:HOLLOW

(5) wa-de-nhina

waha

1pl-have-REM.P.SEC.H we

wa-rada-sina 1pl-poder-REM.P.NON.VIS

(6) waha-sawa-seni we-CL:GROUP-SINGL:PL

wa-rada-sina 1pl-poder-REM.P.NON.VIS

(7) khida-mha

wa-kare wa-de-mha

waha

ready-PRES.NON.VIS 1pl-heart 1pl-have-PRES.NON.VIS we

‘Then we had everything, (ritual objects), cigar-holder. It was our power, it was the power of our group. All right, we have power in our heart (lit. we have heart).’

(8) hi$

yema sede-sina

DEM:AN tobacco NEG.EX-REM.P.NON.VIS

wali-kasu beginning

‘This tobacco did not exist in the beginning’

(9) yema sede-ka

di-ka

hi$

tobacco NEG.EX-SEQ 3sgnf-see DEM:AN

LW/T 07

84

Tariana

(10) kuite68 which+CL:AN

enu-naku thunder-TOP.NON.A/S

Wanali Yapirikuri Wanali Yapirikuri

(11) di-hˆawe-ri

di-de-sina

3sgnf-parent.in.law-MASC 3sgnf-have-REM.P.NON.VIS

di-de 3sgnf-have

‘This one what’s-his-name saw that there was no tobacco. Wanali Yapirikuri had thunder as his father-in-law.’

(12) yema sede-ka

pana-phe-pidana

tobacco NEG.EX-SEQ leaf-CL:LEAF.LIKE-REM.P.REP

(13) di-sita

di-a-nhi

3sgnf-smoke 3sgnf-go-ANT

‘Having no tobacco, he was smoking leaves.’

(14) pana-phe

di-sita-ka

leaf-CL:LEAF.LIKE 3sgnf-smoke-SEQ

du-ka 3sgf-see

(15) di-sa-do

du-a-pidana

ìo! nuha nu-sa-niri

3sgnf-spouse-FEM 3sgf-say-REM.P.REP oh! I 1sg-husband-MASC

(16) maìi-pu-naka

pi-rena69 phia

bad-AUG-PRES.VIS 2sg-feel you

(17) yema pi-na-ka

pi-sita

tobacco 2sg-want-SEQ 2sg-smoke

du-a-pidana 3sgf-say-REM.P.REP

‘His wife saw him smoke leaves and said: ‘My husband, you in a bad way when you want to to smoke tobacco’.’

(18) nuha kwe-hna

nuha

I INTER-INTER.PRES.VIS I

di-a-pidana 3sgnf-say-REM.P.REP

“What’s wrong with me?’ he said.’

(19) phia yapirikuri-ka-naka

kay pi-rena-naka

du-a-pidana

you Yapirikuri-DECL-PRES.VIS so 2sg-feel-PRES.VIS 3sgf-say-

REM.P.REP

(20) nu-ha-niri

puaya-na

1sg- parent-MASC elsewhere-REM.P.VIS

yema di-de tobacco 3sgnf-have

(21) di-ˆa-nhi

du-a-pidana

68 kuite (kwa- ‘which’ + -ite ‘CL:ANIMATE’) is frequently used in the sense of ‘what’s name’. 69 Tariana has two verbs which can be translated as ‘feel’: -\ena describes physical and mental sensations, while -himeta describes mental processes and presentiments.

LW/T 07

85

3sgnf-stay-ANT 3sgf-say-REM.P.REP

Tariana

“You are Yapirikuri, and you are feeling this way’, she said, ‘my father had tobacco elsewhere’, she said.’

(22) haw diwesewhya yes then

pi-a 2sg-go

phita

di-a-pidana

2sg-bring 3sgnf-say-REM.P.REP

(23) diha-ne-nha di-sa-do-nuku he-AG-PAUS 3sgnf-spouse-FEM-TOP.NON.A/S

(24) phia (ha)niri dalipa-se pi-a

phita

di-a-pidana

you father near-LOC 2sg-go 3sg+bring 3sgnf-say-REM.P.REP

“Then go and get [it]’, he said to his wife, ‘go to your father and get [it], he said.’

(25) haw du-a-pidana

dusa

du-a

yes 3sgf-say-REM.P.REP 3sgf+go.up 3sgf-go

‘Yes, she said, and went up.’

(26) yenu-ni-se-pidana

diha enu

sky-AFF-LOC-REM.P.REP he thunder

‘The Thunder is in the sky.’

(27) waha we

diha-tha wa

wa-sape-thada

he-FR 1pl+say 1pl-speak-INDEED

(28) waha we

wa-yeka-naka

diha-naku

1pl-know-PRES.VIS he-TOP.NON.A/S

‘We are saying this, we know this.’

(29) dusa

du-a

du-siri-ne

3sgf+go.up 3sgf-go 3sgf-husband’s.brother70-INS

du-a-pidana 3sgf-go-REM.P.REP

(30) du-siri-tiki 3sgf-husband’s.brother-DIM

alia-pidana EXIST-REM.P.REP

‘She went with a husband’s brother, there was a small husband’s brother.’

(31) di-na-pidana 3sgnf-OBJ-REM.P.REP

dhuta 3sgf+bring

dusa

du-a

3sgf+go.up 3sgf-go

(32) dusa

du-a

du-ka-pidana

ha-niri

dalipa-se

3sgf+go.up 3sgf-go 3sgf-see-REM.P.REP parent-MASC near-LOC

70 See Table 8.

LW/T 07

86

‘She brought him up there, she climbed towards her father.’

Tariana

(33) kwaka-nikha what-INTER.PAST.VIS

pi-na-ka

pi-nu phia nuitõ

2sg-want-SEQ 2sg-come you daughter:VOC

(34) di-a-pidana 3sgnf-say-REM.P.REP

pai

nuha nu-nu-ka

Dad:VOC I 1sg-come-REC.P.VIS

(35) hi$

pi-ìimari

yema di-na-ka

di-sita

DEM:AN 2sg-son.in.law tobacco 3sgnf-want-SEQ 3sgnf-smoke

(36) masi-pu-ka bad-AUG-REC.P.VIS

di-a-niki 3sgnf-go-COMPL

(37) kayu-maka

nu-nu-ka

nhuta

nuha

so-AFF

1sg-come-REC.P.VIS

1sg+bring

I

(38) du-a-pidana

pi-a-pida

di-a-ka

3sgf-say-REM.P.REP 2sg-give-IMPV 3sgnf-say-REC.P.VIS

(39) hi$

nu-sa-niri

du-a-pidana

DEM:AN 1sg-spouse-MASC 3sgf-say-REM.P.REP

“Why did you come, daughter (lit. you came wanting what)?’, he said. ‘Dad, I came, your son-in-law is in a very bad way, wanting to smoke tobacco. This is why I came here, she said, give [it to me], he said, my husband’, she said.’

(40) haw di-a-pidana

alia-mha

di-a-pidana

yes 3sgnf-say-REM.P.REP EX-PRES.NON.VIS 3sgnf-say-REM.P.REP

“Yes, there is [tobacco]’, he said.’

(41) di-mita-ni-kayama-re

di-swa-pidana

3sgnf-smoke-TOP.ADV-SMOKING.GRID-POSS 3sgnf-stay-REM.P.REP

(42) diha kuphe kayu

he fish

as

di-mita-ni-kayama-re 3sgnf-smoke-TOP.ADV-SMOKING.GRID-POSS

(43) di-swa-pidana 3sgnf-stay-REM.P.REP

‘There was a smoking grid for fish, something like a smoking grid for fish.’

(44) haw di-a yes 3sgnf-say

dhita 3sgnf+bring

di-musu

di-nu

3sgnf-go.out 3sgnf-come

(45) di-tuka 3sgnf-break

di-whe-ta-hna 3sgnf-stay+CAUS-CAUS-PAUS

(46) ãsyapi di-whe-ta-ri

kayu

pepperpot 3sgnf-stay+CAUS-CAUS-CONV as

di-ni-ka-pidana 3sgnf-do-SEQ-REM.P.REP

LW/T 07

87

Tariana

‘He said, ‘yes’, he brought [it], broke [in two halves] and put it [down] acting as if offering a pepperpot.’

(47) kay di-ni

diha-ne

so 3sgnf-do he-INS

di-ka-ka

ku:phe-pidana

3sgnf-see-SEQ fish-REM.P.REP

‘When he did it, for him (her husband’s brother) looking it was fish.’

(48) diha di-hˆa-pidana

pi-hˆa du-a-pidana

he 3sgnf-eat-REM.P.REP 2sg-eat 3sgf-A-REM.P.REP

(49) haw di-a-pidana

diha-tiki di-hˆã-nha

yes 3sgnf-say-REM.P.REP he-DIM 3sgnf-eat-PAUS

‘He ate. ‘Eat!’ she said, ‘yes’, he said and ate.’

(50) di-hˆã 3sgnf+eat

thui maìa-naka all good-PRES.VIS

di-a-pidana 3sgnf-say-REM.P.REP

‘The boy ate it all, he (thunder) said, ‘It is good’.’

(51) i-ruku

i-a-pita

2pl-go.down 2pl-go-REP

di-a-pidana 3sgnf-say-REM.P.REP

(52) pi-ruku 2sg-go.down

pi-uka 2sg-arrive

hi$ DEM:AN

(53) panisaru-miki-ri-naku

pira

pi-khata-nha

abandoned.village-NOM.PAST-MASC-TOP.NON.A/S 2sg+order 2sg-vomit-PAUS

(54) di-a-pidana

diha enu

3sgnf-say-REM.P.REP he thunder

“Go down again’, he said, ‘you will arrive at an old abandoned village, you order (him) to vomit’, said Thunder.’

(55) diha di-ruku he 3sgnf-go.down

di-nu

diha-tiki

3sgnf-come he-DIM

‘The little one came down.’

(56) ai$-ka

nuhua-niri

direta

here-REC.P.VIS I+parent-MASC 3sgnf+need+CAUS

di-a-pidana 3sgnf-say-REM.P.REP

(57) di-uka 3sgnf-arrive

di-khata 3sgnf-vomit

‘Here my father ordered you to vomit.’ [she said]

(58) di-khata diha 3sgnf-vomit

pa-da

yamina-pidana

hipole di-nu

one-CL:ROUND day-REM.P.REP green 3sgnf-comehe

LW/T 07

88

‘He vomited, one day [later] it [tobacco] came up green.’

Tariana

(59) yema di-tawina

hiku

di-nu-pidana

tobacco 3sgnf-grow appear 3sgnf-come-REM.P.REP

‘The tobacco started growing’

(60) di-khata-mi

diha yema di-keta-pidana

3sgnf-vomit-LOC.NOM he tobacco 3sgnf-meet-REM.P.REP

‘Where he vomited, he (Wanali Yapirikuri) found tobacco.’

(61) ne-pidana then-REM.P.REP

hi$

myaka-na-pe nheta diha-naku

DEM:AN ancient-AFF-PL 3pl+take he-TOP.NON.A/S

(62) hi$

yema-pu-nuku

na-sita-pidana

DEM:AN tobacco-CL:HOLLOW-TOP.NON.A/S 3pl-smoke-REM.P.REP

(63) yema sede-wani-nuku tobacco NEG.EX-CL:NAT.PHEN-TOP.NON.A/S

na-keta 3pl-meet

(64) na-sita-pidana 3pl-smoke-REM.P.REP

wa-na ketemi-naka kasina 1pl-OBJ rest-PRES.VIS now+ADV

(65) na:-pidana-ta 3pl+say-REM.P.REP

diha-pidana he-REM.P.REP

hipatu-nuku

di-de

snuff-TOP.NON.A/S 3sgnf-have

‘Then the ancient ones took the cigar-holder [and] smoked; while there was no tobacco, they found [it] and smoked. Now one thing remains, they said: he [Thunder] has snuff.’

(66) kuphe fish

hipatu-ni snuff-POSS

na:-nipe

hi$

3pl+go-ALL.TIME DEM:AN

(67) uni water

wika-nuku

alia-mha

over-TOP.NON.A/S EXIST-PRES.NON.VIS

(68) diha-tupe-pidana

nahˆa

he-DIM:PL-REM.P.REP 3pl+eat

na-yã-nhina 3pl-stay-REM.P.SEC.H

‘There was fish snuff on top of the water, and they were eating small pieces [of it].’

(69) maìi-pu-naka

i-rena

puaya-peri-na

bad-AUG-PRES.VIS 2pl-feel different-COLL-REM.P.VIS

(70) di-de 3sgnf-have

nuha haniri I father

du-a-pidana

duha-ya-pita

3sgf-say-REM.P.REP she-EMPH-REP

“You are having a bad time, my father used to have different [kind of snuff]’, she said once again.’

(71) haw pi-a phita diwesewhya-nuku phia ha-niri-tha-sika yes 2sg-go 2sg+bring then-TOP.NON.A/S you parent-MASC-FR-PRES.INFR

LW/T 07

89

Tariana

(72) di-de-pada

direta-sika

di-a-pidana

diha

3sgnf-have-CONTREXP 3sgnf+need+CAUS-PRES.INFR 3sgnf-say-REM.P.REP he

“Yes, go and bring [it], in this case your father is said to have it for nothing [and] orders it around’, he said.’

(73) haw du-a-pidana

dusa

yes 3sgf-say-REM.P.REP 3sgf+climb

du-a-pita 3sgf-go-REP

(74) te up.to

ne-se enu

dalipa-se duka-pidana

then-LOC thunder near-LOC 3sgf+arrive-REM.P.REP

‘Yes, she said, she climbed up to the thunder, [and] arrived.’

(75) diha diha hipatu he he snuff

hiku-pana appear-ALL

ma-kade-pidana NEG+give-NEG-REM.P.REP

‘He [Thunder] did not give the snuff in a way open to all.’

(76) hi-naka

di-a-ri

sede-pidana

here-PRES.VIS 3sgnf-say-CONVNEG.EX-REM.P.REP

‘There is no him saying: here it is.’

(77) diha-pidana he-REM.P.REP

ku:phe-nuku

dhita

di-nu-pidana

fish-TOP.NON.A/S 3pl+bring 3sgnf-come-REM.P.REP

(78) di-thuka 3sgnf-break

di-whe-ta-pidana-pita 3sgnf-stay+CAUS-CAUS-REM.P.REP-REP

‘Again, he brought smoked fish, broke [it in two] and put it down.’

(79) haw di-a-pidana

di-hˆa-pidana

yes 3sgnf-say-REM.P.REP 3sgnf-eat-REM.P.REP

(80) di-hˆa di-sita 3sgnf-eat 3sgnf-finish

i-ruku-ya 2pl-come down-EMPH

di-a-pidana 3sgnf-say-REM.P.REP

‘Yes, he (the boy) said, he ate it up (lit. eat-finish); ‘Go down’, said he [Thunder].’

(81) di-ruku 3sgnf-come down

di-nu

upi-mia-pidana

di-ni-pita

3sgnf-comeold-only-REM.P.REP 3sgnf-do-REP

‘He [the boy] came down, he did the same thing as before.’

(82) pani-si

i-thirikuna

house-NPOSS INDF-near

pira

pi-khata di-a-pidana

2sg+order 2sg-vomit 3sgnf-say-REM.P.REP

“Order him to vomit in the back of the house’, [Thunder] said [to his daughter].’

LW/T 07
(83) ne-ya-pidana then-EMPH-REM.P.REP

90
di-uka 3sgnf-arrive

di-khata 3sgnf-vomit

Tariana
diha-misini he-TOO

‘Then he (the boy) arrived and vomited in the very same place, too.’

(84) ne-ya-pidana

hiku

diha-hna

then-EMPH-REM.P.REP appear he-PAUS

(85) heku hipatu-ni tree snuff-POSS

hemari hipatu-ni

abiu

snuff-POSS

hiku-pidana appear-REM.P.REP

‘Then it appeared, [it was] [seed of] snuff of tree, snuff of abiu-palm.’

(86) yama-na-seri two-CL:VERT-SINGL

dhita 3sgnf+bring

(87) di-nu-pidana

ketemi-pidana

kasina

3sgnf-come-REM.P.REP rest-REM.P.REP now+ADV

‘He brought two types of snuff trees; there was something still missing.’

(88) syawa-pidana

sede-pita

di-na

fire-REM.P.REP NEG.EX-REP 3sgnf-OBJ

(89) syawa fire

sede

hi$

keri-ne-pidana

di-merita

NEG.EX DEM:AN sun-INS-REM.P.REP 3sgnf-fry

(90) ku:phe-nuku

di-hˆa di-hˆa-nhi

fish-TOP.NON.A/S 3sgnf-eat 3sgnf-eat-ANT

‘He did not have fire, there was no fire; he fried fish in the sun and used to eat [it].’

(91) duha dhumeta-ka puisanima-pidana she 3sgf+feel-SEQ bad.smell.of.fish-REM.P.REP

di-yã-nhi 3sgnf-stay-ANT

(92) phia maìi-pu-naka

pi-ni

nu-api

you bad-AUG-PRES.VIS 2sg-do 1sg-with

(93) pi-hˆa-naka

phia du-a-pidana

duha-ya-pita

2sg-eat-PRES.VIS you 3sgf-say-REM.P.REP she-EMPH-REP

‘She felt [that] there was bad smell of fish, [and] said again: ‘You doing bad to me by eating [this way].’

(94) kwe-hna

nuha nu-ni nu-de nuha pi-na

INTER-INTER.PRES.VIS I 1sg-do 1sg-have I 2sg-OBJ

(95) di-a-pidana 3sgnf-say-REM.P.REP

“What am I doing to you?’ he said.’

(96) syawa-na

di-de

di-yã-ka

du-a-pidana

duha-ne

LW/T 07

91

Tariana

fire-REM.P.VIS 3sgnf-have 3sgnf-stay-SEQ 3sgf-say-REM.P.REP she-AG

“My father had fire’, she said.’

(97) diwesewhya then

pia 2sg-go

phita 2sg+bring

di-a-pidana 3sgnf-say-REM.P.REP

“Then go and bring [it]’, he said.’

(98) du-a-pidana-pita

dusa

3sgnf-go-REM.P.REP 3sgnf+go.up

du-a 3sgnf-go

(99) ne-se-pita

dusa

then-LOC-REP 3sgnf+go.up

du-a 3sgnf-go

‘Then she went up again, up she went again.’

(100) hi$

pi-ìimari

syawa-ka

di-na

diha

DEM:AN 2sg-son.in.law fire-REC.P.VIS 3sgnf-want he

(101) du-a-pidana

nu-api maìi-pu-ka

3sgf-say-REM.P.REP 1sg-with bad-AUG-REC.P.VIS

di-ni 3sgnf-do

(102) di-hˆa 3sgnf-eat

diha du-a-pidana he 3sgf-say-REM.P.REP

“This son-in-law of yours, it is fire that he wants’, she said, ‘he is doing bad to me by eating [the way he does]’, she said.’

(103) haw nu-itõ

nuha ma:ìi

yes 1sg-daughter:VOC I bad

nu-ni nu-api 1sg-do 1sg-with

(104) nu-hˆa-nite-kade-ka 1sg-eat-TOP.ADV+CL:AN-NEG-REC.P.VIS71

phia di-a-pidana you 3sgnf-say-REM.P.REP

“Yes, my daughter, you have never been the one badly fed with me’, he said.’

(103) ma:ìa good

nu-ni nu-api nu-hˆa-nite-ka 1sg-do 1sg-with 1sg-eat-TOP.ADV+CL:AN-REC.P.VIS

(104) phia di-a-pidana

nu-a-de

pi-na

di-a-pidana

you 3sgnd-say-REM.P.REP 1sg-give-FUT 2sg-OBJ 3sgnf-say-REM.P.REP

“You have been well-fed with me’, he said, ‘I’ll give [it] to you’, he said.’

(105) hiku-pana appear-ALL

ma-kade-pidana NEG+give-NEG-REM.P.REP

71 maìi nu-ni nu-api nu-hˆa-nite is a nominalisation of a serial verb construction marked with the animate classifier -ite (see Aikhenvald forthcoming-d).

LW/T 07

92

‘He did not give [it] in an apparent way.’

Tariana

(106) diwesewhya pi-ruku

pi-a di-a-pidana

pi-ruku

pi-a

then

2sg-go.down 2sg-go 3sgnf-say-REM.P.REP 2sg-go.down 2sg-go

(107) marisi-nuku

pira

pi-ˆa pi-sue-ta

grass-TOP.NON.A/S 2sg+order 2sg-clear 2sg-stay+CAUS-CAUS

(108) marisi pi-ˆa pi-sue-ta

pi-wapa-hna di-a-pidana

grass 2sg-clear 2sg-stay+CAUS-CAUS 2sg-wait-IMPV 3sgnf-say-REM.P.REP

“Then go down, he said, go down [and] order to clear the grass, arrange the clearing of the grass and wait’, he said.’

(109) hekwa-ka

pi-wapa-mhade

midday-SEQ 2sg-wait-PROB.FUT

phia

di-a-pidana

you

3sgnf-say-REM.P.REP

(110) ne-mhade then-PROB.FUT

pi-kisi-pe

na:

2sg-relation-PL 3pl+go

(111) hi$

syawa-nuku

na:-mhade

na-whanipa

DEM:AN fire-TOP.NON.A/S 3pl+go-PROB.FUT 3pl-deposit

‘Wait until it is midday, then your relatives will go and deposit this fire.’

(112) di-a-pidana

diha di-anihta-tha-pidana

nu-a-ka

3sgnf-say-REM.P.REP he 3sgnf-be.aware-FR-REM.P.REP 1sg-say-SEQ

(113) di-wapa-nikhe 3sgnf-wait-WHILE:SS

amaku-se

di-ˆu

hammock-LOC 3sgnf+be.up

di-kwa 3sgnf-hang

(114) di-a-pidana

dihmeta

di-kwa-pidana

3sgnf-go-REM.P.REP 3sgnf+think 3sgnf-hang-REM.P.REP

‘He said [thus], and he was ‘aware’ (i.e. worried) while he was lying in his hammock, he was up there hanging and thinking (having presentiments).’

(115) ya:piku ka:muy

di-eme-ta-pidana

some.time summer.heat 3sgnf+stand+CAUS-CAUS-REM.P.REP

‘He [Thunder] made summer heat for some time.’

(116) peme-kapi-da-pe

ka:muy

one+SIDE-hand-CL:ROUND-PL summer.heat

‘He created summer heat for five days.’

(117) di-eme-ta-pidana

peme-kapi-da-pe-pidana

3sgnf+stand+CAUS-CAUS-REM.P.REP one+SIDE-hand-CL:ROUND-PLREM.P.REP

LW/T 07

93

Tariana

(118) ka:muy

alia

maìa-makara dihmita-kasu-pidana

summer.heat EXIST well-dry

3sgnf+burn-INT-REM.P.REP

‘There were five days of summer heat, to burn [the gardens] really dry.’

(119) ya:piku-pidana some.time-REM.P.REP

pi:ma-nha

pima

sound-PAUS sound

na-ruku

na-nu

3pl-come.down 3pl-come

‘For some time there was a sound, they (i.e. relatives) were coming.’

(120) hu:li

te:pana

swallow72 swallow73

alia-pidana EX-REM.P.REP

(121) du-weni-ne

madalipa-pidana

3sgf-younger.brother-INS three+CL:AN-REM.P.REP

alia EXIST

(122) èuite-tiki

hu:li

alia-pidana

small+CL:AN-DIM andorinha EX-REM.P.REP

‘There were two types of swallows, there were three of them, counting a younger brother, there was a small swallow.’

(123) na-ruku

na-nu-pidana

manihta-kade-pidana

diha

3pl-come.down 3pl-come-REM.P.REP NEG+realise-NEG-REM.P.REP he

‘They were coming down, he [the boy] did not realise [this].’

(124) di-matara 3sgnf-leave

di-sue-ta

di-eku di-a-pidana

3sgnf-stay+CAUS-CAUS 3sgnf-run 3sgnf-go-REM.P.REP

(125) kale-pena-ne

hi$

kale

wind-FUT.NOM-AG DEM:AN wind

kale di-eku di-a wind 3sgnf-run 3sgnf-go

(126) lama flame

di-eku di-swa-hna

di-eku

3sgnf-run 3sgnf-stay-PAUS3sgnf-run

(127) di-a-pidana

diha lama-ka-se-pidana

3sgnf-go-REM.P.REP he flame-SEQ-CONTR-REM.P.REP

(128) di-uka 3sgnf-arrive

di-anihta-hna 3sgnf-realise-PAUS

‘He [boy] left the fire and ran away. The future wind, the wind appeared all of a sudden (run-go), the flame was everywhere, when there was flame, he [the boy] realised [what was happening].’

(129) pa-ka-karu mahyuna-ma-pidana

diha-pada

72 'swifts/cypseloides’ 73 'andorinha'; Martins/Progne

LW/T 07

94

IMP-see-PURP difficult-EXC-REM.P.REP

he-CL:PIECE

Tariana

(130) sie-pada

thuya-pidana

firewood-CL:PIECE all.NON.INDIV-REM.P.REP

lama di-eku di-a flame 3sgnf-run 3sgnf-go

(131) haiku-pada-pe

lama-pidana

thuy dhipa di-a-pidana

tree-CL:PIECE-PL flame-REM.P.REP all 3sgnf+take 3sgnf-go-REM.P.REP

‘It was extremely difficult to see (the original piece of firewood), the flame was moving quickly, the pieces of wood were (running) in flames, [the fire] took all.’

(132) di-uma-tha-pidana

diha ne-ma-keta-de-pidana

3sgnf-look.for-FR-REM.P.REP he NEG-NEG-meet-NEG-REM.P.REP

‘He went to look [for the original piece of wood], he did not find it.’

(133) hiwe lizard

ka:siwa

isa-tupe-pidana

nhepa

small.crocodile smoke-DIM:PL-REM.P.REP 3pl+take

(134) ne-mhani-pidana

syawa di-a-ka-pidana

3pl-walk-REM.P.REP fire

3sgnf-go-SEQ-REM.P.REP

‘A lizard and a small crocodile took little bits of smoke, they were walking while the fire was raging.’

(135) hanupe-tha-pidana

di-sue-ta

syawa khepa-pena

many-FR-REM.P.REP 3sgnf-stay+CAUS-CAUS fire REL+take-NOM.FUT

(136) naha ma-keta-kade-pidana they NEG-meet-NEG-REM.P.REP

‘He left a lot (of pieces of wood) for the fire to catch on [and so] they did not find [the original piece].’

(137) i:sa-tupe

haiku-pada-pe-tupe

smoke-DIM:PL wood-CL:PIECE-PL-DIM:PL

na-hwã 3pl-bite

(138) na-mare-ta-tha-pidana 3pl-go.down+CAUS-CAUS-TENT-REM.P.REP

‘They bit and swallowed bits of smoke [and] little pieces of wood (in vain).’

(139) na:-nite

na-hˆa ka:siryana

di-swa-pidana

3pl+make-TOP.ADV+CL:AN 3pl-eat crocodile+PEJ 3sgnf-lie-REM.P.REP

‘The bad crocodile, who was raised (lit. made eat) by them, was there lying down.’

(140) diha di-swa-pidana he 3sgnf-stay-REM.P.REP

diha kadaru he hat

(141) dhita

di-swa-pidana

di-eku

di-musu

LW/T 07 3sgnf+take

95 3sgnf-stay-REM.P.REP

3sgnf-run

Tariana 3sgnf-go.out

(142) di-a

diha-pada

di-uka

3sgnf-go he-CL:PIECE 3sgnf-arrive

di-hwã-pidana 3sgnf-bite-REM.P.REP

‘He was lying down, he took the hat [made of clay], put it [on his head], ran out, took the very piece of wood [from which the original fire had come].’

(143) i:sa-tupe

haiku-pada-pe-tupe

smoke-DIM:PL wood-CL:PIECE-PL-DIM:PL

na-hwã 3pl-bite

(144) na-mareta-tha-pidana 3pl-go.down+CAUS-CAUS-TENT-REM.P.REP

‘They (the lizard and the small crocodile) bit and swallowed bits of smoke [and] little pieces of wood (in vain).’

(145) di-hwã-ta-tha 3sgnf-bite-REP-TENT

di-eku 3sgnf-run

di-a

mayakani-pidana

3sgnf-go right-REM.P.REP

(146) di-ruku-kha 3sgnf-descend

di-a

te uni-se

3sgnf-go until water-LOC

(147) di-hwa 3sgnf-fall

thepi

di-a-pidana

TO.WATER 3sgnf-go-REM.P.REP

(148) di-hwa-thepi 3sgnf-fall-TO.WATER

na-ma-tha-pidana 3pl-search-TENT-REM.P.REP

‘He bit [the piece], ran straight up to the water and fell into the water, they tried to look for him in vain.’

(149) di-pumi-se

na-kuka-nikhe

3sgnf-after-LOC 3pl-lit-IN.SPITE

di-a-ka-kha 3sgnf-go-SEQ-AWAY

(150) di-a-pidana

di-a-nipe-pidana

3sgnf-go-REM.P.REP 3sgnf-go-ALL.TIME-REM.P.REP

‘After that in spite of them lighting [the fire], it went away by going, it was always going away.’

(151) kwa-hna who-INTER.PRES.VIS

na-de na-tha-pidana 3pl-have 3pl+say-TENT-REM.P.REP

‘Who has it, they asked (in vain).’

(152) isa-tupe-mia-pidana

na-hˆe-ta

smoke-DIM:PL-ONLY-REM.P.REP 3pl-show+CAUS-CAUS

‘They could only show the little bits of smoke.’

(153) kwa-na-pu-tha-sika

nheta-hna

INTER-AN-AUG-FR-PRES.INFR 3pl+take-PAUS

LW/T 07

96

Tariana

(154) na:-pidana 3pl+go-REM.P.REP

nama 3pl+look.for

‘Whoever took it, they went to look for it.’

(155) hi$ku waha

wa-hwa-ri

kayu na-hwa-pidana

so we

1pl-sit-CONV as 3pl-sit-REM.P.REP

(156) di-yeka-nipe-mia-pidana 3sgnf-know-NOM-ONLY-REM.P.REP

‘They were sitting like we are sitting here, only they were all familiar to him (to Wanali Yapirikuri).’

(157) diha-naka

sede

na-pidana

he-PRES.VIS NEG.EX 3pl+say-REM.P.REP

‘It (the fire) is not here’, they said.’

(158) hi$

kasiri-nuku

diha-sika

di-nitu

DEM:AN croc-TOP.NON.A/S he-PRES.INFR 3sgnf-steal

(159) na-pidana 3pl+say-REM.P.REP

na-yeka 3pl-know

‘They knew who stole it, the crocodile: ‘it is him’ [they said].’

(160) pa-da one-CL:ROUND

dekina-pidana

uni-se-pidana

afternoon-REM.P.REP water-LOC-REM.P.REP

(161) keraphe-da

hiku-nha

flame-CL:ROUND appear-PAUS

‘In the afternoon there appeared a flame on the water.’

(162) diha-pada

di-nitu

he-CL:PIECE 3sgnf-steal

di-nitu 3sgnf-steal

di-dawa 3sgnf-escape

(163) di-a-pidana

diha-pada-nuku

3sgnf-go-REM.P.REP he-CL:PIECE-TOP.NON.A/S

(164) ne-pidana then-REM.P.REP

na-yeka-hna 3pl-know-PAUS

‘He stole, stole and hid the piece, and this is how they knew.’

(165) kwe-mhade

wa-ni

INTER-PROB.FUT 1pl-do

wheta 1pl+take

hi$ DEM:AN

(166) masite-nuku

diha hi$-nuku

na-pidana

bad+CL:AN-TOP.NON.A/S he DEM:AN-TOP.NON.A/S 3pl+say-REM.P.REP

LW/T 07

97

Tariana

(167) na-sape-hna 3pl-speak-PAUS

na-siwa-kaka 3pl-self-REC

‘How are we going to get this (from him), they said; they spoke among themselves.’

(168) kwe pheta-karu INT IMP+take-PURP

mahyu$na-ma-pidana difficult-EXC-REM.P.REP

‘It was very difficult to get.’

(169) haw diha di-yeka yes he 3sgnf-know

kuite

di-yeka-pidana

INT+CL:AN 3sgnf-know-REM.P.REP

(170) diha-nha na:pi

ka-yã-ne

wanaliana

he-PAUS 3pl+with REL-live-AG Wanali+PEJ

‘Yes, he knew, what’s his name, he knew, the old Wanali (the American snake bird) who stayed with them.’

(171) dapi-nuku

dhita

vine-TOP.NON.A/S 3sgnf+take

di-maìike-ta-pidana 3sgnf-bad+TH+CAUS-CAUS-REM.P.REP

(172) dapi-puku-pe

dhita

vine-CL:BUNCH-PL 3sgnf+take

di-maìiketa-pidana 3sgnf-bad+TH+CAUS-CAUS-REM.P.REP

(173) awakada paiìi-pina jungle frog-CL:SWAMP

na-karu-nuku 3pl+go-PURP-TOP.NON.A/S

(174) la:pe-se-pidana swampy.area-LOC-REM.P.REP

di-sue-ta 3sgnf-stay+CAUS-CAUS

‘He took bunches of vine and transformed the jungle into a swamp full of frogs, he put them onto a swampy area.’

(175) ne-se-pidana

na:

nãsa-hna

paiìi nãsa-pidana

then-LOC-REM.P.REP3pl+go 3pl+sing-PAUS frog 3pl+sing-REM.P.REP

‘Then the frogs started singing.’

(176) diha-mhade di-a

di-hˆa di-a-ka-pidana

he-PROB.FUT 3sgnf-go 3sgnf-eat 3sgnf-go-SEQ-REM.P.REP

(177) di-sue-ta

di-matara

3sgnf-stay+CAUS-CAUS 3sgnf-leave

(178) diha-pidana he-REM.P.REP

di-a

dhita

3sgnf-go 3sgnf+take

diha he

‘He [the crocodile] was going to eat them, after [Wanali] left [them], and so he went.’

LW/T 07

98

(179) kasiri

ma:ìsite

di-dukunia-pidana

crocodile bad+CL:AN 3sgnf-lit-REM.P.REP

Tariana

‘The bad crocodile lit up [with fire].’

(180) di-ˆu 3sgnf-go.up

di-a

keraphe-da

di-ˆu

3sgnf-go flame-CL:ROUND 3sgnf+go.up

di-a 3sgnf-go

‘The flame was going up.’

(181) diwesewhya then

hiku wa-ni thus 1pl-do

wa-panisa diha-yana-nuku 1pl-snatch he-PEJ-TOP.NON.A/S

(182)wasã whepa di-a-pidana

di-ˆu

let’s 1pl-take 3sgnf-say-REM.P.REP 3sgnf+go.up

di-a-hna 3sgnf-go-PAUS

‘Then this is what we are going to do, we will snatch [it] away from the bad one, he (Wanali) said and went up.’

(183) di-ruku

di-nu-ka-pidana

3sgnf-descer 3sgnf-come-SEQ-REM.P.REP

(184) di-na 3sgnf-OBJ

nhepa-pidana

nhepa di-na

3pl+take-REM.P.REP 3pl+take 3sgnf-OBJ

(185) na:ma-pidana

hi$

3pl+look for-REM.P.REP DEM:AN

di-daki-nuku 3sgnf-body-TOP.NON.A/S

‘While the crocodile was coming downstream, they took him, they took him and searched his body.’

(186) ne-sede-pidana

ma-keta-kade-pidana

then-NEG.EX-REM.P.REP NEG-meet-NEG-REM.P.REP

‘It was not there, they did not find [it].’

(187) di-hwi-da-iki-se-pidana 3sgnf-head-CL:ROUND-brain-LOC-REM.P.REP

di-de 3sgnf-have

(188) hi$

wanihta-ni-da-se

DEM:AN 1pl+think, reason-TOP.ADV-CL:ROUND-LOC

‘He had [the fire] in his brain, the place in which we think of this.’

(189) diki-se 3sgnf+brain-LOC

di-hwi-da-iki-se-pidana

di-de

3sgnf-head-CL:ROUND-brain-LOC-REM.P.REP 3sgnf-have

(190) syawa-pada-nuku

ne-se-pidana

keraphe-daka

fire-CL:PIECE-TOP.NON.A/S then-LOC-REM.P.REPflame-YET

(191) di-musu-i-ta

diha nama-tha-pidana

LW/T 07 3sgnf-go.out-CAUS-CAUS

99

Tariana

he 3pl+look for-TENT-REM.P.REP

(192) na:-nite

na-hˆa

3pl+do-TOP.ADV+CL:AN 3pl+eat

‘He still had the piece of fire in his brain, in his head, he was letting it out; they looked in vain, the one who was raised by them (lit. was made eat by them).’

(193) tuiri oropendola

alia-pidana EXIST-REM.P.REP

(194) diha-pidana he-REM.P.REP

di-yeka 3sgnf-know

‘There was an oropendola (japú) bird, he knew [where the fire was].’

(195) hi$-se-naka

di-yã

DEM:AN-LOC-PRES.VIS 3sgnf-stay

‘Here it is, he said.’

di-a

diha

3sgnf-say he

(196) di-tuda 3sgnf-split

dihwi-da-naku 3sgnf+head-C:ROUND-TOP.NON.A/S

di-tuda-bosa 3sgnf-split-SPLIT

(197) di-pe-pidana

di-ku

3sgnf-leave-REM.P.REP 3sgnf-open

di-ni

di-pe-niki

3sgnf-do 3sgnf-leave-COMPL

‘He split his head, split it open, made it open, opened it completely.’

(198) ne-se-pidana

diha-pada

nheta-pidana

then-LOC-REM.P.REPhe-CL:PIECE 3pl+take-REM.P.REP

(199) diha-pada

nheta syawa

he-CL:PIECE 3pl+take fire

na-de-nhina 3pl-have-REM.P.SEC.H

‘Then they took the piece [of wood with fire] out, they took the piece out and they had fire.’

(200) syawa fire

sede-ka-na NEG.EX-SEQ-REM.P.VIS

sede-nisawa NEG.EX-AFTER:DS

(201) hiku-nhina so-REM.P.SEC.H

syawa fire

na-ni 3pl-do

na-de-nhina 3pl-have-REM.P.SEC.H

‘They had seen that there was no fire, since there was none, this is what they — reportedly — did to have fire.’

(202) hi$

na:

na-kalite pedalia-pe

DEM:AN 3pl+say 3pl-tell old-PL

(203) hiku-nhina appear-REM.P.SEC.H

na:

wa-na

3pl+say 1pl-OBJ

LW/T 07

100

(204) wa-thani-na-se-nuku

na:

naka

1pl-start-AFF-LOC-TOP.NON.A/S 3pl+say

na-kalite-na 3pl-tell-REM.P.VIS

Tariana kaida-
ready-PRES.VIS

‘This is what old people tell, this is how it appeared to us in the beginning, they tell us. This is all.’

Story 4. The Secret Flute. Author: Cândido Brito

(1) pi-na

nu-kalite-de na-pia-nipe-naku

hi$

2sg-OBJ 1sg-tell-FUT 3pl-hide-NOM-TOP.NON.A/S DEM:AN

(2) ina woman:PL

ma-ka-kade-mha

hi$

NEG-see-NEG-PRES.NON.VIS DEM:AN

(3) piri-naku

kayu-maka

Yurupary.flute-TOP.NON.A/S thus-AFF

pi-na

nu-kalite-naka

2sg-OBJ 1sg-tell-PRES.VIS

‘I will tell you about their secret thing, [which] women cannot see, about Yurupary flute. This is how I am telling you [this story].’

(4) hiku-sina

wa-thanina-se

nu-a-ka

pi-na

appear-REM.P.NON.VIS 1pl-beginning-LOC 1sg-say-SEQ 2sg-OBJ

(5) hi$-naku

nu-kalite-naka

DEM:AN-TOP.NON.A/S 1sg-tell-PRES.VIS

‘How it was [appeared] from the very beginning [of our tradition], I am saying, I am telling you this.’

(6) ne inaru then woman

pa:-ma

ma-ka-kade-sina

one-CL:FEM NEG-see-NEG-REM.P.NON.VIS

(7) ne-pedalia-ma-misini NEG-old-CL:FEM-also

ne-ma-ka-kade-sina NEG-NEG-see-NEG-REM.P.NON.VIS

(8) ne-yanape NEG-child

ne-ma-ka-kade-sina NEG-NEG-see-NEG-REM.P.NON.VIS

‘No woman could see [it], neither an old woman nor a girl could see [it].’

(9) na-ka-sina

nha ãìa

pedalie-pe-mia

3pl-see-REM.P.NON.VIS they man:PL old-PL-only

(10) kayu ka-ni-kani-mia-sina so REL-do-PAST.REL:PL-ONLY-REM.P.NON.VIS

(11) na-ka naha kay na-ni-ka-mha 3pl-see they so 3pl-do-SEQ-PRES.NON.VIS

hi$-naku DEM:AN-TOP.NON.A/S

(12) i:na-nuku

mara-kade

woman:PL-TOP.NON.A/S NEG+order-NEG

na-ka-mha 3pl-see-PRES.NON.VIS

LW/T 07

101

Tariana

‘The ancient men saw [the ones who had done it], this is what they did. They saw: the women had seen this, [they, i.e. men] ordered them not to’

(13) hiku-pidana

pi-na

kalisi nu-kalite-de

thus-REM.P.REP2sg-OBJ story 1sg-tell-FUT

‘This is how it was. I will tell you a story.’

(14) diha heku-iha-tiki-nuku

dihya

he afternoon-APPR-DIM-TOP.NON.A/S he

yaphini thing

(15) piri-naku

nhe

na-walita-ka-pidana

Yurupary.flute-TOP.NON.A/S 3pl+enter 3pl-offer-SEQ-REM.P.REP

(16) duh a du-dawa-ka du-wa

du-a

she

3sgf-hide-SEQ 3sgf-enter.into.bush 3sgf-go

‘This afternoon they [men] entered the village performing the Offering ritual with Yurupary flute. She hid in the bush.’

(17) nuri

di-ˆu-nha

du-a-pidana

du-kapuku du-ka

1sg+son 3sgnf-go.up-PAUS 3sgf-say-REM.P.REP 3sgf-turn 3sgf-see

“My son is coming up’, she said, and turned around to see.’

(18) ma-ka-kade-tha

du-siwa-se

nha-ne du-ka-ka-niki

NEG-see-NEG-FR 3sgf-self-CONTR they-AG 3sgf-see-REC.P.VIS-COMPL

(19) wa-na na:-pidana 1pl-OBJ 3pl+say-REM.P.REP

na-sape 3pl-say

(20) piri

khe-ne

kayu

na-sina

Yurupary.flute REL+enter-AG thus

3pl+go-REM.P.NON.VIS

‘She did not see [anything] herself, they [the men] said: ‘She has seen everything about

us’, the ones who entered (the village) with Yurupary flute said so.’

(21) kay na-ni nheta thui nha na-pudali-nuku

na-sue-ta

thus 3pl-do 3pl+take all they 3pl-offering-TOP.NON.A/S 3pl-stay+CAUS-

CAUS

(22) na-sita du-sa-niri-naku 3pl-finish 3sgf-spouse-MASC-TOP.NON.A/S

na-sape-pidana

nha

3pl-say-REM.P.REP they

(23) pi-sa-do 2sg-spouse-FEM

du-ka-ka-niki 3sgf-see-SEQ-COMPL

(24) pi-a 2sg-go

pi-wane

ikasu-piaka

du-na weinu-kasu-niki

2sg-call+CAUS now-this.moment 3sgf-OBJ 1pl+kill-PURP-COMPL

(25) na-pidana 3pl+say-REM.P.REP

LW/T 07

102

Tariana

‘Thus they took all their offering and put it (down), [and] told her husband: Since your wife saw everything, go and call her immediately, for us to kill her, they said.’

(26) dhima-pidana

harame di-a

3sgnf+hear-REM.P.REP be.scared 3sgnf-go

(27) du-sa-niri

dhima

3sgf-spouse-MASC 3sgnf+hear

harame hanipa-pidana be.scared big+CL:CL.SP-REM.P.REP

(28) kawarikupeda nu-sa-do-nuku

be.sorry

1sg-spouse-FEM-TOP.NON.A/S

(29) mhe$da nu-ka-ri

nu-pe diha ma:ìi

PROH 1sg-see-REL 1sg-leave he bad

i-ni

nu-siu

2pl-do 1sg-for

(30) mhe$da inu

nu-ka-ri

nu-pe

PROH 2pl+kill 1sg-see-REL 1sg-leave

(31) di-a-pidana

di-sape du-sa-niri-nha

3sgnf-say-REM.P.REP 3sgnf-tell 3sgf-spouse-MASC-PAUS

‘Her husband heard [this] and was scared, he said, ‘I am very sorry for my wife, don’t do this evil [thing] to me in front of me (lit. me seeing), do not kill [her] in front of me’, said her husband.’

(32) hanipa-pidana

di-a-pidana

di-kare-se

big+CL:CL.SP-REM.P.REP 3sgnf-say-REM.P.REP 3sgnf-heart-LOC

(33) hanipa-pidana

kawarikupeda nu-sa-do-nuku

big+CL:CL.SP-REM.P.REP be.sad

1sg-spouse-FEM-TOP.NON.A/S

(34) kwe-mhade

na-ni

INTER-PROB.FUT 3pl-do

hi$

nu-kesi-pe

kay na

DEM:AN 1sg-relative-PL thus 3pl+go

(35) na-sape-ka

di-a-pidana

3pl-tell-SEQ 3sgnf-say-REM.P.REP

‘He suffered a lot in his heart. He said ‘I am very sorry for my wife, what are my relatives going to do, talking like this’.’

(36) nu-sa-do-nuku

kawhikiri-pu inu-naka

ihya

1sg-spouse-FEM-TOP.NON.A/S quick-AUG2pl+kill-PRES.VIS you.pl

(37) ihwya-si

alia-mha

di-ne

ihya iwhya-si-ne

2pl+breath-NPOSS EX-PRES.NON.VIS 3sgnf-INS 2pl 2pl+breath-NPOSS-INS

(38) inu

maìi-pu-mha

2pl+kill bad-AUG-PRES.NON.VIS

inuna-mha be.unwilling-PRES.NON.VIS

LW/T 07
(39) pa-ka IMP-see

103

di-a-pidana

dhepa

3sgnf-say-REM.P.REP 3sgnf-answer

di-a-nha 3sgnf-go-PAUS

Tariana

“You are killing my wife very quickly [in front of me], [but] there is your [magic] breath; kill [her] with your [magic] breath. It is very bad, I am unwilling to see’, he answered [them].’

(40) du-na kay-na-ni

na-sita na-matare-pidana

3sgf-OBJ thus-3pl-do 3pl-finish 3pl-leave+CAUS-REM.P.REP

‘They finished doing this [sorcery with the magic breath] to her and left [her].’

(41) nha na:-kwa-ri-naku they 3pl-stay-REL-TOP.NON.A/S

hipa rapid

alia-naka EXIST-PRES.VIS

(42) miaka-pani

na-ri

ancient-CL:RAPID 3pl+say-REL

‘Where they live there is a rapid called ‘the rapid of the ancients’ (i.e. the Apui rapid).’

(43) ne-pidana then-REM.P.REP

ukara

na-wasa-pidana

piramirim.fish 3pl-jump-REM.P.REP

(44) yuru-pi-kada-na

diha

yuru.fish-CL:CYCLE.OF.TIME-CL:DAY-REM.P.VIS he

‘Then piramirim-fish appeared, it is what used to happen during days of the month of yuru-fish.’ 74

(45) ne ukara

dhuta du-ˆu

then piramirim.fish 3sgf+get 3sgf-go.up

du-nu 3sgf-come

(46) maka-syepu-pe

du-ni

large-firewood+CL:LOG.LIKE-PL 3sgf-make

du-mita-pidana 3sgf-fry-REM.P.REP

(47) du-mita diha 3sgf-fry he

ãsi pepper

syawa fire

wika-pidana

du-sue-ta

on.top-REM.P.REP 3sgf-stay+CAUS-CAUS

(48) ukara-syepu-pe-naku

du-sita-pidana

piramirim.fish-firewood+CL:LOG.LIKE-PL-TOP.NON.A/S 3sgf-finish-REM.P.REP

(49) hinipuku du-a-khani

du-itu-kanape-ne

garden 3sgf-go-AWAY 3sgf-daughter-PL-INS

(50) hinipuku-se garden-LOC

du-a

du-dia du-nu-pidana

3sgf-go 3sgf-return 3sgf-come-REM.P.REP

du-a-nha 3sgf-go-PAUS

74 Month 13 in Table 6.

LW/T 07

104

Tariana

‘Then she went upstream to get tpiramirim fish and came back. She arranged large bundles of firewood (and) fried [the fish], she fried (and) she put pepper on top of the fire, she finished (preparing) bundles of firewood with piramirim fish. (Then) she went away to the garden with her daughters, and came back from the garden.’

(51) ma na

wa-hˆa-karu

let’s 3pl+say 1pl-eat-PURP.RES

‘Let’s eat, they [daughters] said’

(52) ukara

pi-wasa

du-a-pidana

piramirim.fish 2sg-let.jump 3sgf-say-REM.P.REP

‘Let a piramirim fish jump out, she [mother] said.’

(53) na:-pidana 3pl+go-REM.P.REP

du-itu-kanape-ne 3sgf-daughter-PL-AG

‘Her daughters went on.’

(54) nu-itu-kanape 1sg-daughter-PL

hi$-nuku DEM:AN-TOP.NON.A/S

(55) ukara-syepu-naku piramirim.fish-firewood+CL:LOG.LIKE-TOP.NON.A/S

(56) pa-syepu-naka

di-swa

one-firewood+ CL:LOG.LIKE-PRES.VIS 3sgnf-stay

(57) mhe$da i-hˆa ihya nu-phu-mi-se PROH 2pl-eat 2pl 1sg-follow-NOM-LOC

(58) tarada-karu-pena-naka

ihya du-a-pidana

alive-PURP.RES-NOM.FUT-PRES.VIS 2pl 3sgf-say-REM.P.REP

‘She said: ‘My daughters, there is one bundle of firewood with piramirim fish among [other] bundles, do not eat [of it] after me, for you to be alive in future’.’

(59) du-na hiku-pidana-sita

du-kare-se

3sgf-OBJ appear-REM.P.REP-PERF 3sgf-heart-LOC

(60) nu-na dihya ki-ya-mhade 1sg-OBJ he thus-EMPH-PROB.FUT

na-ni 3pl-do

du-a-pidana 3sgf-say-REM.P.REP

(61) duhmeta

du-sita

3sgf+feel,think 3sgf-finish

‘It appeared to her like this in her heart, (and) she said (in her mind), ‘This is what they will do to me’ (i.e. they will poison me).’

(62) kwe-bohtI how-COND

waha-pu-bohta we-AUG-COND

tarada alive

wa-wa 1pl-try

LW/T 07

105

Tariana

(63) na:

wa-hˆa-da

wha-misini

na-pidana

nha

3pl+say 1pl-eat-APPR we-too

3pl+say-REM.P.REP

they

(64) du-itu-kanape-nha 3sgf-daughter-PL-PAUS

‘How could we try and stay alive, lest we eat, they said, her daughters.’

(65) ne-nuku

duha ne-ma-na-kade-pidana

nhaha-do

then-TOP.NON.A/S she NEG-NEG-want-NEG-REM.P.REP 3pl+parent-FEM

‘Then their mother did not want [this to happen].’

(66) mhe$da i-hˆa hi$

maleta-peni

ku:phe

PROH 2pl-eat DEM:AN fat+CL:ANIM-PL:ANIM75 fish

(67) alia-naka EXIST-PRES.VIS

nha-ne i-thuka they-AG 2pl-break

i-hˆa hya 2pl-eat 2pl

(68) du-a-pidana

dhuepa

3sgf-say-REM.P.REP 3sgf+answer

‘Don’t eat, these fat fish, they are here, break [them] and eat, she answered.’

(69) wha wha-misini we we-TOO

wa-yami-de 1pl-die-FUT

pi:ne-ya 2sg+INS-EMPH

(70) hanipa-bohta

kasitana

big+CL:CLOSED.SPACE-COND be.fed.up

(71) wa-pinita-ka na:-pidana 1pl-follow-SEQ 3pl+say-REM.P.REP

nhepa-pidana answer-REM.P.REP

(72) na-yã-pidena 3pl-stay-REM.P.REP

na-na hiku-pana-pidena-sita-nha 3pl-OBJ appear-ALL-REM.P.REP-PERF-PAUS

(73) du-yami-karu-pena

hiku-pana-pidana-sita

na-ni

3sgf-die-PURP.RES-NOM.FUT appear-ALL-REM.P.REP-PERF 3pl-do

‘We, we too will die with you, it would be really annoying if we carry on [without you]’, they kept answering. It had already dawned on them that she would be dead, it had dawned on them.’

(74) hi$

i-pu-mina

piri

dhua76 du-ka-ka

75 A few adjectives — such as èui ‘small’ and male ‘big, fat’ — can only take a plural marker after an appropriate classifier; *male-peni would be impossible. This explains the ‘double’ animacy marking here. 76 Personal pronouns have the following variants: nuha, nuhua, hnua ‘I’, piha, pihya ‘you sg.’, diha, dihya ‘he’, duha, duhua, dhua ‘she’, waha, wha ‘we’, ihya, iha ‘you pl.’, and naha, nha ‘they’.

LW/T 07

106

Tariana

DEM:AN INDF-follow-NOM+ADV Yurupary.flute she 3sgf-see-SEQ

(75) i-pu-mina

nu-sa-do-nuku

na-inu-na-nha

INDF-follow-NOM+ADV 1sg-spouse-FEM-TOP.NON.A/S 3pl-kill-REM.P.VIS-

PAUS

(76) di-a-na 3sgnf-say-REM.P.VIS

di-kalite du-sa-niri-miki-ri 3sgnf-tell 3sgf-spouse-MASC-NOM.PAST-MASC

‘Because of this, because of her having seen the Yurupary flute, they killed my wife, her late husband told [this to Cândido].’77

(77) heku-hya

tuki

some.time.ago-APPR DIM

na

hi$

kayi

3pl+go DEM:AN thus

(78) ha-kamu-pe-naku

nha na-de-naka

nha

DEM:INAN-year-PL-TOP.NON.A/S they 3pl-have-PRES.VIS they

(79) mayanakuni diha yaphini piri-naku

na-de-naka

Baniwa he thing Yurupary.flute-TOP.NON.A/S 3pl-have-PRES.VIS

‘Some time ago they went like this. These years they, the Baniwa, [still] have this thing, the Yurupary flute.’

(80) hi$

wyume-naka

DEM:AN be.last-PRES.VIS

‘This is it.’

Story 5. A Menstruating Girl. Author: Juvino Brito

(1) nu-hˆawe-ri

di-kalite nu-na

1sg-parent.in.law-MASC 3sgnf-tell 1sg-OBJ

‘My father-in-law told me [this].’

(2) ne Sao Pedru-nuku nu-hˆawe-ri

di-kwa-ri

then São Pedro-TOP.NON.A/S 1sg-parent.in.law-MASC 3sgnf-stay-REL

(3) yeda-naku downstream-TOP.NON.A/S

pa-ita-pidana

inaru

one-CL:AN-REM.P.REP woman

(4) hi$tu-ka

duhua

have.first.menstruation-TH she

ha-niri parent-MASC

(5) ˆamepa-pidana

ãìa

kenipe

two+NUM.CL:HUM-REM.P.REP man:PL REL+child

duha inaru she woman

77 Cândido was present at the moment at which the story was told to him long time ago — this accounts for the use of remote past tense visual evidential.

LW/T 07

(6) hi$tu-kite

wyumite-pidana

have.first.menstruation-TH+CL:AN

107 be.last+CL:AN-REM.P.REP

Tariana

‘A woman had her first periods downstream from São Pedro where my father-in-law lives. Her father had two sons (lit. men), the girl who was having her first period was the last one.’

(7) madali-kada yamina ha-niri

dinipe

three-CL:DAY day

parent-MASC 3sgnf+child

na-ha-do 3pl-parent-FEM

(8) inipuku-se-pidana

na

kaini

nheta

garden-LOC-REM.P.REP 3pl+go manioc 3pl+get

‘On the third day [of her ritual seclusion] father, sons [and] their mother went to the garden to get manioc.’

(9) naha na-kayami-nuku they 3pl+go-AFTER:DS-TOP.NON.A/S

duha inaru pa:-ma-pidana she woman one-CL:FEM

(10) du-dia

pani-si-se-nuku

3sgf-return,remain house-NPOSS-TOP.NON.A/S

‘After they went, the girl remained alone in the house.’

(11) ne-pa:-ita NEG-one-CL:AN

diha-yakale-nuku he-CL:VILLAGE-TOP.NON.A/S

nawiki person

(12) sede-pidana

nehpani-nipe-se

na-pidana

NEG.EX-REM.P.REP 3pl+work-NOM-LOC 3pl+go-REM.P.REP

(13) thui-niki all-COMPL

na

nehpani paìi ku:phe na

nhalitu

3pl+go 3pl+work one fish

3pl+go 3pl+fish

(14) na-ni-pidana 3pl-do-REM.P.REP

diha-kada-nuku he-CL:DAY-TOP.NON.A/S

‘There was not a single person in the village, all went to their work, they went to work, some went to stay fishing that day.’

(15) duha inaru she woman
PRES.NON.VIS

dhumeta-pidana 3sgf+think,feel-TOP.NON.A/S

kwe-wani yaphini-mha

how-EMPH

thing-

(16) hi$

nhua-niri

nu-na di:ta

di-eme-ta

DEM:AN I+parent-MASC 1sg-OBJ 3sgnf+lock.up 3sgnf-put-CAUS-CAUS

(17) hiperi-ne

du-a-pidana

du-a-yhume

parí.stick-INS 3sgf-say-REM.P.REP3sgf-say-AFTER:SS

(18) duku

du-musu du-a-pidana

pani-si-nuku

3sgf+open 3sgf-go.out 3sgf-go-REM.P.REP house-NPOSS-TOP.NON.A/S

LW/T 07

108

Tariana

‘The girl thought: ‘What indeed is it, [why] my father locked me up with parí sticks [into an eclosure]’, she said. After saying [this], she opened [the house] and went out.’

(19) ne ka-wha-karu

yakoleka du-ka du-ema du-ka

then REL-fall-PAST.REL.FEM door

3sgf-see 3sgf-stand 3sgf-see

(20) du-ruku-i-ta-pidana

u$i$-se

3sgf-go.down-CAUS-CAUS-REM.P.REP port-LOC

(21) du-ka du-ruku-ita

du-siwa du-sape-pidana

3sgf-see 3sgf-go.down-CAUS-CAUS 3sgf-self 3sgf-talk-REM.P.REP

(22) nu-na-thama

nu-pita nuha

du-a-pidana

1sg-want-FR+PRES.NON.VIS 1sg-bathe I

3sgf-say-REM.P.REP

‘Having got out [of the enclosure] she stood looking at the door, she looked down (lit. look-make go down) at the port, she looked down [and] said to herself: ‘I would like to bathe.’

(23) du-kapuku dhue

du-a yaru-maka-si

dhuta

du-musu

3sgf-turn 3sgf+enter 3sgf-go thing-CL:CLOTH-NPOSS 3sgf+take.off 3sgf-go.out

(24) du-nudu-ruku

du-a-pidana

ui$-se

du-a

du-pita

3sgf-come 3sgf-go.down 3sgf-go-REM.P.REP port-LOC 3sgf-go 3sgf-bathe

‘She turned around and went back (into the house), took off her clothes, came out and went to bathe at the port.’

(25) pa:-piu

du-hwa-thepi-kayami

pa-whya

one-CL:TIME 3sgf-fall-IN.WATER-AFTER:DS one-CL:CANOE

(26) ita-whya

episi-da-ne

di-mara di-nu-pidana

canoe-CL:CANOE metal-CL:ROUND-INS 3sgnf-float 3sgnf-come-REM.P.REP

‘After she bathed once, a canoe with a motor came up.’

(25) duhua she

du-ka du-se-ta-ka

yarana

3sgf-see 3sgf-go.up+CAUS-CAUS-SEQ white.man

(26) madalipa-pidana three+NUM.CL:HUM-REM.P.REP

na-yã diha-whya-se 3pl-stay he-CL:CANOE-LOC

(27) ita-whya-se-nuku canoe-CL:CANOE-LOC-TOP.NON.A/S

‘When she looked up (lit. she looked she made go up), there were three white men (i.e. Non-Indians) in this canoe.’

(28) pa-ita one-CL:AN

di-daki 3sgnf-body

maìa-halite-pidana

pa-ita

good-white+CL:AN-REM.P.REP one-CL:AN

(29) kadite-pidana

di-swa-ni-da

LW/T 07 black+CL:AN-REM.P.REP

109

Tariana

3sgnf-stay,wear-TOP.ADV-CL:ROUND

(30) kada-da-pidana black-CL:ROUND-REM.P.REP

di-swa 3sgnf-wear

di-a 3sgnf-go

(31) pa-ita one-CL:AN

kwame-iha how-APPR

kadite-pidana black+CL:AN-REM.P.REP

‘One had a really white body, another one was black, he was wearing a black hat, another one was blackish.’

(32) diha kwame-iha he how-APPR

kadite-pidana black+CL:AN-REM.P.REP

diha-da he-CL:ROUND

(33) episi-da-nuku metal-CL:ROUND-TOP.NON.A/S

di-ka-kumeta 3sgnf-REL-steer

kadite-wani black+CL:AN-EMPH

(34) di-daki 3sgnf-body

halite white+CL:AN

‘The blackish one was steering the canoe, he was really black, his body was white.’

(35) ne-pidana

na-nu nhepa du-na duhua inaru-nuku

then-REM.P.REP 3pl-come 3pl+grab 3sgf-OBJ she woman-TOP.NON.A/S

(36) nhepa-ka

du-ka dhuema-thani-tha-pidana

3pl+grab-SEQ 3sgf-see 3sgf+shout-AWAY-FR-REM.P.REP

(37) nu-na mhai$da hita-ya

nhua-niri

1sg-OBJ PROH 2pl+take-EMPH I+father-MASC

(38) keru-mha-ka

diha du-a-tha-pidana

be.angry-PRES.NON.VIS-SEQ he 3sgf-say-FR-REM.P.REP

‘Then they came and grabbed her, the girl. When she saw that they grabbed her, she shouted: ‘Don’t take me, because my father is angry’, she said in vain.’

(39) kay du-a

kaya du-numa-nuku

nhepa-sa

thus 3sgf-say thus 3sgf-mouth-TOP.NON.A/S 3pl+grab-TIGHT

(40) na-yota na-pala-pidana

na-ya-whya

3pl-hang 3pl-put-REM.P.REP 3pl-POSS-CL:CANOE

LOC

ita-whya-se canoe-CL:CANOE-

‘She said this, and they grabbed her mouth shut, hung her [over their shoulders] and put her into their canoe.’

(41) diha episi-da

ka-kumeta

he metal-CL:ROUND REL-steer

diha-da-nuku he-CL:ROUND-TOP.NON.A/S

(42) di-api-kusu

nesa-khana-pidana

LW/T 07

110

3sgnf-draw-PUSHING 3pl+go.up-AWAY-REM.P.REP

Tariana

‘The one who was steering the motoe, pushed the motor and they went upstream.’

(43) ne-dikwe-se-tiki

mawali-dapana nha

then-3sgnf+upstream-LOC-DIM snake-CL:HAB they

(44) na-na-ni-dapana

hipa-da-pe-pasi-naka

3pl-do-TOP.ADV-REM.P.REP earth-CL:ROUND-CL:ROUND-AUG-PRES.VIS

(45) di-hwa nawiki ma:-kade-wani-naka 3sgnf-lie people NEG+go-NEG-CL:NAT.PHEN-PRES.VIS

(46) karuna-ma-naka

ne mawali-dapana-naka

be.afraid+ADV-EXC-PRES.VIS then snake-CL:HAB-PRES.VIS

‘Then a little bit upstream there is a Snake-house, a house made by them, there are many stones, and people do not go there. It is dangerous — it is a Snake-house.’

(47) nesa

neku

na

du-na inaru-nuku

3pl+go.up 3pl+run 3pl+go 3sgf-OBJ woman-TOP.NON.A/S

(48) du-thi-da-nuku

nhepa-sa

3sgf-eye-CL:ROUND-TOP.NON.A/S 3pl+grab-TIGHT

na-pe-pidana 3pl-leave-REM.P.REP

(49) pa-ehkwapi-se-pidana

duhua du-ka du-dia-niki

one-CL:WORLD,DAY-LOC-REM.P.REP she 3sgf-see 3sgf-remain-COMPL

‘They went up [there], they let the girl’s eye go (i.e. let her open her eyes), she saw herself in another world.’78

(50) deikina

hekwa di-kapuku

afternoon+ADV midday 3sgnf-turn

di-ema 3sgnf-stand

(51) ha-niri

inipuku ka:-kali

parent-MASC garden REL+go-PAST.REL.MASC

di-dia-ka 3sgnf-return-SEQ

(52) di-nu-pidana

di-ka

pamuˆa-sawa-se

3sgnf-come-REM.P.REP 3sgnf-see middle-CL:GROUP-LOC

(53) hipa-da-sawa-se

yaru-maka-si-pe

earth-CL:ROUND-CL:GROUP-LOC thing-CL:CLOTH-NPOSS-PL

(54) dhupa-ka-pidana 3sgf-wash-SEQ-REM.P.REP

‘In the afternoon, at midday, her father turned around, having come back from the garden, he saw her wash clothes on a heap of stones.’

78 Cf. discussion in §5.3.1, p. 33.

LW/T 07

111

Tariana

(55) kwa-na-sõ

ha-ne

hipa-dawa-se

INTER-AN-INTER.INFR DEM:INAN-DISTAL earth-CL:ROOM-LOC

(56) karuna-wani-se

yaru-maka-si

khepa

be.afraid+ADV-CL:NAT.PHEN-LOC thing-CL:CLOTH-NPOSS REL+wash

(57) di-a-hyume-pidana 3sgnf-say-AFTER:SS

di-dena

di-a

di-ka

3sgnf-paddle 3sgnf-go 3sgnf-see

(58) ditu-pu-pidana

di-yeka-pidana-niki

3sgnf+daughter-AUG-REM.P.REP 3sgnf-know-REM.P.REP-COMPL

‘After having said: ‘Who is is washing clothes there in the dangerous corner of the earth?’, he paddled and saw: it was really his daughter, he recognised [her].’

(59) diha ha-niri

du-dalipa di-a-tha-pidana

he parent-MASC 3sgf-near 3sgnf-go-FR-REM.P.REP

(60) ditu-nuku

di-a-ka

di-pala

3sgnf+daughter-TOP.NON.A/S 3sgnf-say-SEQ 3sgnf-put

‘The father tried (in vain) to come near her, having addressed his daughter (lit. he saidhe put).’

(61) ha-niri-nuku parent-MASC-TOP.NON.A/S

du-ka-pidana

du-hwa-thepi

3sgf-see-REM.P.REP 3sgf-fall-IN.WATER

(62) du-a

du-aphua hu

du-ruku

du-a-pidana

3sgf-go 3sgf-dive AWAY 3sgf-go.down 3sgf-go-REM.P.REP

(63) kuphe-nisa-do-se-sina

du-a

fish-PL+INDF-spouse-FEM-CONTR-REM.P.NON.VIS79 3sgf-go

‘She saw the father, and fell into water and dived away going down, she had become a Fish-woman.’

(64) kai di-ni

diha ha-niri

di-mara di-nu-pidana

te

thus 3sgnf-do he parent-MASC 3sgnf-float 3sgnf-come-REM.P.REP until

(65) pani-si-se

sede-pidana

house-NPOSS-LOC NEG.EX-REM.P.REP

ditu 3sgnf+daughter

(66) sede-pidana

mawali-nuku

ka-sa-niri

NEG.EX-REM.P.REP snake-TOP.NON.A/S REL-spouse-MASC

(67) ditu-pidana 3sgnf+daughter-REM.P.REP

79 Underlying form is kuphe-ne-i-sa-do-se-sina (fish-PL+INDF-spouse-FEM-CONTRREM.P.NON.VIS).

LW/T 07

112

Tariana

‘Then the father came floating home, his daughter did not exist, she did not exist [any more], his daughter had married a snake.’

(68) te kasina-misini-nuku

mapisi-ka

diha

until now+ADV-TOO-TOP.NON.A/S be.ominous-SEQ he

(69) hipa-da-sawa-se-nuku earth-CL:ROUND-CL:GROUP-LOC-TOP.NON.A/S

yaru-maka-si thing-CL:CLOTH-NPOSS

(70) dhupa-pidana 3sgf+wash-REM.P.REP

diha kay-di-a-mi he thus-3sgnf-say-NOM

Until now when it is ominous, she washes clothes on this heap of stones. This is how they tell (it).’

(71) ai$-mha here-PRES.NON.VIS

kali-si di-sisa tell-NOM 3sgnf-end

‘Here the story ends.’

Story 6. How Children Turned Into Guans. Author: Olívia Brito

Ya:ìiri na-masika-mi

guan

3pl-bad-TH-NOM

Their turning into guans.

(1) ai$-tuki nu-kalite

kali-si

here-DIM 1sg-tell+DER tell-NOM

(2) ya:ìiri naha na-masi-ka-mi-pidena

guan

they 3pl-bad-TH-REM.P.REP

‘I will tell a little story.’

(3) duha pa-ita-pidena

uphe-do

she one-CL:AN-REM.P.REP long.ago+parent-FEM80

(4) uphe-do-pidena

duha

long.ago+parent-FEM-REM.P.REP she

‘There was a widow.’

(5) madalipa-pidena

kenipe ãìa

ˆhamepa

three+NUM.CL:AN-REM.P.REP REL+child man:PL two+NUM.CL:AN

(6) inaru pa-ma-pidena woman one-CL:FEM-REM.P.REP

‘She had three children, two boys and one girl.’

80 Underlying form: upi-ha-do ‘long.ago-parent-feminine’.

LW/T 07

113

Tariana

(7) ke:nipe REL+child

duha ne-pidana she then-REM.P.REP

ne:ri-ne deer-INS

(8) ne:ri-ne-pidana

du-henita

uphe-do-miki-ru

deer-INS-REM.P.REP 3sgf-remarry long.ago-parent+FEM-NOM.PAST-FEM

‘She had children with a deer, this old widow had remarried a deer.’

(9) diha ne:ri ˆaki-pidana

ˆaki-pidana

diha ne:ri

he deer ghost-REM.P.REP ghost-REM.P.REP he deer

‘This deer was an evil spirit.’81

(10) diha depi-mia-pidana

di:ma

he night-ONLY-REM.P.REP 3sgnf+sleep

di-yã-nhi

duhua-ne

3sgnf-stay-ANT she-INS

‘He slept with her only at night.’

(11) depi-iha-tiki night-APPR-DIM

di-a-khani 3sgnf-go-AWAY

di-yã-nhi

awakada-se

3sgnf-stay-ANT jungle-LOC

‘When it was still dark he used to go to the jungle’

(12) ma:mi dinu-ka tinamou 3sgnf+kill-SEQ

di-emhani 3sgnf-walk

ne-se di-emhani then-LOC 3sgnf-walk

‘He was walking around killing tinamou birds.’

(13) dekina

kada-wa di-hwa di-swa-pidana

afternoon+AFF black-AFF 3sgnf-fall sgnf-stay

(14) di-dia 3sgnf-return

di-uka 3sgnf-arrive

di-yã-nhi 3sgnf-stay-ANT

(15) hanupe-pidana many-REM.P.REP

ma:mi dinu

di-yã-nhi

tinamou 3sgnf+kill 3sgnf-stay-ANT

‘In the afternoon when it was getting dark he came back after having killed many tinamou birds.’

(16) naha-yana-pe-tupe-nuku

di-dia-karu

i-peya-pidana

they-PEJ-PL-DIM:PL-TOP.NON.A/S 3sgnf-return-PURP INDF-before-REM.P.REP

(17) duha i-ma-kada she 2pl-sleep-DIST.IMPV

ihya amaku-pe-se

du-a-pidana

you hammock-Pl-LOC 3sgf-say-REM.P.REP

(18) du-yã-nhi

du-yenipe-nuku

3sgf-stay-ANT 3sgf-child-TOP

81 See Table 10.

LW/T 07

114

Tariana

‘Before he came home she said to her poor little ones: ‘You sleep over there in your hammocks’, she said to her children.’

(19) kayu na-ni so 3pl-do

naha-tupe

neyu

they-DIM:PL 3pl+go.up

(20) na-kwa naha 3pl-hang they

amaku-pe hammock-PL

(21) tewida-ku-pe-pidana

na-yã-nhi

muriti-CL:HAMMOCK-PL-REM.P.REP 3pl-stay-ANT

‘So (lit. after they did so) they climbed into their hammocks made of murit palm leaves.’

(22) ne-se-pidana

na-dawa na-ka na-yã-nhi

then-LOC-REM.P.REP3pl-hide 3pl-see 3pl-stay-ANT

‘Then they were looking from their hiding.’

(23) dihya he

ne:ri iˆe di-dia-ka deer devil 3sgnf-return-SEQ

di-uka 3sgnf-arrive

na-ka 3pl-see

(24) duha du-sa-niri

di-dia-ka

she 3sgf-spouse-MASC 3sgnf-return-SEQ

di-uka-pidana 3sgnf-arrive-REM.P.REP

‘They saw that the deer-devil came back, that her husband came back.’

(25) naha hˆa-ka-si

du-ni

naha mami-pa-nuku

they eat-TH-NOM 3sgf-do they tinamou-AUG-TOP.NON.A/S

(26) hˆa-ka-si

du-ni-pidana

du-hˆa thui du-yã-nhi

eat-TH-NOM 3sgf-do-REM.P.REP

3sgf-eat all 3sgf-stay-ANT

‘She made their food, big tinamous, she made the food to eat, and ate everything.’

(27) diha ne:ri he deer

di-a-pidana

di-yã-nhi

3sgnf-say-REM.P.REP 3sgnf-stay-ANT

(28) pi-enipe-nuku 2sg-children-TOP.NON.A/S

pi-a-nihka 2sg-give-INTER.PAST.VIS

pi-hˆa 2sg-eat

(29) phia di-a-pidana

di-yã-nhi

you 3sgnf-say-REM.P.REP 3sgnf-stay-ANT

‘The deer kept asking: ‘Did you give food to your children’, he was asking.’

(30) nu-a-ka

nu-hˆa-sita pi-ka-thara

1sg-give-REC.P.VIS 1sg-eat-PERF 2sg-see-PREC

(31) ˆapi-pe-pana-ka

di-swa naha amaku yapi-se

bone-PL-ALL-SEQ 3sgnf-stay they hammock under-LOC

LW/T 07

115

Tariana

(32) na-hˆa-nipe du-a-pidana

du-yã-nhi

3pl-eat-NOM 3sgf-say-REM.P.REP 3sgf-stay-ANT

‘I gave them to eat, please look (that) all the bones are under their hammocks, this is what they ate, she said.’

(33) kayu-ka-pidena so-SEQ-REM.P.REP

du-a

du-yã-nhi

3sgf-say 3sgf-stay-ANT

‘She was saying it just like that (i.e.there was no truth in her saying it).’

(34) naha-tupe

duha-misini

they-DIM:PL she-TOO

hinipuku du-a

kaini

garden 3sgf-go manioc

(35) du-nitu 3sgf-tear

du-dia 3sgnf-return

du-ka 3sgnf-arrive

(36) kaini

du-ni-sita-pidana

manioc 3sgf-do-PERF-REM.P.REP

‘The little ones and her went to the garden, she tore out the manioc, and returned home after she treated the manioc.’

(37) kainiki di-ape-mia-pidana

du-nua

manioc 3sgnf-juice-ONLY-REM.P.REP 3sgf-draw

(38) du-pala du-yã-nhi

dira-karu-pena-nuku

3sgf-put 3sgf-stay-ANT 3sgnf+drink-PURP-BEN-TOP.NON.A/S

‘She drew the juice of manioc, put it for him to drink.’

(39) du-nua du-pala du-yana du-hwe-ta

du-yã-nhi-pidana

3sgf-draw 3sgf-put 3sgf-cook 3sgf-stay+CAUS-CAUS 3sgf-stay-ANT-REM.P.REP

‘She cooked it, and left it to stay.’

(40) diha di-asari he 3sgnf-itself

hiwiri-peri-mia-pidana cool-COLL-ONLY-REM.P.REP

ne:ri deer

(41) dira 3sgnf+drink

di-yã-nhi 3sgnf-stay-ANT

di-dia-ka 3sgnf-return-SEQ

di-uka 3sgnf-arrive

(42) de:pi-se night-LOC

di-dia-ka 3sgnf-return-SEQ

di-uka 3sgnf-arrive

‘It would get cool by itself only, the deer would drink it when he returned at night.’

(43) pa:-da

duha

one-CL:ROUND she

di:ne 3sgnf+INS

yuwapiku alia-pidana some.time EX-REM.P.REP

LW/T 07

116

Tariana

‘One day she stayed with him for some time.’

(44) ne:ri-tiki-nuku

diha ne:ri iˆe

deer-DIM-TOP.NON.A/S he deer devil

(45) ˆaki

iri-nuku

kenipe

evil.spirit son-TOP.NON.A/S REL+child

du-yã-nhi 3sgf-stay-ANT

‘She had a little deer, the son of this deer-evil spirit.’

(46) naha ha-do they parent-FEM

du-a-kayami 3sgf-go-AFTER:DS

(47) naha-yana-pe diha-tiki-nuku they-PEJ-PL he-DIM-TOP.NON.A/S

yenu-ni-se-pidana up-SUFF-LOC-REM.P.REP

(48) du-tutu du-kwe 3sgf-tie 3sgf-hang+CAUS

du-ya-nhi

duri-tiki

3sgf-stay-ANT 3sgf+son-DIM

(49) ne:ri-nuku

naha ha-do

deer-TOP.NON.A/S they parent-FEM

du-a-kayami 3sgf-go-AFTER:DS

(50) naha-yanape-ˆana-pe-hna na-wasa

they-PEJ-PL-PAUS

3pl-jump

(51) na-ruku-i-pidana

nheta na-manika na-yã-nhi

3pl-go down-CAUS-REM.P.REP 3pl-take 3pl-play 3pl-stay-ANT

(52) diha ne:ri-tiki-nuku he deer-DIM-TOP.NON.A/S

‘After their mother went away, they the bad ones — and she tied him up, her little son the deer — after their mother went away, the bad ones untied him and took him down
playing with the little deer.’

(53) diha yakoleka kaliri-peda

he door

sweet.potato-CL:HEAP

di-swa-pidana 3sgnf-stay-REM.P.REP

‘Near the door there was a heap of sweet potato.’

(54) diha di-phe-nuku

diha neri-tiki di-hˆa

he 3sgnf-leaf-TOP.NON.A/S he deer-DIM 3sgnf-eat

di-yã-nhi 3sgnf-stay-ANT

‘The little deer was eating the leaves.’

(55) ne-se

na-matara neme-ta-pidana

then-LOC 3pl-leave 3pl-stand+CAUS-CAUS-REM.P.REP

diha-tiki he-DIM

(56) na-wapa na-yã-nhi

diha kaliri

3pl-wait 3pl-stay-ANT he sweet.potato

i-phe

di-hˆa-ka

INDF-leaf 3sgnf-eat-SEQ

LW/T 07

117

Tariana

‘Then they left him stand, they were watching him eat the leaves of sweet potato.’

(57) kayu na-ni so 3pl-do

pa-da one-CL:ROUND

dihya he

ne:ri-tiki deer-DIM

(58) di-dawa-niki

di-eku-hu

3sgnf-hide-COMPL 3sgnf-run-AWAY

(59) di-wa 3sgnf-enter

di-a-pidana

awakada-se

3sgnf-go-REM.P.REP jungle-LOC

‘After they did so, one day the little deer rushed off quickly into the jungle.’

(60) kayu na-ni-ri-pidena

du-dia

so 3pl-do-CONV-REM.P.REP 3sgf-return

duka 3sgf+arrive

(61) nha ha-do they parent-FEM

du-a-pidana

na-na

3sgf-say-REM.P.REP 3pl-OBJ

(62) kweka-nihka why-INTER.PAST.VIS

nuri-nuku 1sg+son-TOP.NON.A/S

i-matara ihya 2pl-leave you

(63) ma:ìi-peni bad-PL AN

yanape du-a-pidena

du-kwisa

children 3sgf-say-REM.P.REP 3sgf-scold

‘After they did this, their mother came. She said to them: ‘Why did you leave my son, you bad children?’, she scolded them.’

(64) na-na du-kwisa-ka 3pl-OBJ 3sgf-scold-SEQ

nhema na-ruku-kha 3pl+hear 3pl-go.down-AWAY

(65) na:

na-yã-nhi

na:

na-pita ui$-se

na-pita

3pl+go 3pl-stay-ANT 3pl+go 3pl-bathe port-LOC 3pl-bathe

‘Hearing her scold, they went away, they went down to the port to bathe at the port.’

(66) i-yu$-ka

i-nu

kwaka

2pl-go.up-SEQ 2pl-come how

i-ni-mhade

ihya

2pl-do-PROB.FUT you

(67) i-phya-mhade 2pl-breathe-PROB.FUT

ihya du-a-pidana

du-yã-nhi

you 3sgf-say-REM.P.REP 3sgf-stay-ANT

‘When you go up, give me a hint (lit. breathe) about what you are going to do, she said.’

(68) neyu-kasu

na-nu na-phya-pidana

na-yã-nhi

3pl+go.up-INT 3pl-come 3pl-breathe-REM.P.REP 3pl-stay-ANT

(69) kayu so

payape-se-nuku

pure-pure

long.ago-LOC-TOP.NON.A/S pure-pure

LW/T 07
(70) na: 3pl+say

na-yã-nhi 3pl-stay-ANT

118
na-kapi-da-pe-ne 3pl-hand-CL:ROUND-PL-INS

Tariana

‘They were going to go up, and they were breathing, like in the old days, pure-pure, with their hands.’

(71) kay-na-ni neyu-ka

na-nu

so-3pl-do 3pl+go.up-SEQ 3pl-come

(72) du-hˆa-kasu-pidena 3sgf-eat-INT-REM.P.REP

du-yã-nhi

duhua

3sgf-stay-ANT she

(73) phepa one+CL:AN

du-hˆa-kasu 3sgf-eat-INT

‘While they did so and were going up, she was going to eat, she was going to eat alone.’

(74) na:-na dura 3pl-OBJ 3sgf+order

du-pita du-yã-nhi 3sgf-bathe 3pl-stay-ANT

‘She ordered them to bathe.’

(75) kayu na-ni-ka so 3pl-do-SEQ

dhuma du-hˆa thuy du-yake-ta 3sgf+hear 3sgf-eat all 3sgf-join+CAUS-CAUS

(76) thuy-niki all-COMPL

duha

i-hˆa-ka-si-nuku

she

INDF-eat-TH-NOM-TOP.NON.A/S

‘When she heard them do it while she was eating, she put away all her food.’

(77) kayu du-ni pa-da-pidana

na-nha

so 3sgf-do one-CL:ROUND-REM.P.REP 3pl+say-PAUS

(78) hi$

maìite-nuku

DEM:AN bad+CL:AN-TOP.NON.A/S

wa-inu-niki 1pl-kill-COMPL

(79) na:-pidana 3pl+say-REM.P.REP

nawada

na-nha

yanape-nha

3pl+remember, think 3pl+say-PAUS children-PAUS

‘She doing so, one day they said, ‘Let’s kill this bad one (deer)’, they thought, the children.’

(80) kay na-ni-pidana

ku:na

so 3pl-do-REM.P.REP fish.poison

na:

nheta

3pl+go 3pl+draw

(81) ku:na fish.poison

na:

nheta-pidana

3pl+go 3pl+draw-REM.P.REP

‘So they did, they went and got fish-poison.’

(82) na-ˆa-weri

na-pisu

dihya ku:na

LW/T 07 3pl-hit-SMASH

119 3pl-squeeze he

fish.poison

Tariana

(83) yape-mia-pidena

diha kainiki-se-nuku

juice-ONLY-REM.P.REP he manioc-LOC-TOP.NON.A/S

(84) na-ˆamura 3pl-mix

na-whe-ta-pidana 3pl-stay+CAUS-CAUS-REM.P.REP

‘They smashed and squeezed the fish-poison, and mixed its juice into the manioc drink.’

(85) kay di-ni

diha neri

so 3sgnf-do he deer

di-dia 3sgnf-return

di-uka 3sgnf-arrive

(86) di:ra-kasu 3sgnf+drink-INT

‘So he did, the deer, he returned to have a drink.’

(87) dhimeta-pidana

kesani-ma-mha

diha

3sgnf+think-REM.P.REP smell-EXC-PRES.NON.VIS

he

(88) phimaka-kade-sika

diha di-a-pidana

ready-NEG-PRES.INFR he 3sgnf-say-REM.P.REP

‘He felt a strong smell. ‘It is apparently not ready,’ he said.’

(89) kay di-a-ka

nu-ni-karu-wani

so 3sgnf-say-SEQ 1sg-do-PURP-REALLY

(90) kayu-ka nu-ni nhua so-SEQ 1sg-do I

(91) du-a-pidana

dhuepa

di-sa-do-ne

3sgf-say-REM.P.REP 3sgf+answer 3sgnf-spouse-FEM-AG

‘After he said so, ‘I made [the drink] as I really always do’, answered his wife.’

(92) kay di-a-sita-pidena so 3sgnf-say-PERF-REM.P.REP

di:ra 3sgnf+drink

diha ne:ri he deer

(93) di-yami-pidana

di-a-hna

3sgnf-die-REM.P.REP 3sgnf-go-PAUS

ˆaki-hna evil.spirit-PAUS

‘After he said so, the deer drank and died, the evil spirit.’

(94) di-yami-ka

duhua

3sgnf-die-SEQ she

du-kwisa 3sgf-scold

du-enipe-nuku 3sgf-child-TOP.NON.A/S

(95) ihya ma:ìi-peni-sika

hi$

kayu

you bad-PL:AN-PRES.INFR DEM:AN so

i-ni 2pl-do

LW/T 07

120

(96) du-a-pidena

du-kwisa

3sgf-say-REM.P.REP 3sgf-scold

Tariana

‘After he died, she scolded her children, ‘You bad ones, you did like this’, she scolded them.’

(97) kayu na-ni so 3pl-do

nha kawarikupeda nemhani-pidena-hna

they be.sad

3pl+walk-REM.P.REP-PAUS

‘After they did so, they were going around sad.’

(98) hipe-thiwa-se-pidana

na:

maka-yawa-pe

nheka

ground-CL:DITCH-LOC-REM.P.REP 3pl+go large-CL:HOLE-PL 3pl+dig

(99) na-kasu-hna

nheka nheka nemhani

3pl+go-INT-PAUS 3pl+dig 3pl+dig 3pl+walk

(100) depiha-tiki night+APR-DIM

na:

te

3pl+go until

dekina afternoon+ADV

(101) na-dia

na-yã-nhi

3pl-return

3pl-stay-ANT

‘They went to a ditch (slope), they were digging a hole for them to go, digging,

digging, they went out in the morning early and came back in the afternoon.’

(102) nha-tupe

nha na-kesi-du-tiki-se

pa-yawa

they-DIM:PL they 3pl-relative-FEM-DIM-CONTR one-CL:HOLE

(103) nha-misini

nha hindapada-yawa-pe-pidana

they-ALL TOO they each-CL:HOLE-PL-REM.P.REP

nheka-nha 3pl+dig-PAUS

‘They the little ones, with their little sister, were digging a hole each.’

(104) kay na-ni so 3pl-do

dekina afternoon+ADV

na-dia-ka

na-ka

3pl-return-SEQ 3pl-arrive

(105) nu-yenipe 1sg-children

kani-se-nihka

i-uka

ihia

where-LOC-INTER.PAST.VIS 2pl-arrive you

(106) du-a-pidana

du-yã-nhi

naha

ha-do

3sgf-say-REM.P.REP 3sgf-stay-ANT they

parent-FEM

‘After they did so, when they returned home in the aftrenoon, their mother said, ‘My children, where are you coming from?’

(107) kayu du-a-ka

waha

so 3sgf-say-SEQ we

waka-ka

ya:ka whepa

1pl+arrive-SEQ shrimp 1pl+catch

(108) wama-nikha

na-pidana

1pl+look.for-REC.P.INFR 3pl-say-REM.P.REP

na-yã-nhi 3pl-stay-ANT

LW/T 07

121

Tariana

‘After she said so, ‘We have arrived, we were playing as if82 catching shrimp, they said.’

(109) kay du-a

du-itu-nuku

so 3sgf-say 3sgf-daughter-TOP.NON.A/S

ketemi-ma-tiki-nuku rest-EXC-DIM-TOP.NON.A/S

(110) du-kapi dhuta 3sgf-hand 3sgnf+take

du-ka du-yã-nhi-pidena 3sgnf-see 3sgf-stay-ANT-REM.P.REP

‘So she said, she took her daughter, the very last little one, by her hand to see.’

(111) ne-se-pidena

hipe deru di-yã-nhi

then-LOC-REM.P.REPmud hang

3sgnf-stay-ANT

(112) duha du-kapi-pe-se she 3sgf-hand-PL-LOC

‘Then there was mud ‘hanging’ on her hands.’

(113) kwe pi-ni-nihka

phia du-a-pidana

du-sata dhuma

what 2sg-do-INTER.PAST.VIS you 3sgf-say-REM.P.REP 3sgf-greet 3sgf+hear

‘What have you been doing, she asked (lit. greet hear).’

(114) kayu-ka nu-phe-ne-ne

nha ya:ka nhepa-ka

so-SEQ 1sg-elder.brother-PL-INS they shrimp 3pl+take-SEQ

(115) nu-ita-ka

nu-manika-ka

1sg-close-SEQ 1sg-play-REC.P.VIS

(116) du-a-pidena

du-yã-nhi

duha-tiki

3sgf-say-REM.P.REP 3sgf-stay-ANT she-DIM

‘While my elder brothers were catching shrimp, I was playing at ‘closing’ (a spring’), said the little one.’

(117) kay-na-ni nha diha-yawa-pe-se so-3pl-do they he-CL:HOLE-PL-LOC

pa-da-pidana one-CL:ROUND-REM.P.REP

(118) hyukade not.appear

‘So they did, and [one day] they ‘disappeared’ in the holes.’

(119) kayu na-ni-ka so 3pl-do-SEQ

kwe-nihka how-INTER.PAST.VIS

iha you.pl

(120) du-a-pidana

du-yã-nhi

naha ha-do-ne

3sgf-say-REM.P.REP 3sgf-stay-ANT they parent-FEM-AG

82 Recent past inferred is used to express the meaning of ‘as if’.

LW/T 07

122

Tariana

‘After they did so, ‘What are you doing’, said their mother.’

(121) kayu na-ni so 3pl-do

pa-da

dekina-pidana

one-CL:ROUND afternoon+ADV-REM.P.REP

na:-nha 3pl+talk-PAUS

‘So they did, they talked (to each other) one day in the afternoon.’

(122) na-nu nara

na-swa-pidana

3pl-come 3pl+fly 3pl-stay-REM.P.REP

hawaya-na

wika-se-hna

ingá-CL:VERT top-PL-PAUS

‘They arrived flying onto an ingá-tree.’

(123) ya:ìiri guan

na-maìika-pidena-sita-hna 3pl-transform-REM.P.REP-PERF-PAUS

‘They have already turned into guans.’

(124) kayu na-ni so 3pl-do

naha ha-do they parent-FEM

du-a-pidena

i-ruku

3sgf-say-REM.P.REP 2pl-go.down

(125) i-nu

nu-inipe-ka

2pl-come 1sg-children-SEQ

ihia du-a-tha-pidena you 3sgf-say-FR-REM.P.REP

‘So they did, their mother said, ‘Come down, you are my children’, she said in vain.’

(126) mhema-kade-pidena NEG+hear-NEG-REM.P.REP

na-dia-tha-pidena 3pl-return-FR-REM.P.REP

(127) pa-da one-CL:ROUND

pa-da-pidena

na:-khani

one-CL:ROUND-REM.P.REP 3pl+go-AWAY

(128) nha they

na: 3pl+go

‘They did not listen, one day they came back in vain, another day they went away.’

(129) te hawaya-na

wika-se na-nu na-hwa na-hwa-pidena

until ingá-CL:VERT top-LOC 3pl-come 3pl-sit 3pl-sit-REM.P.REP

‘They came and sat on the ingá tree.’

(130) iˆõkoro tutIri

na:ka-peru

du-kwisa-ka

(Our mother scolded us)83 Mum:REF-OLD:FEM 3sgf-scold-REC.P.VIS

(131) na:-pidana 3pl+say-REM.P.REP

ãìa-tupe man:PL-DIM:PL

‘Our old mother scolded us, said the little men.’

83 Underlined text is in Piratapuya. Animals in stories usually speak a different language.

LW/T 07

123

(132) du-kwisa-nipe-nuku

na-ka-pidana

3sgf-scold-NOM-TOP.NON.A/S 3pl+say-SEQ-REM.P.REP

Tariana
kayu na so 3pl+say

‘They repeated how she had scolded them, so they spoke.’

(133) kayu so

du-ni duha inaru du-ya-khe 3sgf-do she woman 3sgf-cry-IN.SPITE:SS

(134) du-a-ka-pidana 3sgf-say-SEQ-REM.P.REP

iˆõkoro etereka e (she scolded me: Guanano)

(135) nu-na du-kwisa-ka 1sg-OBJ 3sgf-scold-REC.P.VIS

du-a-pidana 3sgf-say-REM.P.REP

(136) duha inaru du-ya-ka-pidana she woman 3sgf-cry-SEQ-REM.P.REP

kayu

duhmeriku

so

3sgf+mutter

‘In spite of her crying, the daughter was saying, ‘She scolded me’; the woman was crying while she (the daughter) was muttering (it).’

(137) kay-na-ni-pidena

nara-khani-nha

so-3pl-do-REM.P.REP 3pl+fly-AWAY-PAUS

na:-khani

nha-hna

3pl+go-AWAY they-PAUS

‘So they did, they flew away.’

(138) du-dana-miki-ri-mha

ha-ne

kwaka

3sgf-shadow-NOM.PAST-MASC-PRES.NON.VIS DEM:INAN-DIST

what

(139) sikyami-se-nuku swamps-LOC-TOP.NON.A/S
PAUS

kepira niri-niri-niri di-a-tha-hna

bird

niri-niri-niri 3sgnf-say-FR-

(140) di-niakada 3sgnf-do.this.way

du-dana-miki-ri-mha 3sgf-shadow-NOM.PAST-MASC-PRES.NON.VIS

‘Her poor old shadow there, whatsname, in swamps, a bird, goes niri-niri-niri, her poor old shadow.’

(141) kida ready

di-sisa 3sgnd-end

hi$

kali-si

this:AN tell-NOM

‘This is the end of the story.’

Story 7. Evil Spirits. Author: Graciliano Brito

ˆaki-ne evil.spirit-PL Evil spirits

(1) payape:-se-pidana

pa-ita

ìiãri di-sa-do-nuku

LW/T 07

124

long time ago-LOC-REM.P.REP one-CL:AN man

TOP.NON.A/S

(2) di-a-pidana

nuhua ikasu-nuku

3sgnf-say-REM.P.REP I

now-TOP.NON.A/S

Tariana 3sgnf-spouse-FEM-

(3) payaru nu-a-kasu caxiri 1sg-go-INT

nu-ira di-a-pidana 1sg-drink 3sgnf-say

di-kalite 3sgnf-tell

‘A long time ago a man said to his wife, ‘I am now going to drink caxiri (manioc beer)’.’

(4) diha alia-ri

yekwe-se-pidana

di-a-kasu

dira

he EXIST-CONV INDF+above-LOC-REM.P.REP 3sgnf-go-INT

3sgnf+drink

(5) payaru-nuku

di-ya-yakale-se-pidana

caxiri-TOP.NON.A/S 3sgnf-POSS-CL:VILLAGE-LOC-REM.P.REP

(6) hinipu road

di-a

hinipu

3sgnf-go road

di-a 3sgnf-go

‘He was going to dring caxiri upstream from where he lived, so he went onto a road to that village.’

(7) te di-ekwe-se until 3sgnf-above-LOC

yakale di-musu-pidana village 3sgnf-go.out-REM.P.REP

(8) dihya-puna he-CL:STRETCH

‘He went up to the village on a road.’

(7) kayu-maka so-AFF

di-sa-do-nuku

di-a-pidana

3sgnf-spouse-FEM-TOP.NON.A/S 3sgnf-say-REM.P.REP

(8) nuhua I

de:pi-pamuˆa nu-dia-ka

nu-nu nu-wana-mhade

night-middle 1sg-return-SEQ 1sg-come

1sg-call-PROB.FUT

(9) nhua I

di-a-pidana 3sgnf-say-REM.P.REP

(10) kayu nu-a-ka

phima mesape pi-dukunia

so 1sg-say-SEQ 2sg+hear turí

2sg-light

pi-a 2sg-go

(11) nu-na pi-a

pi-kolota di-a-pidana

1sg-OBJ 2sg-go 2sg-meet 3sgnf-say-REM.P.REP

‘So he said to his wife, ‘When I am back in the middle of the night I shall call out’; as I am saying, as you hear [me come], light the turí, and go and meet me’, he said.’

(12) duhua she

inaru

maìa-ma-pidana

woman good-EXC-REM.P.REP

ka-kare REL-heart

LW/T 07

125

Tariana

(13) du-sa-niri-ne 3sgf-spouse-MASC-INS

‘The woman was obedient to the husband (lit. she had a good heart with respect to her husband).’

(14) kayu di-a

ka-kalite di-a-khani-pidana

halite-tiki

so 3sgnf-say REL-tell 3sgnf-go-AWAY-REM.P.REP early-DIM

(15) te ne-se di-uka

dira-pidana

until then-LOC 3sgnf-arrive 3sgnf+drink-REM.P.REP

(16) dira

dainu-pidana

3sgnf+drink sleep-REM.P.REP

payaru-nuku caxiri-TOP.NON.A/S

(17) dira

halia-pidana

diha

3sgnf+drink early-REM.P.REP he

ma-nu-kade-pidana NEG-come-NEG-REM.P.REP

‘So he went as he said early. He came (to the village) and drank caxiri, he drank and he fell asleep, drank and he did not come [home] early.’

(18) di-sa-do-nuku

di-kalite-mi

ma-ni-kade-pidana

3sgnf-spouse-FEM-TOP.NON.A/S 3sgnf-tell-NOM NEG-do-NEG-REM.P.REP

‘He did not do what he had said to his wife.’

(19) duhua she

di-sa-do

dhumeta

3sgnf-spouse 3sgf+think

du-kwa-pidana

dhumeta

3sgf-hang-REM.P.REP 3sgf+think

(20) du-kwa-ka

phema-ri

3sgf-hang-SEQ IMP+hear-CONV

pa-ˆare-ta IMP-disappear+CAUS-CAUS

(21) di-wana-nhi-pidana

di-wana

di-nu-pidana

3sgnf-call-ANT-REM.P.REP 3sgnf-call

3sgnf-come-REM.P.REP

(22) III! di-a-pidana

III! di-a-pidana

III! 3sgnf-say-REM.P.REP III! 3sgnf-say-REM.P.REP

‘The wife was hanging (in her hammock) thinking; while she was hanging and thinking, there was a voice a long way away calling and coming towards her: ‘III!’’

(23) mesape phita

pi-nuuu! di-a-pidana

kada-wa-ma-nha

turí

2sg+take 2sg-come 3sgnf-say-REM.P.REP dark-AFF-EXC-PAUS

(24) di-a-pidana 3sgnf-say-REM.P.REP

‘’Bring turí!’, he said. ‘It is too dark’, he said.’

(25) ìa! nu-sa-niri

di-dia-ka

di-nu-mha

ìa! 1sg-spouse-MASC 3sgnf-return-DECL 3sgnf-come-PRES.NON.VIS

(26) du-a-pidana

diha kayu-ka di-a

di-kalite du-a-pidana

LW/T 07 3sgf-say-REM.P.REP he

126

Tariana

so-SEQ 3sgnf-say 3sgnf-tell 3sgf-do-REM.P.REP

“ìa! My husband is coming back’, she said. She did as he told her (to).’

(27) mesape dhuta

turí

3sgf+take

du-enipe-nuku

du-kahweta

3sgf-child-TOP.NON.A/S 3sgf-be.awake+CAUS

(28) ihya you.pl

ha-niri

di-dia-mha

parent-MASC 3sgnf-return-PRES.NON.VIS

di-nu 3sgnf-come

(29) du-a-pidana

haw na:-pidana

3sgf-say-REM.P.REP yes 3pl+say-REM.P.REP

mesape nheta

turí

3pl+take

(30) na-dukunia 3pl-light

na:-pidana 3pl+go-REM.P.REP

hinipu-se road-LOC

‘She took turí and woke up the children, ‘Your father is coming back’. ‘Yes’, they said, they took the turí, they lit it up on the road.’

(31) mhai$da piaka naha

a.little now

they

diha-puna-se he-CL:STRETCH-LOC

na:ka 3pl+go-SEQ

(32) di-wana-pidana

III! di-a-pidana-pita

3sgnf-call-REM.P.REP III! 3sgnf-say-REM.P.REP

(33) upi-mia-pidana long.ago-ONLY-REM.P.REP

di-a-pita

III! di-a-pidana

3sgnf-say-REP III! 3sgnf-say-REM.P.REP

‘A little later they went to that road, it called again: ‘III!’, it said again, as before, it said again: ‘III!’, it said.’

(34) di-dalipa-iha-tiki 3sgnf-near-APPR-DIM

di-wana 3sgnf-call

di-nu-pidana 3sgnf-come-REM.P.REP

‘It came and called again nearer.’

(35) kay na-ni so 3pl-do

dinipe 3sgnf+child

pa:ìi mesape pa-ita

another turí

one-CL:AN

(36) dhepanita 3sg+change

di-dukunia-pidana

di-dalipa-tiki

3sgnf-light-REM.P.REP 3sgnf-near-DIM

(37) di-wana 3sgnf-call

di-nu-pidana 3sgnf-come-REM.P.REP

‘Children changed one turí to another, lit (it) very near to him; he was calling.’

(38) iha you:pl

ha-niri

di-nu-sita

parent-MASC 3sgnf-come-PERF

du-a-pidana 3sgf-say-REM.P.REP

“Your father is already coming’, she said.’

LW/T 07
(39) yuwapiku naha some.time they

127
na-dukunia-ri na: 3pl-light-CONV 3pl+go

hanu-ite big-CL:AN

Tariana
ìiãri kayu man so

(40) hiku-ite

di-nu-pidana

na-dalipa diha ˆaki-pidana

appear-CL:AN 3sgnf-come-REM.P.REP 3pl-near he evil.spirit-REM.P.REP

(41) nha-niri-kade-pidana 3pl+parent-MASC-NEG-REM.P.REP

ˆaki-pasi-pidana evil.spirit-AUG-REM.P.REP

‘They were lighting and lighting turí for some time; someone looking like a big man came near them, it was an evil spirit, it was not their father.’

(42) na-ha-do-nuku

di-kolota

3pl-parent-FEM-TOP.NON.A/S 3sgnf-meet

dhipa-pidana 3sgnf+take-REM.P.REP

(43) du-api di-rapa-pidana 3sgf-with 3sgnf-dance-REM.P.REP

diha-puna he-CL:STRETCH

hinipu-se road-LOC

‘He found their mother and took her, and danced with her on the road.’

(44) du-yenipe na-dukunia 3sgf-child 3pl-light

nema na-wapa-pidena 3pl+stand 3pl-wait-REM.P.REP

(45) diha ˆaki

di-rapa-ka

he evil.spirit 3sgnf-dance-SEQ

‘Her children lit (the turí) and were standing waiting, while the evil spirit was dancing.’

(46) ne-pidana

halia

di-uka

di-ema-niki

then-REM.P.REP dawn 3sgnf-arrive 3sgnf-stand-COMPL

(47) halia dawn

di-wasa 3sgnf-jump

‘Then it dawned and became light.’84

(48) diha ˆaki

naha ha-do-nuku

he evil.spirit they parent-FEM-TOP.NON.A/S

dhipa-weri 3sgnf+take-CRUSH

(49) du-hwi-da 3sgf-head-CL:ROUND

ipuriku INDF+top.of.the.head

di-susu 3sgnf-suck

hotho away

(50) di-pe-pidana

diha-yami-nuku

3sgnf-leave-REM.P.REP he-CL:PIECE.OF.CLOTH-TOP.NON.A/S

(51) da:pi-kha

wika-se di-yã

vine-CL:CURV top-LOC 3sgnf-stay

di-kwe 3sgnf-hang+CAUS

84 See Table 7, for the structure of a day in Tariana.

LW/T 07

128

Tariana

‘The ghost crushed their mother’s head, sucked the top of the head and threw (her) away. He left only her skin hanging on a vine.’

(52) di-wa-kha

di-a-pidana

3sgnf-enter-AWAY 3sgnf-go-REM.P.REP

(53) du-yenipe 3sgf-child

na:ka na-pinita-ka na-wa na-pidana 3pl+arrive 3pl-follow-SEQ 3pl-enter 3pl+go-REM.P.REP

‘He went away (into the jungle), her children went after him (into the jungle).’

(54) tuki a.little

di-wa 3sgnf-enter

di-a

heku-na

hanu-na

3sgnf-go tree-CL:VERT big-VERT

(55) hala-na-se

dhe-kha

di-a-pidana

diha

open-CL:VERT-LOC 3sgnf+enter-AWAY 3sgnf-go-REM.P.REP he

(56) ˆaki

pani-si-ka-pidana

ha-na

heku-na

evil.spirit house-NPOSS-SEQ-REM.P.REP DEM:INAN-CL:VERT tree-CL:VERT

‘He went on a little, and then entered a hollow tree, since this tree was the evil spirit’s house.’

(57) nha-niri 3pl+ parent-MASC
return

diha-kada-ya

hekwa-se-pidana

di-dia

he-CL:DAY-EMPH middle-LOC-REM.P.REP 3sgnf-

‘At midday their father came back.’

(58) dinipe 3sgnf+child

di-na 3sgnf-OBJ

na-kolota na-kalite-pidana 3pl-meet 3pl-tell-REM.P.REP

(59) phia ma:ìite you bad+CL:AN

wa-na pi-maye-nihka 1pl-OBJ 2sg-cheat+CAUS-REC.P.INFR

(60) pi$:kase

wa-ha-do-nuku

ˆaki

earlier.on.today 1pl-parent-FEM-TOP.NON.A/S evil.spirit

(61) di-hˆa-ka-niki

na:-pidana

3sgnf+eat-REC.P.VIS-COMPL 3pl+say-REM.P.REP

‘His children met him and said to him, ‘You the bad one cheated us, earlier on today a evil spirit ate up our mother.’

(62) kani-nihka

diha di-a

di-sata dhima-pidana

where-INTER.PAST.VIS he 3sgnf-go 3sgnf-ask 3sgnf+hear-REM.P.REP

“Where did he go’, he asked.’

(63) naha-tupe

dinipe

they-DIM:PL 3sgnf+child

na-kalite-pidana

wa-ka-ka

waha

3pl-tell-REM.P.REP 1pl-see- REC.P.VIS we

LW/T 07

129

Tariana

(64) dhe-ka 3sgnf+enter-SEQ

di-a

na:-pidana

3sgnf-go 3pl+go-REM.P.REP

‘The little ones said, ‘We have seen where he went in’.’

(65) kayu naha na-kalite-ka

dhima

so they 3pl-tell-SEQ 3sgnf+hear

di-a

di-ka-pidana-daka

3sgnf-go 3sgnf-see-REM.P.REP-YET

(66) diha-na

heku-na

dhe-ni-na

di-a-se

he-CL:VERT tree-CL:VERT 3sgnf+enter-TOP.ADV-CL:VERT 3sgnf-go-LOC

(67) di-uka 3sgnf-arrive

di-ka 3sgnf-see

‘He heard what they said, (and) he went to see, he arrived and saw the tree which he (the evil spirit) had entered.’

(68) di-dia 3sgnf-return
come

di-nu-pidana

di-nu-ka

a:si

di-nu

3sgnf-come-REM.P.REP 3sgnf-come-SEQ pepper 3sgnf-

(69) dhita-pidana

di-na

3sgnf+take-REM.P.REP 3sgnf-OBJ

ˆaki-nuku evil.spirit-TOP.NON.A/S

(70) dinu-kasu-pidana

diha nha-niri

dhita-pidana

3sgnf+kill-INT-REM.P.REP he 3pl+parent-MASC 3sgnf+take-REM.P.REP

(71) a:si pepper

mesape dhita-pidana

turí

3sgnf+take-REM.P.REP

‘He returned and took pepper, their father took pepper to kill the rvil spirit, he took pepper and took turí.’

(72) wasã let’s

wa-inu diha-yana-nuku

di-a-pidana

1pl-kill he-PEJ-TOP.NON.A/S 3sgnf-say-REM.P.REP

“Let’s go and kill the bad one’, he said.’

(73) na:

na-wa na:-pidana

3pl+go 3pl-enter 3pl+go-REM.P.REP

te ne-se

na:ka

until then-LOC 3pl+arrive

(74) syawa fire

na-kuka isa 3pl-set.fire smoke

na-bueta

nheta-pidana

diha

3pl-drive+CAUS 3pl+take-REM.P.REP he

(75) ãsi-ne

hanipa

syawa na-kuka-pidana

pepper-INSbig+CL:CLOSED.SPACE fire

3pl-set.fire-REM.P.REP

‘They went unto the jungle, until they arrived, they lit fire and made smoke with pepper, they made a big fire.’

(76) mhai$da piaka nha ˆaki-ne hanupe-pidana na-yã diha-na

LW/T 07
a.little CL:VERT

now they

130

Tariana

evil.spirit-PL many-REM.P.REP 3pl-stay

he-

(77) heku-na-se

diha ˆaki

pani-si-ka-pidana

tree-CL:VERT-LOC he evil.spirit house-NPOSS-SEQ-REM.P.REP

‘In a little while there were many evil spirits, since this tree was the house of evil spirits.’

(78) diha syawa he fire

su$me

la:ma-ka i:sa

dhe-ka

much burn-SEQ smoke 3sgnf+enter-SEQ

di-a 3sgnf-go

(79) diha-na

heku-na-se

naha ˆaki-ne

na-khetya-pidana

he-CL:VERT tree-CL:VERT-LOC they evil.spirit-PL 3pl-cough-REM.P.REP

(80) na-yami-kasu na-musu 3pl-die-INT 3pl-go.out

na-nu-pidana 3pl-come-REM.P.REP

‘While the fire was aflame and the smoke was entering (into the tree), the evil spirits were coughing, they were going out to die.’

(81) diha du-sa-niri-miki-ri

heku-pada

di-de

he 3sgnf-spouse-MASC-NOM.PAST-MASC tree-CL:PIECE 3sgnf-have

(82) diha-na

heku-na

i-hwi-da-na

he-CL:VERT tree-CL:VERT-LOC INDF-head-CL:ROUND-AFF

(83) maˆa-pidana

di-wapa di-ema

ka-musu

middle-REM.P.REP 3sgnf-wait 3sgnf-standREL-go.out

(84) ka-nu-nuku

di-ˆa-kasu-wisa-pidana

REL-come-TOP.NON.A/S 3sgnf-hit-INT-SMASH-REM.P.REP

‘The poor husband had a piece of wood. He was standing at the entrance of this tree waiting for them to go out for him to smash them.’

(85) èu-ita-pe-tupe-pidana

na-musu

na-keˆa

small-CL:AN-PL-DIM:PL-REM.P.REP 3pl-go.out

3pl-start

(86) nha-tupe-nuku they-DIM:PL-TOP.NON.A/S

di-ˆa-nipe-wisa-pidana 3sgnf-hit-ALL.TIME-SMASH-REM.P.REP

(87) pa! di-hwi-da

maˆa dhema-thani

pa! 3sgnf-head-CL:ROUND middle 3sgnf+cry-EVERYWHERE

(88) di-a-nipe-pidana 3sgnf-say-ALL.TIME-REM.P.REP

diha di-ˆa-nipe-wisa he 3sgnf-hit-ALL.TIME-SMASH

‘The little ones started coming out, he was hitting him in the middle of the head, pa! was their shouting when he was smashing (them).’

(89) yuwapiku nha na-sisa-ri

pedalia-pe na-musu

na-nu-pidana

LW/T 07

131

some.time they 3pl-end-CONV old-PL REM.P.REP

3pl-go.out

Tariana 3pl-come-

(90) nha-sini-nuku

di-ˆa-pidana-wisa

they-TOO-TOP.NON.A/S 3sgnf-hit-REM.P.REP-SMASH

‘Some time after they having finished, the old ones started coming out, he smashed them, too.’

(91) na-pumi-se naha pedalia-pe na-sisa-ri-se

nekana

3pl-after-LOC they old-PL 3pl-end-CONV-LOC 3pl+boss

(92) nha-ha-do-nuku

ka-hˆa-kali

3pl-parent-FEM-TOP.NON.A/S REL-eat-PAST.REL.MASC

(93) di-musu-pidana

di-nu

hanu-ite-pidana

diha ˆaki

3sgnf-go.out-REM.P.REP 3sgnf-come big-CL:AN-REM.P.REP he evil.spirit

‘After them, after the old ones finished, their boss, the one who had eaten their mother, came out, he was a big evil spirit.’

(94) heku-pada-ne

di-ekwa

maˆa

tree-CL:PIECE-INS 3sgnf-forehead middle

(95) di-kolota 3sgnf-meet

di-ˆa-pidana-wisa 3sgnf-hit-REM.P.REP-SMASH

di-pe-niki 3sgnf-let-REM.P.REP

‘He hit him with a piece of wood in the middle of the forehead, smashed him (making him fall down).’

(96) na-na dinu-pidana 3pl-OBJ 3sgnf+kill-REM.P.REP

thui-niki all-COMPL

‘He killed all of them.’

(97) kay na-ni so 3pl-do

diha-na

heku-na

nha ˆaki

he-CL:VERT tree-CL:VERT they evil.spirit

(98) na-yã-ni-na-nuku 3pl-stay-TOP.ADV-CL:VERT-TOP.NON.A/S

na-makha-pidana 3pl-split-REM.P.REP

(99) na-na na-inu thuy 3pl-OBJ 3pl-kill all

‘After they did so, they split the tree where the evil spirits lived, killed them all.’

(100) ne-se

di-waliku-se

then-LOC 3sgnf-inside-LOC

khesa-da-pidana full-CL:ROUND-REM.P.REP

(101) da:ne ikuruna pi:si ant.species queen ant.species

ikuruna kasiteru queen ant.species

ikuruna queen

LW/T 07

132

Tariana

(102) na:-de-pidena

diha-pi-se-nuku

3pl-have-REM.P.REP he-CL:PALM.TREE.TRUNK-LOC-TOP.NON.A/S

(103) naha they

ˆaki-ne

na-hˆa-nipe-pidana

evil.spirit-PL 3pl-eat-NOM-REM.P.REP

‘Inside there was plenty of edible (leaf-cutting) ants, the queen of da:ne, the queen of pi:si, the queen of kasiteru, the evil spirits had their food inside the palm tree trunk.’

(104) kayu na-ni so 3pl-do

na-dia-pidana

na-nu na-ya-panisi-se

3pl-return-REM.P.REP3pl-come 3pl-POSS-CL:HOUSE-LOC

(105) di-dia 3sgnf-return

di-uka 3sgnf-arrive

diha du-sa-niri he 3sgf-spouse-MASC

(106) di-ya-pidana

yasene-seri-pidana

3sgnf-cry-REM.P.REP Tucano-PL-SINGL-REM.P.REP

‘After they did so, they came back to their house, the husband returned, he cried, he was a Tucano.’

(107) yenImo dero wagIsari (Tucano)

nu-sa-do

kwe-mhade

nu-a

1sg-spouse

how-PROB.FUT

1sg-go

nhua (Tariana) I

(108) di-a-pidana

di-ya

yase-niku-ne-pidana

3sgnf-say-REM.P.REP 3sgnf-cry Tucano-PL+AFF-INS-REM.P.REP

(109) di-ya-ka 3sgnf-cry-SEQ

‘My wife, how will I be (without you),’ he said and cried (all) in Tucano.’

(110) khida-naka ready-PRES.VIS

‘It is over.’

Story 8. A Man and a Snake. Author: Juvino Brito

Nawiki mawali-ne person snake-INS A man and a snake

(1) pa:-pio-pidana

ha-do

waliki-ri-ne

ina:

one-CL:TIME-REM.P.REP parent-FEM young.person-MASC-AG woman:PL

(2) meninite-pidana

di-yã-nhi

NEG+want+TOP.ADV+CL:AN-REM.P.REP 3sgnf-stay-ANT

‘Once a man not loved by women lived with his mother.’

LW/T 07
(3) pa:-kada one-CL:DAY

diha ha-do he parent-FEM

133
du-a-pidana 3sgnf-say-REM.P.REP

Tariana

(4) ina woman:PL

pi-uma 2sg-look.for

phia-misini you-TOO

du-a 3sgnf-say

(5) du-kalite-pidana 3sgf-tell-REM.P.REP

duri-nuku

duhua

3sgf+son-TOP.NON.A/S she

‘One day his mother said to him, ‘You go and look for women, too’, she said to him.’

(6) kayi du-a-ka

dhima ha-do-nuku

so 3sgf-say-SEQ 3sgnf+hear parent-FEM-TOP.NON.A/S

(7) dhepa-pidana

nu-teduaru-nuku

3sgnf-answer-REM.P.REP 1sg-sister.in.law85-FEM-TOP.NON.A/S

pi-a 2sg-go

(8) phita

nu-siu ka-sa-do-kasu

du-na di-a-pidana

2sg+take 1sg-for REL-spouse-FEM-INT 3sgf-OBJ 3sgnf-say-REM.P.REP

(9) dhepa

duri-ne

duri ha-do-nuku

3sgnf-answer 3sgf+son-AG 3sgf+son parent-FEM-TOP.NON.A/S

‘After she said so, he answered his mother, ‘Bring me my ‘sister-in-law’ for me to marry her’, the son answered his mother.’

(10) haw du-a-pidana

nu-a-de

nhuta

yes 3sgf-say-REM.P.REP 1sg-go-FUT 1sg+take

(11) du-a

dhuepa-pidana

3sgnf-say 3sgf-answer-REM.P.REP

“Yes’, she said, ‘I’ll go’, she answered.’

(12) pa:-kada

halite

one-CL:DAY early

du-a

i:na

3sgf-go woman:PL

dhuta-pidana 3sgf+take-REM.P.REP’

‘One day she went a brought the women.’

(13) diha waliki-ri-ne

di-a-pidana

dhilitu

he young.person-MASC-AG 3sgnf-go-REM.P.REP 3sgnf+fish

(14) di-a-kayami 3sgnf-go-AFTER:DS

dhuta duka-pidana

duhua

3sgf+take 3sgf+arrive-REM.P.REP she

(15) inaru-nuku

dekina

woman-TOP.NON.A/S afternoon+ADV

duri di-dia 3sgf+son 3sgnf-return

85 See Table 8.

LW/T 07

134

Tariana

(16) dyuka-pidana ku:phe 3sgnf+arruve fish

kaka-kali REL+arrive-PAST.REL

khalitu REL+fish

‘The young man went fishing. After he went, she arrived with the woman. In the afternoon the son came back from fishing.’

(17) nuhua I

pi-siu pi-teduaru-nuku 2sg-for 2sg-sister.in.law-TOP.NON.A/S

(18) nuka-ka

nhuta

1sg+arrive-REC.P.VIS 1sg+take I

nhua

pi-siwa pi-yeka

2sg-self 2sg-know

(19) du-a-pidena

du-kalite duri-nuku

3sgf-say-REM.P.REP 3sgf-tell 3sgf+son-TOP.NON.A/S

“I have brought your sister-in-law for you, (now) it is up to you (lit. you know for yourself)’, she said to her son.’

(20) duhua she

inaru-ne

nhesiri-kade-pidana

diha ìiãri-nuku

woman-AGlike-NEG-REM.P.REP he man-TOP.NON.A/S

(21) ka:-pidana so-REM.P.REP

du-ka-niki 3sgf-look-COMPL

‘The woman did not like the man, was indifferent to him (lit. looked at him like that).’

(22) diha waliki-ri

ke:ru-pidana

di-yena

he young.person-MASC angry-REM.P.REP 3sgnf-exceed

(23) ka:-de nu-a

nupa-niki

so-FUT 1sg-go 1sg-rot-COMPL

di-a-pidana

dhimeta

3sgnf-say-REM.P.REP 3sgnf+think

‘The young man got very angry, ‘I will rot (die) for nothing’, he thought.’

(24) na-ya-yakale

ye:da

pa-nai

3pl-POSS-CL:VILLAGE INDF+downstream one-CL:LAKE

(25) alia-pidana EXIST-REM.P.REP

mawali keru-nai snake angry-CL:LAKE

ne-nuku then-TOP.NON.A/S

(26) ne-pa-ita NEG-one-CL:AN

pa-wa-ri IMP-enter-CONV

sede-pidana NEG.EX-REM.P.REP

(27) di-yã-nhi 3sgnf-stay-ANT

‘In their village, donwstream, there was a lake of an angry snake, nobody entered there.’

(28) halite diha waliki-ri

di-kalite-pidana

ha-do-nuku

early he young.person-MASC 3sgnf-tell-REM.P.REP parent-FEM-TOP.NON.A/S

LW/T 07

135

Tariana

(29) nu-na hi$

nu-teduaru du-duiha-pu-mha-niki

1sg-OBJ DEM:AN 1sg-sister.in.law 3sgf-dislike-AUG-PRES.NON.VIS-COMPL

(30) ka:-de nu-a nu-pa-niki di-a-pidana

thepe

di-wa

so-FUT 1sg-go 1sg-rot-COMPL 3sgnf-say-REM.P.REP be.annoyed 3sgnf-become

‘Early in the morning the young man said to his mother, ‘My sister-in-law really dislikes me, so I will die (rot)’, he said, he was annoyed.’

(31) kay-di-a-sita

hekuta

dhita

so-3sgnf-say-PERF tree+CL:INAN 3sgnf+take

(32) di-ruku 3sgnf-go.down

di-a-pidana

u$i$-se

3sgnf-go-REM.P.REP port-LOC

‘After he said so, he took a paddle and went down to the port.’

(33) ita-whya

di-aru

canoe-CL:CANOE 3sgnf-take water

di-mara 3sgnf-float

di-a-pidana 3sgnf-go-REM.P.REP

(34) te diha-nai-se

numa-na

ita-whya-nuku

until he-CL:LAKE-LOC mouth-AFFcanoe-CL:CANOE-TOP.NON.A/S

(35) di-pi-kolo 3sgnf-push-FROM.WATER

di-wha-thepi 3sgnf-fall-TO.WATER

di-ayha 3sgnf-swim

(36) di-wa 3sgnf-enter

di-a-pidana

diha-nai-nuku

3sgnf-go-REM.P.REP he-CL:LAKE-TOP.NON.A/S

(37) nu-na mawali di-hˆa-pida

di-a-ka

1sg-OBJ snake 3sgnf-eat-3p.IMPV 3sgnf-say-SEQ

‘He took water out of the canoe and floated, pushed canoe out of the water, fell into the water and swam, having said, ‘Let the snake eat me’.’

(38) di-wetaka-se

maka-taku-pidana

alia

3sgnf-corner-LOC large-CL:POINT-REM.P.REP EXIST

(39) mayakani-ne pa:-dawa

right-INS

one-CL:ENCLOSURE

pemekema-ne one+CL:SIDE+left-INS

(40) pa:-dawa-pidana one-CL:ENCLOSURE

di-wa 3sgnf-enter

di-a 3sgnf-go

‘There was a point in the corner of the lake, one closed part to the right, and one to the left, so he entered one.’

(41) mayakani-dawa-ne-pidana

di-dena

di-musu

right-CL:ENCLOSURE-INS-REM.P.REP 3sgnf-paddle 3sgnf-go.out

(42) di-nu

pa-ita

LW/T 07

136

3sgnf-come one-CL:AN

Tariana

(43) nawiki waliki-ri

mawali iri-pidana

diha

man

young.person-MASC

snake son-REM.P.REP he

‘From the right hand side there came a young man paddling, he was the son of a snake.’

(44) di-na 3sgnf-OBJ

di-ka

di-sata

3sgnf-see 3sgnf-greet

dhima-pidana 3sgnf+hear-REM.P.REP

(45) ne nai

di-a-pidana

kwe

pi-ni-ka

piha

then cousin:VOC86 3sgnf-say-REM.P.REP what

2sg-do-SEQ you

(46) pi-rahta-hna 2sgnf-float-INTER.PRES.VIS

pi-ni-ka-hna

phia

2sg-do-SEQ-INTER.PRES.VIS you

(47) ai-nuku

di-a-pidana

here-TOP.NON.A/S 3sgnf-say-REM.P.REP

‘He saw him and asked him: ‘Cousin, what are you doing here, floating, what are you doing’, he said.’

(48) diha ina: he woman:PL

me:ninite-ne NEG+want+TOP.ADV+CL:AN-AG

(49) dhepa-pidana

di-na

ha-nai-se

3sgnf+answer-REM.P.REP 3sgnf-OBJ DEM:INAN-CL:LAKE-LOC

mawali snake

(50) di-hˆa-pida

nu-na nu-a-ka

3sgnf-eat-3p.IMPV 1sg-OBJ 1sg-go-SEQ

nu-ayha nu-rahta-naka 1sg-swim 1sg-float-PRES.VIS

(51) dhepa-pidana

mawali nawiki-nuku

3sgnf+answer-REM.P.REP snake man-TOP.NON.A/S

‘The man not loved by women answered him, ‘I am floating in this lake so that the snake may eat me’, he answered the snake man.’

(52) phia mawali pi-a-nite you snake 2sg-say-TOP.ADV+CL:AN

sede-naka NEG.EX-PRES.VIS

(53) ai-nuku

di-a-pidana

dhepa

here-TOP.NON.A/S 3sgnf-say-REM.P.REP 3sgnf+answer

(54) diha mawarya-ka-pidana he snake+EMPH-SEQ-REM.P.REP

“The snake you are talking about does not exist here’, he answered, himself being a snake.’

86 nai is a vocative form for masc. nu-tedua\i, fem. nu-tedua-\u ‘mother’s brother’s son/daughter’ — see Table 8.

LW/T 07

137

Tariana

(55) kayu di-a

dhepa

nu-ine pi-a

so 3sgnf-say 3sgnf+answer 1sg-INS 2sg-go

(56) diwesewya-nuku

phia

then-TOP.NON.A/S you

ma:ìi-thama

pi-rena-da

bad-FR+PRES.NON.VIS 2sg-feel-LEST

(57) ha-ehkwapi-nuku

nuhua-de nhuta nu-a

DEM:INAN-CL:WORLD-TOP.NON.A/S I-FUT 1sg+take 1sg-go

(58) pi-na

di-a-pidana

diha mawali nawiki

2sg-OBJ 3sgnf-say-REM.P.REP he snake man

‘So he said, answering, ‘You come with me, now that you are feeling badly in this world, I shall take you (away), said the snake man.’

(59) pi-nu

pi-thi-da

i-dupe nhupa di-a-pidana

2sg-come 2sg-eye-CL:ROUND INDF-dust 1sg+grab 3sgnf-say-REM.P.REP

“Come, I will grab and throw dust into your eyes’, he said.’

(60) kay di-a

kaya

so 3sgnf-do so

di-thi-da-nuku 3sgnf-eye-CL:ROUND-TOP.NON.A/S

(61) dhipa-sa-pidana

puale-se-pidana

di-uka

3sgnf+grab-TIGHTLY-REM.P.REP elsewhere-LOC-REM.P.REP 3sgnf-arrive

(62) di-ema-niki

yakale-se-pidana

di-uka

3sgnf-stand-COMPL village-LOC-REM.P.REP 3sgnf-arrive

(63) di-ema-niki 3sgnf-stand-COMPL

‘So he did, he grabbed his eyes tightly, and he (the man) arrived into a ‘different world’,
in a village he arrived.’

(64) ahi$ pi-wapa pi-ema nai

di-a-pidana

nawiki-nuku

here 2sg-wait 2sg-stand cousin:VOC 3sgnf-say-REM.P.REP man-TOP.NON.A/S

(65) nu-ha-niri-nuku

nu-a nu-kalite ke:ru-ma-na

di-yã-ka

1sg-parent-MASC-TOP.NON.A/S 1sg 1sg-tell angry-EXC-REPR 3sgnf-stay-

SEQ

“Stay here and wait, cousin’, he said to the man, ‘I will tell my father, he is very angry’.’

(66) ma-kalite-kade-ka di-a

di-ˆu-kha

di-a-pidana

NEG-tell-NEG-SEQ 3sgnf-go 3sgnf-go.up-AWAY 3sgnf-go-REM.P.REP

‘He did not say (it was a snake) and went up.’

LW/T 07

138

Tariana

(67) tuki hyukade little not.appear

di-ruku 3sgnf-go down

di-uka-pidana-ta 3sgnf-arrive-REM.P.REP-REP

(68) maìa-ka good-SEQ

di-a-pidana 3sgnf-say-REM.P.REP

‘For a little while he did not appear, then he came down, he said, “It’s good’.’

(69) diha nawiki-nuku

mhãida karu-mhade

phia nuhua

he man-TOP.NON.A/S PROH be.scared-PROB.FUT you I

(70) ha-niri

karu-mana

di-yã-ka

diha ka phime

parent-MASC be.scared-EXC+ADV 3sgnf-stay-SEQ he thus 2sg+hear+CAUS

(71) pi-hwa-niki pa-phina-pe wika-se-nha di-peta 2sg-sit-COMPL IMP-thigh-PL top-LOC-PAUS 3sgnf-hit.with.tail

(72) di-yena

di-a

di-yã-ka

3sgnf-exceed 3sgnf-go 3sgnf-stay-SEQ

(73) mhãida pi-ˆupiru-mhade

phia

PROH 2sg-move-PROB.FUT

you

‘He said to the man, ‘Don’t be afraid; when my father is dangerous, you sit quietly, when he goes round and round on (people’s) thinghs hitting (them) with his tail, don’t move’.’

(74) di-sata-ka

kay di-ni

di-ˆa-ka-nha

3sgnf-greet-SEQ so 3sgnf-do 3sgnf-stay-REC.P.VIS-PAUS

di-a 3sgnf-say

(75) di-kalite-pidana

haw di-a-pidana

diha-misini

3sgnf-tell-REM.P.REP yes 3sgnf-say-REM.P.REP he-TOO

“When he greets, this is what he does’, he (the snake man) said. ‘Yes’, said the other one, too.’

(76) ˆamepa

neyu$

two+NUM.CL:HUM 3pl+go.upstream

kha

na:-pidana

away 3pl+go-REM.P.REP

(77) te pani-si-se

yakoleka di-uka

until house-NPOSS-LOC door

3sgnf-arrive

di-ema 3sgnf-stand

(78) di-a-pidana

di-na

3sgnf-go-REM.P.REP 3sgnf-OBJ

nawiki-nuku man-TOP.NON.A/S

(79) ai$ pi-wha nuhua here 2sg-sit I

ha-niri

di-musu-mhade

parent-MASC 3sgnf-go.out-PROB.FUT

(80) di-nu

pi-na

di-sata-kasu

ka phime

LW/T 07

139

3sgnf-come2sg-OBj 3sgnf-greet-INT

thus 2sg+hear+CAUS

Tariana

(81) pi-wha-niki 2sg-sit-COMPL

di-a-pidana 3sgnf-go-REM.P.REP

‘The two went upstream up to the house. He arrived at the door and said to the man, ‘Sit here, my father will come out to greet (you), sit quietly’, he said.’

(82) dhe-kha

di-a

dhe-kayami

3sgnf+enter-AWAY 3sgnf-go 3sgnf-enter-AFTER:DS

di-a 3sgnf-go

(83) mawali-pasi snake-AUG

di-peta-pidana

di-musu

3sgnf-hit.with.tail-REM.P.REP 3sgnf-go.out

(84) di-nu

di-sata-kasu

3sgnf-come 3sgnf-greet-INT

(85) di-na 3sgnf-OBJ

di-ka-pidana

di-wha diha nawiki-ne

3sgnf-see-REM.P.REP 3sgnf-sit he man-AG

‘He entered, after he (the man) entered, a big snake came out hitting his tail to greet him, and the man saw him and sat down.’

(86) di-phina-pe wika-se di-peta 3sgnf-thigh-PL top-LOC 3sgnf-hit.with.tail

di-uka 3sgnf-arrive

(87) di-swa di-perita-pidana

di-daki-nuku

di-peta

3sgnf-stay 3sgnf-lick-REM.P.REP3sgnf-body-TOP.NON.A/S 3sgnf-hit.with.tail

(88) khuri-khuri

di-ni-pidana

dhe-kha

di-a

SLIDE-SLIDE 3sgnf-do-REM.P.REP 3sgnf+enter-AWAY 3sgnf-go

‘He beat his tail over the man’s thighs, he licked his body, he was sliding (as a snake does) and went away.’

(89) dhe-kayami

di-a

di-sa-do

3sgnf+enter-AFTER:DS 3sgnf-go 3sgnf-spouse-FEM

(90) du-peta-pidana 3sgf-hit.with.tail-REM.P.REP

du-musu

du-nu

3sgf-go.out 3sgf-come

du-sita 3sgnf-finish

‘After he entered, his wife came out hitting her tail.’

(91) di-phina 3sgnf-thigh

wika-se-pidana

du-peta

top-LOC-REM.P.REP 3sgnf-hit.with.tail

du-ka 3sgnf-arrive

(92) du-swa du-peta 3sgf-stay 3sgf-hit.with .ail

khu:ri-khuri-pidana

di-na

SLIDE-SLIDE-REM.P.REP 3sgnf-OBJ

‘She beat her tail over the man’s thighs, sliding over him.’

(93) dhue-kayami

du-a

ˆama-ita-se-pidana

LW/T 07 3sgf+enter-AFTER:DS

140

Tariana

3sgf-go two-CL:AN-CONTR-REM.P.REP

(94) na-musu na-ni 3pl-go.out 3pl-do

mawali waliki-ru-ma-pe-pidana snake young.person-FEM-CL:FEM-PL-REM.P.REP

(95) nha ditu-kanape-pidana they 3sgnf+daughter-PL-REM.P.REP

‘After she entered, two (more) went out, they were young ones, his daughters.’

(96) pa-ita one-CL:AN

du-peta-kha

du-yena

3sgf-hit.with.tail-AWAY 3sgf-exceed

(97) du-a-pidana

whyumite

du-peta

3sgnf-go-REM.P.REP last+CL:AN 3sgf-hit.with.tail

duka 3sgf+arrive

(98) du-swa-pidena 3sgnf-stay-REM.P.REP

diha nawiki di-ˆupiru-pidena

he man

3sgnf-move-REM.P.REP

‘One hit her tail a lot, the last one arrived hitting her tail, (and) the man moved.’

(99) di-ˆupiru-ka 3sgnf-move-SEQ

du-ka du-dia-pidana 3sgf-see 3sgf-return-REM.P.REP

(100) du-nu-pita

yuwapiku-iha-pidana

du-swa-niki

3sgf-come-AGAIN some.time-APPR-REM.P.REP 3sgf-stay-COMPL

(103) di-phina-pe wika

duha

3sgnf-thigh-PL top-LOC she

dhumeta-ka 3sgf+feel-SEQ

(104) ne-nuku

du-na nhesiri-ka-pidana

then-TOP.NON.A/S 3sgf-OBJ like87-SEQ-REM.P.REP

‘When she saw that he moved, she came back, she stayed on his thigh for some time, she thought he liked her.’

(105) kayu-maka-pidana so-AFF-REM.P.REP

kay-du-ni so-3sgf-do

na-sata thuy diha nai 3pl-greet all he cousin:VOC

(106) diha di-a-nite he 3sgnf-say-TOP.ADV+CL AN

di-musu 3sgnf-go.out

di-nu-pidana 3sgnf-come-REM.P.REP

(107) di-duhwe-ri

di-duhwe-ri

3sgnf-parent.in.law-MASC 3sgnf-parent.in.law-MASC

i-pumi INDF-after

‘After she did so, they all greeted him he, called cousin, also came out, after the fatherin- law.’

87 Tariana has two verbs of liking: hui ‘like food’, and nhesi\i ‘like anything except food’.

LW/T 07

141

(108) diha mawali-maka-nuku

di-sole

he snake-CL:CLOTH.LIKE-TOP.NON.A/S 3sgnf-take off+CAUS

Tariana

(109) di-sueta dihya 3sgnf-stay+CAUS

di-nu

di-sata-pidana-niki

3sgnf-come3sgnf-greet-REM.P.REP-COMPL he

‘The snake took off the snake attire and greeted him.’

(110) ìiãri inaru

ditu-kana-ma-pe

man woman 3sgnf+daughter-PL-CL:FEM-PL

na-musu 3pl-go.out

(111) na-nu-pidana

di-na

3pl-come-REM.P.REP 3sgnf-OBJ

na-sata-kasu 3pl-greet-INT

‘The man, the woman and the daughters came out to greet him.’

(112) wyume-ma-se last-CL:FEM-CONTR

maìa-ma-pidana

du-kakapua

good-CL:FEM-REM.P.REP 3sgf-face

(113) ka:wirya-karu-pidana paint-PURP-REM.P.REP

‘The last one was beautiful, her face was painted.’

(114) dhimeta-ka-nuku

wyumite-se

3sgnf+feel-SEQ-TOP.NON.A/S last+CL:AN-CONTR

(115) kiaku-iha-pidana strong-APPR-REM.P.REP

di-kapima-nuku 3sgnf-hand+CL:SIDE-TOP.NON.A/S

(116) dhupa-sa 3sgf+grab-TIGHTLY

du-pe 3sgf-leave

du-matara-pidana 3sgf-let go-REM.P.REP

‘The last one squeezed the hand of the (man) who was thinking and let it go.’

(117) duha mawali-sa-do-peru

ãsyapi

she snake+INDF-spouse-FEM-OLD:FEM pepperpot

(118) du-whe-ta-pidana

di-na

dhuta

3sgf-stay+CAUS-CAUS-REM.P.REP 3sgnf-OBJ

3sgf+take

‘The snake’s wife put a pepper-pot and took it to him (the man).’

(119) du-musu

du-nu-pidana

3sgf-go.out 3sgf-come-REM.P.REP

iìiri

ipe-pe

game meat-PL

(120) apia

i-phina

dapa

wild pig INDF-thigh paca

i-phina INDF-thigh

(121) phiìi agouti

i-phina INDF-thigh

neri i-phina deer INDF-thigh

LW/T 07

142

Tariana

(122) du-hweta-pidana

di-na

dura-ka

du-hˆa

3sgf-stay+CAUS-CAUS-REM.P.REP 3sgnf-OBJ 3sgf+order-SEQ 3sgf-eat

‘She put in front of him meat of game, thigh of a wild pig, thigh of a paca, thigh of agouti, thigh of deer, and ordered him to eat.’

(123) diha nawiki tuki-tiki-pidana

di-ˆha nha na-ka-ka-nuku

he man

little-little-REM.P.REP 3sgnf-eat they 3pl-see-SEQ-TOP.NON.A/S

(124) di-duhwe-ri-nuku

di-a-pidana

3sgnf-parent.in.law-MASC-TOP.NON.A/S 3sgnf-say-REM.P.REP

(125) pi-hˆa-si

phia-misini

2sg-eat-IMM.IMPV you-TOO

nu-ine di-a-pidana 1sg-INS 3sgnf-go-REM.P.REP

(126) haw nu-hˆa-de

di-a-pidana

pa-iphina

dhita

yes 1sg-eat-FUT 3sgnf-go-REM.P.REP one-CL:THIGH 3sgnf+take

(127) di-pe 3sgnf-leave

di-hˆa-khani-pidana

di-hˆa

3sgnf-eat-AWAY-REM.P.REP 3sgnf-eat

(128) kenani-pu-pidana-niki nice-AUG-REM.P.REP-COMPL

di-hˆa thuy 3sgnf-eat all

(129) di-pe-pidana-niki

di-sita

3sgnf-leave-REM.P.REP-COMPL 3sgnf-finish

diha nawiki he man

‘The man ate a little. When they, (including) the father-in-law, saw it, he (the father) said,
‘Eat immediately, you too, with me’, he said. ‘Yes, I will eat,’ he said, he took a thigh, and ate it away, it was nice, the man ate it all up.’

(130) asyapi-nuku

pi-yake-ta

di-a-pidana

pepperpot-TOP.NON.A/S 2sg-put.together+CAUS-CAUS 3sgnf-go-REM.P.REP

‘Put away the pepper pot, he said.’

(131) ne-pidana then-REM.P.REP

mawali nawiki di-musu

di-nu

snake man

3sgnf-go.out 3sgnf-come

(132) di-na 3sgnf-OBJ

di-sape-pidana

phia-hna

3sgnf-speak-REM.P.REP you-PAUS

i:na woman:PL

(133) meninite

di-a

di-sata

NEG+want+TOP.ADV+CL:AN 3sgnf-say 3sgnf-greet

(134) dhima-pidana

nuhua

3sgnf+hear-REM.P.REP I

ˆama-ma

nu-itu-kanape

two-CL:FEM 1sg-daughter-PL

(135) nu-de-naka

pi-siwa pi-yeka

1sg-have-PRES.VIS 2sg-self 2sg-know

di-a-pidana 3sgnf-say-REM.P.REP

LW/T 07

143

Tariana

‘Then the snake-man came out and said to him, ‘You are the one women do not like’, he asked, ‘I have two daughters, it is up to you (lit. you know yourself)’, he said.’

(136) ka:-pidana so-REM.P.REP

dihmeta-niki

diha-misini

3sgnf+think-COMPL he-too

‘He (the man) made the decision (lit. though thus).’

(137) pa-kada

yamina wasã

one-CL:DAY day

let’s

iìiri game

wa-inu nai 1pl-kill cousin:VOC

(138) di-a-pidana

haw di-a-pidana

diha-sini

3sgnf-say-REM.P.REP yes 3sgnf-say-REM.P.REP he-TOO

(139) wasã let’s

na-khani-pidana

awakada-se

3pl+go-AWAY-REM.P.REP jungle-LOC

‘One day he (the snake) said, ‘Cousin, let’s go and hunt for game’. He too said, ‘Let’s (go)’. They went away to the jungle.’

(140) po:po:ari-ma-pidana

na-wapa na-wha iìiri-nuku

arumã.vine-EXC-REM.P.REP 3pl-wait 3pl-sit game-TOP.NON.A/S

‘They were waiting for game where there was a lot of arumã vine.’

(141) ai$na

iìiri nu-inu nu-yã-ka

here+ADV game 1sg-kill 1sg-stay-REC.P.VIS I

nuha

nai

cousin:VOC

(142) di-a

di-kalite-pidana

mawali-ne-seri

3sgnf-say 3sgnf-tell-REM.P.REP snake-PL-SINGL

“I hunt here, cousin’, said the snake-man.’

(143) tuki na-wha ãpia

dinu-pidana

little 3pl-sit wild pig 3sgnf+come

di-na-pidana 3sgnf-OBJ-REM.P.REP

(144) dita

mawali-ne-seri

3sgnf+shoot.arrow snake-PL-SINGL

‘They sat for some time, a wild pig came, the snake shot an arrow at him.’

(145) nai

pi-a

phita

di-a-pidana

nawiki-nuku

cousin:VOC 2sg-go 2sg+take 3sgnf-go-REM.P.REP man-TOP.NON.A/S

“Cousin, you go and get (the pig)’, he said to the man.’

(146) haw di-a

di-uka

yes 3sgnf-go 3sgnf-arrive

di-ka-tha-pidena 3sgnf-see-FR-REM.P.REP

(147) mawali-pasi-pidana

di-papa

snake-AUG-REM.P.REP 3sgnf-roll

di-uka 3sgnf-arrive

di-swa 3sgnf-stay

LW/T 07

144

Tariana

(148) di-ka-pidena

harame di-a

diha nawiki-ne

3sgnf-see-REM.P.REP afraid 3sgnf-go he man-AG

“Yes’, he went, he arrived and saw a big snake, a big snake was rolled (there), the man saw it, and became afraid.’

(149) pi-siwa pi-a 2sg-self 2sg-go

phita

mawali-pasi-ka

2sg+take snake-AUG-REC.P.VIS

di-papa-nhi 3sgnf-roll-ANT

(150) di-na

di-a

di-kalite-pidana

mawali-ne-seri-nuku

3sgnf-OBJ 3sgnf-say 3sgnf-tell-REM.P.REP snake-PL-SINGL-TOP.NON.A/S

“You go there yourself, there is a big snake rolled up’, he said to him, to the snake.’

(151) haw di-a

di-uka

yes 3sgnf-go 3sgnf-arrive

dheta-pidana

diha

3sgnf+take-REM.P.REP he

(152) mawali-nuku

di-pe

snake-TOP.NON.A/S 3sgnf-leave

hotho away

di-pe-pidana 3sgnf-leave-REM.P.REP

‘Yes, he went and took (it - an arrow that was a snake) away.’

(153) diha-ne-nuku he-AG-TOP.NON.A/S

sidua-na-pidana

nawiki

arrow-CL:VERT-REM.P.REP man

(154) di-ka-ka-ne-nuku

mawali-pasi-pidena

3sgnf-see-SEQ-AG-TOP.NON.A/S88 snake-AUG-REM.P.REP

‘For him (looking) it was an arrow, for the man looking it was a snake.’

(155) tuki na-wapa na-wha ne:ri-pasi di-nu-pidana little 3pl-wait 3pl-sit deer-AUG 3sgnf-come-REM.P.REP

(156) di-na-pidana 3sgnf-OBJ-REM.P.REP

di:ta 3sgnf+shoot arrow

(157) pi-a 2sg-go

phita

nai

2sg+take cousin:VOC

di-a-pidana

di-na

3sgnf-say-REM.P.REP 3sgnf-OBJ

(158) nawiki-nuku

haw di-a

man-TOP.NON.A/S yes 3sgnf-say

88 The sequence -ne (focussed and/or agentive subject) and -nuku (topical non-subject) represents an instance of double marking of syntactic function in Tariana (see Aikhenvald forthcoming-h): -ne marks the function of the NP in the embedded clause, while -nuku marks the function of the clause itself.

LW/T 07

145

Tariana

‘They waited a little, a big deer came, (the snake) shot an arrow. ‘Cousin, go and get (it)’, he said to the man. ‘Yes’, he said.’

(159) di-uka

di-ka-pidena

mawalya-pidana

di-papa-ka

3sgnf-arrive 3sgnf-see-REM.P.REP snake+EMPH-REM.P.REP 3sgnf-roll-SEQ

(160) di-na 3sgnf-OBJ

mawali-pasi-naka

di-papa neri-nuku

snake-AUG-PRES.VIS 3sgnf-roll deer-TOP.NON.A/S

(161) di-a

di-kalite-pidana

diha nai-nuku

3sgnf-say 3sgnf-tell-REM.P.REP he cousin:REF-TOP.NON.A/S

‘He arrived and saw: for him it was a snake rolled up (not an arrow). He said to his ‘cousin’, ‘There is a snake rolled over the deer’.’

(162) kwe pi-ni-kasu phia ka:ru-hna

di-a-pidana

what 2sg-do-INT you be.scared-INTER.PRES.VIS 3sgnf-say-REM.P.REP

(163) diha mawali di-hwi-da

dhipa di-pe

he snake 3sgnf-head-CL:ROUND 3sgnf+grab 3sgnf-leave

hotho away

(164) di-pe-pidana

diha-ne-nuku

sidoa-na-pidana

3sgnf-leave-REM.P.REP he-AG-TOP.NON.A/S arrow-CL:VERT-REM.P.REP

“Why are you afraid’, said the snake. He grabbed its head and threw it away. For him (looking) it was an arrow (not a snake).’

(165) pa-ita one-CL:AN

wa-inu litena 1pl-kill more

di-a-pidana 3sgnf-say-REM.P.REP

‘Let’s kill one more, he said.’

(166) kay-na-ni-nisawa so-3pl-do-WHILE:DS

kwisi di-ara

di-uka

curassow 3sgnf-fly 3sgnf-arrive

(167) di-wha-pidana 3sgnf-sit-REM.P.REP

‘While they did it, a curassow flew towards them and sat down.’

(168) ne-pidana then-REM.P.REP

di:ta-pita 3sgnf+shoot.arrow-REP

diha kwisi-nuku he curassow-TOP.NON.A/S

(169) nai cousin:VOC

pi-a 2sg-go

phita

di-a-pidana

2sg+take 3sgnf-say-REM.P.REP

(170) haw di-a

di-ka-pidana

mawalya-pidana

yes 3sgnf-say 3sgnf-see-REM.P.REP snake+EMPH-REM.P.REP

(171) di-swa-niki

mawali-pasi-naka

hi$

kwisi-nuku

3sgnf-stay-COMPL snake-AUG-PRES.VIS DEM:AN curassow-TOP.NON.A/S

LW/T 07

146

Tariana

(172) di-papa di-swa-naka ne
3sgnf-roll 3sgnf-stay-PRES.VIS

di-a-pidana

diha nawiki-

3sgnf-say-REM.P.REP he man-AG

‘Then he shot an arrow at the curassow. ‘Cousin, go and get (it)’, he said. ‘Yes’, he (the man) said, he saw: there was a real snake there. The man said, ‘A huge snake is rolled around the curassow.’

(173) kayu di-a-ka

dhima

so 3sgnf-say-SEQ 3sgnf+hear

diha mawali-ne-seri he snake-PL-SINGL

(174) di-uka

di-pe

hotho-pidana

diha sidoa-na-nuku

3sgnf-arrive 3sgnf-leave away-REM.P.REP he arrow-CL:VERT-TOP.NON.A/S

‘The snake-man heard him say so, he took the ‘arrow’ out.’

(175) wasã wa-dia-wa let’s 1pl-return-HORT

kida-ya

wa-i$hˆa na-pidana

ready-EMPH 1pl-eat 3pl+say-REM.P.REP

“Let’s come back, it is over, we will eat’, they said.’

(176) na-dia 3pl-return

na-nu pani-si-se 3pl-come house-NPOSS-LOC

‘They came back home.’

(177) nu-we-do

ketemite-se-nuku

hi$

1sg-younger sibling-FEM last+CL:AN-CONTR-TOP.NON.A/S DEM:AN

(178) iìiri-nuku

pi-dieta

game-TOP.NON.A/S 2sg-return+CAUS

di-a-pidana 3sgnf-say-REM.P.REP

(179) di-a-pidana

mawali-ne-seri

haw di-a-pidana

3sgnf-say-REM.P.REP snake-PL-SINGLyes 3sgnf-say-REM.P.REP

(180) nawiki-misini di-dia

man-TOO

3sgnf-return

di-uka 3sgnf-arrive

du-na-pidana 3sgf-OBJ-REM.P.REP

(181) di-dieta

ketemi-ma-se-nuku

3sgnf-return+CAUS last-CL:FEM-CONTR-TOP.NON.A/S

“Give this game to the last (i.e. the youngest) sister’, he said, said the snake-man. ‘Yes’, said the man. He came back and gave (it) to the youngest (one).’

(182) ne-pidana then-REM.P.REP

ina:

di-kalite diha nawiki-nuku

woman:PL 3sgnf-tell he man-TOP.NON.A/S

(183) pi-siwa 2sg-self

pi-yeka hi$

nu-we-do-nuku

2sg-know DEM:AN 1sg-younger.sibling-FEM-TOP.NON.A/S

LW/T 07

147

Tariana

(184) di-a-pidana

pi-na

ina:

3sgnf-go-REM.P.REP 2sg-OBJ woman:PL

(185) ma-na-de-thama-da NEG-want-NEG-FR+PRES.NON.VIS-LEST

di-a-pidana 3sgnf-go-REM.P.REP

‘Then he told this man about women, ‘It is up to you as far as my younger sister is concerned, women do not like you anyway.’

(186) ka:-pidana so-REM.P.REP

dhimeta-niki

diha-ne

3sgnf+think-REM.P.REP he-AG

(187) hanipa-pidana

kawarikupeda diha nawiki-ne

big+CL:CLOSED.SPACE-REM.P.REP be.sad

he man-AG

‘The man thought a lot, he was very sad.’

(188) duhua she

inaru

du-musu

du-nu diha nawiki-nuku

woman 3sgf-go.out 3sgf-come

he man-TOP.NON.A/S

(189) du-kalite-pidana 3sgf-tell-REM.P.REP

phia ehkwapi-mia pihpunita you day-ONLY 2sg+follow

nu-na 1sg-OBJ

(190) du-a

du-kalite-pidana

3sgf-say 3sgf-tell-REM.P.REP

depi-nuku

mhãida pehpunita

night-TOP.NON.A/S PROH 2sg+follow

(191) du-a

du-kalite-pidana

3sgf-say 3sgf-tell-REM.P.REP

diha nawiki mhema-kade-pidana he man NEG+hear-NEG-REM.P.REP

‘The woman came out and told the man, ‘Follow me only in daytime, at night do not follow me’. The man did not listen to her.’

(192) nema-nisawa

kwe-wani-pu-tha

kayu na-hna

3pl+sleep-WHILE:DS what-REALLY-AUG-FR so 3pl+say-INTER.PRES.VIS

(193) nu-na di-a-pidana

di-a

di-dawa di-ka

1sg-OBJ 3sgnf-say-REM.P.REP 3sgnf-say 3sgnf-hide 3sgnf-see

(194) mawali-pasi-pe-pidana

na-perita na-kwa naha amaku-pe-se

snake-AUG-PL-REM.P.REP 3pl-lick 3pl-hang they hammock-PL-LOC

(195) pua! mawali-pasi-pe na-kwa di-a-pidana

diha

pua! nake-AUG-PL 3pl-hang 3sgnf-say-REM.P.REP he

(196) di-sa-do-pena

dalipa

3sgnf-spouse-FEM-NOM.FUT near

di-a

di-ka-tha-pidana

3sgnf-go 3sgnf-see-FR-REM.P.REP

‘While they were sleeping, he said: Why did they really try to say this to me. He went secretly and saw: big snakes were licking themselves hanging in their hammocks. Pua! Big snakes are hanging (in hammocks), he said. He went to his future wife to have a look.’

LW/T 07
(197) halite seri
early

nu-a 1sg-go

148 nhulitu di-a-pidana

Tariana diha mawali-ne-

1sg+fish 3sgnf-say-REM.P.REP he snake-PL-SINGL

(198) mhãida pi-a

phia

PROH 2sg-go you

di-a-pidana

nuhua

3sgnf-say-REM.P.REP I

(199) phepa-de

nu-a

nhulitu di-a

di-kalite

one+NUM.CL:HUM-FUT 1sg-go 1sg+fish 3sgnf-say 3sgnf-tell

(200) di-a-pidana

ai$ pani-si

alia

pi-wapa

3sgnf-say-REM.P.REP here house-NPOSS EXIST 2sg-wait

(201) pi-siwa pi-yeka hi$

nu-we-do-nuku

2sg-self 2sg-know DEM:AN 1sg-younger.sibling-FEM-TOP.NON.A/S

(202) di-a-pidana 3sgnf-say-REM.P.REP

‘Early in the morning the snake said, ‘I will go fishing, you don’t go, I will go alone fishing’, he said, ‘you stay at home waiting, it is up to you what to do about my younger sister’, he said.’

(203) ha-niri-pe-misini

hinipuku na-pidana

khani naha mawali

parent-MASC-PL-TOO garden 3pl+go-REM.P.REP away they

snake

(204) hinipuku-pe garden-PL

awakada-se jungle-LOC

mawina-wata-pe pineapple-CL:BUSH-PL

(205) alia-ri-pidana

naha

hinipuku-pe

EXIST-CONV-REM.P.REP they

garden-PL

‘The fathers (father and his brothers) went away to their gardens, the snakes’ gardens were pineapple bushes in the jungle.’

(206) deikina

diha nai

afternoon+ADV he cousin:REF

di-dia 3sgnf-return

di-uka-pidana 3sgnf-arrive-REM.P.REP

(207) kaka-kali

ka-inu ku:phe di-dia

REL+arrive-PAST.REL.MASC REL-kill fish

3sgnf-return

(208) di-uka 3sgnf-arrive

di-kalite-pidana

diha nawiki-nuku

3sgnf-tell-REM.P.REP he man-TOP.NON.A/S

(209) phia ha-do you parent-FEM

du-ya-ka

du-yami-ka

3sgf-cry-SEQ 3sgf-die,lose.conscience-SEQ

duhua she

(210) pi-na

du-awada-ka

desu

wa

wa-ka

2sg-OBJ 3sgf-remember-SEQ tomorrow 1pl+go 1pl-see

(211) di-a-pidana

diha mawali-ne-seri

nawiki-nuku

LW/T 07

149

3sgnf-say-REM.P.REP he snake-PL-SINGLman-TOP.NON.A/S

Tariana

‘In the afternoon, the ‘cousin’ returned from fishing, and said to the man, ‘Your mother is crying until losing her conscience, she remembers you (thinks about you), tomorrow we will go and see her’, said the snake to the man.’

(212) haw di-a-pidana

pa:-kada

halite nha ˆhamepa

yes 3sgnf-say-REM.P.REP one-CL:DAY early

they two+CL:HUM

(213) na:-pidana

na-ka diha nawiki ha-do

3pl+go-REM.P.REP 3pl-see he man

parent-FEM

dalipa-se near-LOC

“Yes’, he (man) said. The next day early the two of them went to see the man’s mother.’

(214) tuki nesa

na-nu na-ka

little 3pl+go.upstream 3pl-come 3pl+go-SEQ

na-rahta nhema-pidena 3pl-float 3pl+hear-REM.P.REP

(215) diha ha-do he parent-FEM

du-ya:-ka

kay na-ka

na-rahta nawiki

3sgf-cry-SEQ so 3pl+go-SEQ 3pl-float man

(216) di-teduaru 3sgnf-sister.in.law

du-ruku

du-nu-pidana

3sgnf-go down 3sgf-come-REM.P.REP

uni water

(217) dusa-kasu

mawali-ne-seri-ne di-sata dhima-pidana

diha

3sgf+go.up-INT snake-PL-SINGL-AG 3sgnf-greet 3sgnf+hear-REM.P.REP he

(218) nawiki-nuku

kwe-mha

man-TOP.NON.A/S what-PRES.NON.VIS

pi-na

phia

2sg-want you

(219) ha-ma-nuku

pi-na-ka

DEM:INAN-CL:FEM-TOP.NON.A/S 2sg-want-SEQ

(220) ka-duiha-karu-nuku

di-a-pidana

REL-dislike-REL-TOP.NON.A/S 3sgnf-say-REM.P.REP

(221) di-sata dhima 3sgnf-greet 3sgnf+hear

wa-inu-niki di-a-pidana

nawiki-ne

1pl-kill-COMPL 3sgnf-say-REM.P.REP man-AG

‘They went a little upstream, they heard his mother cry. So they floated and saw that the sister-in-law came to get water. The snake asked the man, ‘What is it you want for this one who dislikes you’, he asked. ‘We’ll kill (her)’, said the man.’

(222) haw wasã mawi: yes let’s hook

wheta na:-pidana

na-mara

1pl+take 3pl+go-REM.P.REP 3pl-go down

(223) na:

ˆeyu$

na:

ma:wi ˆama-pi-pidana

3pl+go 3pl+go.upstream 3pl+go hook

two-CL:LONG-REM.P.REP

(224) na-pisa na-kadua

na-pe diha mawali-ne-seri

upiìi

3pl-cut 3pl-split.in.half 3pl-leave he snake-PL-SINGLtrap

(225) di-ni-pidana

dyawi-ne-pidana

di-yã-khani

LW/T 07

150

Tariana

3sgnf-do-REM.P.REP 3sgnf+saliva-INS-REM.P.REP 3sgnf-stay-AWAY

(226) upiìi-nuku trap-TOP.NON.A/S

“Yes, let’s take hooks’. They went downstream, then went upstream, cut two hooks, split in halves, the snake man made a trap with his saliva.’

(227) wasã kasina let’s now+ADV

wya-nuku

di-a-pidana

then-TOP.NON.A/S 3sgnf-say-REM.P.REP

(228) na-ruku

na:

na-dena

3pl-go down 3pl+go 3pl-paddle

nesa 3pl+go.up

na-pidana 3pl+go-REM.P.REP

(229) ne-pidana then-REM.P.REP

du-ruku 3sgf-come down

du-nu-pita

duhua-ne

3sgf-come-REP she-AG

(230) u:ni water

du-nu-ka

dusa

kwe-mha

pi-na

phia

3sgf-come-SEQ 3sgf+go.up what-PRES.NON.VIS 2sg-want you

(231) hi$-nuku

di-a

di-sata dhima-pidana-ta

DEM:AN-TOP.NON.A/S 3sgnf-say 3sgnf-greet 3sgnf+hear-REM.P.REP-REP

“Let’s go now’, he said. They went downstream, they paddled and went upstream. Then she came down to get water. ‘What do you want for her’, he (snake) asked.’

(232) pi-nu-niki

mayakani-ya nu-na ma-na-ka-de-na

2sg-do-COMPL right-EMPH 1sg-OBJ NEG-want-NEG-REM.P.VIS

(233) duha-yana di-a-pidana

nawiki-ne haw di-a

upiìi

she-PEJ 3sgnf-say-REM.P.REP man-AG yes 3sgnf-say trap

(234) dhita 3sgnf+take

di-pe 3sgnf-leave

dihˆa di-nita-pidana

upiìi-ne

3sgnf+aim 3sgnf-push-REM.P.REP trap-INS

(235) ka-ˆu-kali

ka:-kheya

REL-go.up-PAST.REL.MASC REL-be first

ne-se-ya-pidana then-LOC-EMPH-REM.P.REP

(236) du-kapuku 3sgf-turn

du-ruku 3sgf-come down

du-nu diha-pi

3sgf-come

he-CL:LONG

(237) nehˆa-ka

upiìi-se-pidana

3pl+aim-SEQ trap-LOC-REM.P.REP

(238) du-nu du-hwa-hala

duka

du-yã

3sgf-come

3sgf-fall-IN.OPEN.SPACE

3sgf+arrive 3sgf-stay

‘The man said, ‘Do the right thing. She did not want me’. ‘Yes’, he said. He put the trap and aimed it (at her) when she was coming. Then she turned around and came down, they aimed the trap at her, and she fell into the trap.’

(239) maìa-naka di-a-pidana

diha nawiki-ne diha

LW/T 07

151

good-PRES.VIS 3sgnf-say-REM.P.REP he man-AG he

Tariana

(240) mawali-ne-seri-nuku

upiìi-nuku

ai$

snake-PL-SINGL-TOP.NON.A/S trap-TOP.NON.A/S here

(241) weme-ta-niki

desu

wa-nu

1pl+stand+CAUS-CAUS-COMPL tomorrow 1pl-come

(242) wa-ka du-na kwe du-a-ka

di-a-pidana

1pl-see 3sgf-OBJ what 3sgf-go-SEQ 3sgnf-say-REM.P.REP

(243) diha-pi

upiìi-pi

waliku-se-pidana

du-yã duha

he-CL:LONG trap-CL:LONG inside-LOC-REM.P.REP 3sgf-stay she

(244) nawiki-ne ne-pidana person-AG then-REM.P.REP

ne:me-ta

na-dia-khana

3pl+stand+CAUS-CAUS 3pl-return-AWAY

“It is good’, the man said to the snake, ‘Let’s leave the trap standing here, tomorrow we will come and see how she is’, he said (the snake). She stayed inside the trap. Then they left (it) standing and returned (home).’

(245) mawali-pani-si-se

mhãida-mhade

snake-house-NPOSS-LOC PROH-PROB.FUT

pi-kalite phia 2sg-tell you

(246) hi$-nuku

kayu-wa-ni-nipe-nuku

phia

DEM:AN-TOP.NON.A/S so-1pl-do-NOM-TOP.NON.A/S you

(247) ha-do-se-nuku parent-FEM-LOC-TOP.NON.A/S

desu tomorrow

pi-na

nu-a

2sg-OBJ 1sg-go

(248) nu-sue-ta-de

ma:ìi-pu-naka

phia ha-do

1sg-stay+CAUS-CAUS-FUTbad-AUG-PRES.VIS you parent-FEM

(249) du-rena pi-na

du-mesa-ka di-a

di-kalite-pidena

3sgf-feel 2sg-OBJ 3sgf-love-SEQ 3sgf-say 3sgf-tell-REM.P.REP

(250) diha nawiki-nuku he man-TOP.NON.A/S

“At snake’s house don’t tell what we did, I will take you to your mother tomorrow, she is feeling bad, since she loves you’, he said to the man.’

(251) pa-kada

halia

one-CL:DAY dawn

di-swa 3sgnf-stay

(252) wasã let’s

upiìi trap

wa-ka di-a-pidana

pa-kha

1pl-see 3sgnf-say-REM.P.REP one-CL:CURV

(253) da:pi-kha cipó vine-CL:CURVED

di-matha-nihka

di-a

3sgnf-break-REC.P.INFR 3sgnf-say

(254) di-a-pidana

inaru i-whe-ri-peri-ne

ya:tu

3sgnf-go-REM.P.REP woman INDF-grandparent-MASC-OLD:MASC-AG snuff

LW/T 07

152

Tariana

(255) di-eme-ka-pidana 3sgnf-sniff-SEQ-REM.P.REP

diha mawali-nuku he snake-TOP.NON.A/S

(256) di-daki-ru-nuku 3sgnf-grandchild-FEM-TOP.NON.A/S

di-hˆa-kapua 3sgnf-eat-BECAUSE

‘The next day it dawned. ‘Let’s go and see the trap’, he said (the man). ‘A cipó vine must have broken’, he (the snake) said, the woman’s grandfather sniffing snuff because of the snake having killed his granddaughter.’

(257) nesa 3pl+go.up
leave

na

diha upiìi-nuku

dhita

3pl+go he trap-TOP.NON.A/S 3sgnf+take

di-pe 3sgnf-

(258) dapi-kha-nuku

di-apita-ka

cipó.vine-CL:CURV 3sgnf-push-SEQ

di-pe

diha

3sgnf-leave he

(259) upiìi-nuku

di-matara

trap-TOP.NON.A/S 3sgnf-let.go

hu

di-pe-pidana

AWAY 3sgnf-leave-REM.P.REP

(260) ne-pidana then-REM.P.REP

inaru du-musu-kha

du-a

woman 3sgf-go.out-AWAY 3sgf-go

(261) i-karu-se-pidana

du-miˆa

du-rahta hi$ku-pana

stink-PURP-CONTR-REM.P.REP 3sgf-body

3sgf-float appear-ALL

‘They went upstream, he (the man) took the trap, pushed the vine and let the trap go off, then the woman went up, already stinking, her body was all visible floating.’

(262) ne-nuku

dhumeta-tupe

duha-yana

then-TOP.NON.A/S 3sgf+think-PERM.IMPV she-PEJ

(263) nu-na ma-na-kade-karu-yana di-a-pidana

diha nawiki-ne

1sg-OBJ NEG-want-NEG-PURP-PEJ 3sgnf-say-REM.P.REP he man-AG

(264) pi-siwa-naka

kay pi-ni

di-a-pidana

dhepa

2sg-self-PRES.VIS so 2sg-do 3sgnf-say-REM.P.REP 3sgnf+answer

(265) mawali-ne-seri-ne snake-PL-SINGL-AG

‘The man said, ‘This is what she deserves (lit. let her think), the bad one who did not want me’. ‘You did it yourself’, answered the snake.’

(266) kay na-ni so 3pl-do

na-sita na-dia-kha 3pl-finish 3pl-return-AWAY

na:-pidana 3pl+go-REM.P.REP

(267) mawali-dapana-se

ne-se

snake-CL:HOUSE-LOC then-LOC

di-uka 3sgnf-arrive

LW/T 07

153

(268) di-kalite-pidana

hi$-kayu

wa-ni-nipe-nuku

3sgnf-tell-REM.P.REP DEM:AN-so 1pl-do-NOM-TOP.NON.A/S

Tariana

(269) mhãida pi-kalite-mhade

pi-a

pi-kisi-pe-se-nuku

PROH 2sg-tell-PROB.FUT 2sg-go 2sg-relative-PL-LOC-TOP.NON.A/S

(270) ne-phia ha-do-nuku NEG-you parent-FEM-TOP.NON.A/S

hi$-kayu-ka DEM:AN-so-SEQ

nu-ni 1sg-do

(271) nu-emhani nhua 1sg-walk I

ne-se-nuku

mhãida pi-a

then-LOC-TOP.NON.A/S PROH 2sg-go

(272) di-a-pidana

di-kalite diha mawali-ne-seri-ne

3sgnf-say-REM.P.REP 3sgnf-tell he snake-PL-SINGL-AG

‘They did this and returned to the snakehouse. Then he (the snake) came and said, ‘Don’t tell your relatives about what we did; don’t tell your mother that I did this while going around, don’t say (it)’, said the snake man.’

(273) desu-de

nu-a

tomorrow-FUT 1sg-go

FEM

nu-sue-ta 1sg-stay+CAUS-CAUS

pi-na

phia ha-do

2sg-OBJ you parent-

(274) dalipa-se hi$

nu-we-do

wya

near-LOC DEM:AN 1sg-young.sibling-FEM then

(275) du-a

pi-ne

phia-ne pi-ka

pi-emhani

3sgf-go 2sg-INS you-AG 2sg-see 2sg-walk

ma:-kasu NEG+go-INT

(276) di-a-pidena

mawali-ne-seri

di-dalipaki-nuku

3sgnf-say-REM.P.REP snake-PL-SINGL3sgnf-in.law-TOP.NON.A/S

‘Tomorrow I will take you to your mother’s, my younger sister will not come with you, only you go and see’, said the snake to his in-law.’89

(277) nuhua I

nhuta-de-kha 1sg+take-FUT-AWAY

nu-a

nhua nu-sa-do-naka

1sg-go I 1sg-spouse-FEM-PRES.VIS

(278) me$da

di-a-pidana

dhepa

diha nawiki-ne

indeed 3sgnf-say-REM.P.REP 3sgnf+answer he man-AG

“I will take her, she is my wife indeed’, said the man.’

(279) ma:-kasu

duhua

NEG+go-INT she

di-a-pidena

diha mawali-ne-seri

3sgnf-say-REM.P.REP he snake-PL-SINGL

(280) wasã di-a-pidena

pi-na

nu-a

nu-sue-ta-de

let’s 3sgnf-say-REM.P.REP 2sg-OBJ 1sg-go 1sg-stay+CAUS-CAUS-FUT

89 Dalipaki is a general term for an in-law of the same generation as ego (not included in Table 8).

LW/T 07
(281) upi-mia-se-ya old-ONLY-LOC-EMPH

154

pi-na

nhuta-mi

2sg-OBJ 1sg+take-LOC.NOM

Tariana

(282) nu-nu-se-ya 1sg-come-LOC-EMPH

di-a-pidena 3sgnf-say-REM.P.REP

“She will not go’, said the snake, ‘let’s go, I will put you onto the same place as the one I took you from,’ he said.’

(283) na:

na-musu

3pl+go 3pl-go.out

na-nu-pidena

te

di-na

3pl-come-REM.P.REP until

3sgnf-OBJ

(284) di-keta-mi 3sgnf-meet-NOM

di-uka 3sgnf-arrive

di-uka-hni-thepi 3sgnf-arrive-ANT-TO.WATER

(285) di-pe-niki

diha ware di-a-khani-pidana

3sgnf-leave-COMPL he outside 3sgnf-go-AWAY-REM.P.REP

(286) ha-ehkwapi-se

di-uka

DEM:INAN-CL:WORLD-LOC 3sgnf-arrive

di-dia-pidana 3sgnf-return-REM.P.REP

‘They went up to the place where he met him and took him into the water, he left him, and he went outside and came back to this world.’

(287) disa 3sgnf+go.up

di-nu

di-ˆu

3sgnf-come 3sgnf-go.upstream

(288) di-a-pidena

ha-do

3sgnf-return-REM.P.REP parent-FEM

dalipa near

(289) du-ya-ka-pidana

duhua-ne di-na

3sgf-cry-REM.P.REP she-AG 3sgnf-OBJ

du-mesa-ka 3sgf-love-SEQ

‘He went upstream towards his mother, and she was crying because she loved him.’

(290) kwe pi-ni

pi-yã-ka-hna

phia na

what 2sg-do 2sg-cry-SEQ-INTER.PRES.VIS you Mum:VOC

(291) di-a-pidana

nu-na ma:ìi nu-rena-ka-mha

3sgnf-say-REM.P.REP 1sg-OBj bad 1sg-feel-SEQ-PRES.NON.VIS

(292) i-ni-iha

du-a

dhuepa-pidena

phia-misini

2pl-do-APPR 3sgf-say 3sgf-answer-REM.P.REP you-TOO

(293) pi-ˆare

pi-a

pi-tedua-ru-misini-nuku

2sg-disappear 2sg-go 2sg-sister.in.law-TOO-TOP.NON.A/S

(294) pathesedape mawali di-hˆa-nihka-niki

du-a-pidena

the.other.day snake 3sgnf-eat-INF-REC.P.INFR-COMPL 3sgf-say-REM.P.REP

“Why are you crying, Mum’, he said. “You guys made me suffer’, she answered, ‘you disappeared, too, and the day before yesterday a snake ate up your sister-in-law, too’, she said.’

LW/T 07

155

Tariana

(295) duhmeta-sika 3sgf+thing-PRES.INFR

tupe

duha-yana nu-na

PERM.IMPV she-PEJ 1sg-OBJ

(296) du-duiha-ka-kapua 3sgf-dislile-SEQ-BECAUSE

di-a

dhepa-pidena

3sgnf-say 3sgnf+answer-REM.P.REP

“She deserves it, because she disliked me’, he answered.’

(297) nawiki i-sa-do-ne

man

INDF-spouse-FEM-AG

du-kalite-pidana 3sgf-tell-REM.P.REP

(298) di-nu-karu 3sgnf-come-RES

i-peya

nu-na pi-wana-ka

INDF-before 1sg-OBJ 2sg-call-SEQ

(299) tiya-nuku

pi-amhue-ta

pi-rahte-ta

pi-ˆa

plate-TOP.NON.A/S 2sg-turn+CAUS-CAUS 2sg-float+CAUS-CAUS 2sg-hit

(300) tiya-se du-a-pidena

du-kalite

plate-LOC 3sgf-say-REM.P.REP 3sgf-tell-REM.P.REP

(301) du-sa-niri-nuku 3sgf-spouse-MASC-TOP.NON.A/S

diha kay-pima-ka nhuma he thus-sound-SEQ 1sg+hear

(302) nu-a-mhade

pi-dalipa-se

du-a-pidena

du-kalite

1sg-go-PROB.FUT 2sg-near-LOC 3sgf-say-REM.P.REP 3sgf-tell

(303) di-nu-kali

i-peya-nuku

3sgnf-come-PAST.REL.MASC INDF-be.first-TOP.NON.A/S

‘The man’s wife had said before he came, ‘When you call me, turn a plate, make it float and hit the plate’, she said to her husband, ‘when it sounds like this, I will come’, she said before he went.’

(304) nu-na kaka du-a

du-kalite di-a

di-a-hyume

1sg-OBJ thus 3sgf-say 3sgf-tell 3sgf-say 3sgf-say-AFTER:SS

(305) tiya dhita

di-ruku

di-ruku

di-a-pidana

plate 3sgnf+take 3sgnf-go down 3sgnf-go down 3sgnf-say-REM.P.REP

(306) u$i$-se

u:ni-se tiya-nuku

port-LOC water-LOC plate-TOP.NON.A/S

(307) di-amhua-pidana

phu,po,po

3sgnf-turn-REM.P.REP phu,po,po

di-matara di-rahte-ta 3sgnf-leave 3sgnf-float+CAUS-CAUS di-wana-ka-pidena 3sgnf-call-SEQ-REM.P.REP

(308) du-na di-sa-do-nuku 3sgf-OBJ 3sgnf-spouse-FEM-TOP.NON.A/S

“She told me so’, he said. After he said this, he took the plate, went down to the port, made the plate float and turned it: phu, po, po, calling his wife.’

LW/T 07
(309) pa:-kada one-CL:DAY

yamina day

156
ha-do-peru-nuku parent-FEM-OLD:FEM-TOP.NON.A/S

Tariana

(310) di-kalite-pidana

yarana i-sa-do

3sgnf-tell-REM.P.REP white INDF-spouse-FEM

(311) ka-sa-do-ka

nuhua ne-se-nuku

di-a

REL-spouse-FEM-REC.P.VIS I

then-LOC-TOP.NON.A/S 3sgnf-go

(312) ne-se-nuku

di-a

di-kalite-pidana

then-LOC-TOP.NON.A/S 3sgnf-go 3sgnf-tell-REM.P.REP

(313) ha-do-peru-nuku

pi-a

phita

diwesewya-nuku

parent-FEM-OLD:F-TOP.NON.A/S 2sg-go 2sg+get then-TOP.NON.A/S

(314) nu-na-mha

nu-ka du-na du-a-pidena

diha

1sg-want-PRES.NON.VIS 1sg-see 3sgf-OBJ 3sgnf-go-REM.P.REP he

(315) ha-do parent-FEM

haw phia pi-na-mha

pi-ka

phia

yes you 2sg-want-PRES.NON.VIS 2sg-see you

(316) pi-na

nu-maye$-naka

ma-ni-kade nhua

di-a

2sg-OBJ 1sg-cheat+CAUS-PRES.VIS NEG-do-NEG I

3sgnf-say

‘One day he said to his old mother, ‘I am married to a white woman’, he said to his old mother. ‘Go and bring her, I want to see her’, said the mother. ‘Yes, you want to see her, I am not telling you a lie’, he said.’

(317) tiya dhita plate 3sgnf+take

di-ruku

di-a-pidena

di-a

3sgnf-go down 3sgnf-go-REM.P.REP 3sgnf-go

(318) di-wana 3sgnf-call

du-na tiya-nuku

di-amhue-ta

3sgf-OBJ plate-TOP.NON.A/S 3sgnf-turn+CAUS-CAUS

(319) di-rahte-ta

di-ˆa-pidana

pho-pho-pho di-a-ka

3sgnf-float+CAUS-CAUS 3sgnf-hit-REM.P.REP pho-pho-pho 3sgnf-go-SEQ

(320) ya:pi-ku some time

du-ˆu 3sgf-go.up

du-nu-pidena 3sgf-come-REM.P.REP

‘He took the plate, went down, called her, turned the plate, made it float and hit it: phopho-pho, after some time she came up.’

(321) nuhua I

ha-do parent-FEM

du-na-ka

du-ka duhua

3sgf-want-SEQ 3sgf-see she

(322) di-a

di-kalite-pidena

di-sa-do-nuku

3sgnf-say 3sgnf-tell-REM.P.REP 3sgnf-spouse-FEM-TOP.NON.A/S

LW/T 07

157

Tariana

“My mother wants to see (you)’, he said to his wife.’

(323) di-ka-ka-nuku

inaru-pasi-pidena

3sgnf-see-SEQ-TOP.NON.A/S woman-AUG-REM.P.REP

(324) dihya he

ha-do parent-FEM

du-ka-ka-nuku 3sgnf-see-SEQ-TOP.NON.A/S

(325) mawali-pasi-pidena

kawirya-karu-pasi-pidena

ˆamema

snake-AUG-REM.P.REP painted-PURP-AUG-REM.P.REP two+CL:PAIR

(326) kawirya-karu-pasi-pidena painted-PURP-AUG-REM.P.REP

‘For him looking it was a big (and handsome) woman, for her is was a big snake, painted, painted from both sides.’

(327) wasã wa-ka diwesewya-nuku

na:

ne$yu$

let’s 1pl-see then-TOP.NON.A/S 3pl+go 3pl+go.up

(328) na-pidena

duhua

3pl+go-REM.P.REP she

mawali i-sa-do snake INDF-spouse-FEM

(329) yakoleka dhue-ka

door

3sgf+enter-SEQ

du-a

maˆa-pidena

3sgf-go middle-REM.P.REP

(330) nawiki man

ha-do-peru parent-FEM-OLD:FEM

du-ka 3sgf-see

(331) harame dhuema-thani afraid 3sgf+cry-AWAY

du-yami-kha 3sgf-die-AWAY

du-a-pidena 3sgf-go-REM.P.REP

(332) du-yami-wani-pidena

duha duha-ne du-ka-ka

3sgf-die-REALLY-REM.P.REP she she-AG 3sgf-see-SEQ

(333) mawali-pasi-pidena

du-hue

snake-AUG-REM.P.REP 3sgf-enter

du-nu 3sgf-come

“Let’s go and see’. Then they went up, the snake woman came through the door. The old woman saw, she was afraid and cried, she died, she really died, because she saw a huge
snake come in. ‘

(349) ai$-na here-REM.P.VIS

kalisi di-sisa tell-NOM 3sgnf-end

‘Here the story finishes.’

Story 9. A Widow. Author: Jusé Brito.

Uphe-do long.ago+parent-FEM

LW/T 07 Widow

158

Tariana

(1) pa-pio

uphe-do

du-sa-niri

di-yami-kayami

one-CL:TIME long.ago+parent-FEM 3sgf-spouse-MASC 3sgnf-die-AFTER:DS

(2) du-ya du-emhani du-yã-hni-pidana 3sgnf-cry 3sgnf-walk 3sgnf-stay-ANT-REM.P.REP

du:ri-tiki-ne 3sgnf+son-DIM-INS

‘Once there was a widow. After her husband died, she was walking crying with her small son.’

(3) pa-kada

hinipuku-se

one-CL:DAY garden-LOC

du-a-pidana-khani 3sgf-go-REM.P.REP-AWAY

‘One day she went to the garden.’

(4) hinipuku-se garden-LOC

du:ka 3sgf+arrive

mhinisi dhue-ka-pidana worms 3sgf+dig-SEQ-REM.P.REP

(5) duhua hipe

waliku-se

pima

hiku-pidana

kwa!

she what!

ground inside-LOC

sound appear-REM.P.REP

(6) kani-mha

pima-sõ

du-a

dhumeta-pidana

where-PRES.NON.VIS sound-INTER.INFR 3sgf-say 3sgf+think-REM.P.REP

‘She came to the garden, and while she was digging worms (for fishing), there was a sound in the ground. ‘What, where could it be sounding from’, she thought.’

(7) di-pu-mi

dhuma du-theta-pidana

3sgnf-follow-NOM 3sgnf+hear 3sgnf-lean-REM.P.REP

(8) di-apise-pidana

pima

3sgnf-under-REM.P.REP sound

ˆapu spring

kayu-pidana so-REM.P.REP

pima sound

(9) di-mara

di-a

kay du-ni-pidana

dhuka te dhuka

3sgnf-go.down 3sgnf-go so 3sgf-do-REM.P.REP 3sgf+dig until 3sgf+dig

(10) du-keta-pidena

diha u:ni

3sgf-encounter-REM.P.REP he water

(11) di-mara-ni-puna-nuku 3sgnf-go down-TOP.ADV-CL:STRETCH-TOP.NON.A/S

‘After she leaned and heard underneath as if a spring was sounding, as if it was floating down, so she dug and dug until she found the channel of water going down.’

(12) diha-puna-se he-CL:STRETCH-LOC

ne ku:phe maìa-da-pidana

then fish

good-CL:ROUND-REM.P.REP

(13) maìa-peni

ku:phe-mia-pidana

LW/T 07 good-PL:AN

159 fish-ONLY-REM.P.REP

Tariana

(14) puiha tali

tanapyari

kerakanipe

matrinxão aracú.braboaracú.pintado pacú.branco

(15) kerapukuri

thuya

pacu.do.igarapé all.NON.INDIV

ku:phe alia-pidana

fish

EXIST-REM.P.REP

(16) diha-puna-se he-CL:STRETCH-LOC

kada-wa na-mara-niki black-AFF 3pl-float.down-COMPL

‘In this channel there was good fish, only good fish, matrinxão, aracú brabo, aracú pintado, pacú branco, pacú do igarapé, all the fish was there, in this channel, it was black from fish floating.’

(17) kay duha du-ni-ri

du-ema pa-ita

so she 3sgf-do-CONV 3sgf-stay one-CL:AN

nawiki man

(18) hiku-pidena

phia kherukana-pu-naka

appear-REM.P.REP you poor-AUG-PRES.VIS

pi-rena 2sg-feel

(19) piri-tiki-ne

kuphe pi-na-ka

pi-ˆha

2sg+son-DIM-INS fish

2sg-want-SEQ 2sg-eat

(20) ha-yawa-se DEM:INAN-CL:HOLE-LOC

phipa pi-ˆha di-a-pidana 2sg+grab 2sg-eat 3sgnf-say-REM.P.REP

‘While she was doing it, a man appeared. ‘You are in a bad way with your little son. When you want to eat fish, take it from this hole and eat’, he said.’

(22) pawari phipa kanapada

right

2sg+grab how.many

pi-na-ri

pihˆa

2sg-want-CONV 2sg-eat

(23) phipa hanupe pi-na-ka

phipa ˆamema-kapi

2sg+grab many 2sg-want-SEQ 2sg+grab two+CL:SIDE-hand

(24) ku:phe phipa di-yena-ri-se

mhai$da

fish

2sg+grab 3sgnf-exceed-CONV-LOC PROH

(25) phipa di-a-pidana 2sg+grab 3sgnf-say-REM.P.REP

“Take the right number as many as you want to eat, if you want many, take ten, do not take too many’, he said.’

(26) haw du-a-pidana

duha-misini di-a-mi

yes 3sgf-say-REM.P.REP she-TOO

3sgf-say-REM.P.REP

(27) kayu-pidana so-REM.P.REP

du-ni du-yã-nhi 3sgf-do 3sgf-stay-ANT

“Yes’, she said, she was doing, too, as he said.’

LW/T 07

160

Tariana

(28) hinipuku du-a-ka

ka: ˆama-ita

garden 3sgf-go-SEQ so two-CL:AN

madalita

dhupa

three+CL:AN 3sgf+grab

(29) du-yã-nhi-pidana 3sgf-stay-ANT-REM.P.REP

‘When she went to the garden, she used to take two-three fish.’

(30) ehkwapi-pe

hindapada-pidana

kay du-ni

du-yã-nhi

day-REM.P.REP every-REM.P.REP so 3sgf-do 3sgf-stay-ANT

‘Every day she did this.’

(31) kayu du-ni-ka

na-ka diha yakale-peni na-ka

so 3sgf-do-SEQ 3pl-see he village-PL:AN 3pl-see

(32) na-sape-pidena

na-yã-nhi

kwe-hna

3pl-speak-REM.P.REP 3pl-stay-ANT what-INTER.PRES.VIS

du-ni 3sgf-do

(33) du-inu kuphe 3sgf-kill fish

maìa-peni-mia

du-hˆa-ka

na-pidena

good-PL:AN-ONLY 3sgf-eat-SEQ 3pl+say-REM.P.REP

‘While she was doing so, the villagers saw and were talking, ‘How come she gets only good fish to eat’, they said.’

(34) pa-kada

du-siri

di-sata dhima-pidena

one-CL:DAY 3sgf-husband’s.brother 3sgnf-greet 3sgnf+hear-REM.P.REP

(35) kwe-hna what-INTER.PRES.VIS

pi-ni

pinu

kuphe

2sg-do 2sg+kill fish

maìa-peni-mia good-PL:AN-ONLY

(36) di-a-pidena

nhulitu-ka

nu-yã-ka

3sgnf-say-REM.P.REP 1sg+fish-SEQ 1sg-stay-REC.P.VIS

(37) du-a-pidana

dhuepa

3sgf-say-REM.P.REP 3sgf+answer

‘One day her husband’s brother asked, ‘How come you kill only good fish’, he said. ‘I fish’, she answered.’

(38) pa:-kada

duha hinipuku du-a-ka

di-a-pidana

one-CL:DAY she garden 3sgf-go-SEQ 3sgnf-say-REM.P.REP

(39) hi$

piri

nu-ine-pidana

di-dia

de:ri

DEM:AN 2sg+son 1sg-INS-REM.P.REP 3sgnf-stay

banana

(40) alia-ka EXIST-SEQ

diha di-api he 3sgnf-with

nu-hˆa nuha-de-niki 1sg-eat I-FUT-COMPL

LW/T 07

161

Tariana

(41) di-a-pidana

haw du-a-pidana

3sgnf-say-REM.P.REP yes 3sgf-say-REM.P.REP

(42) du-whe-ta

du-a-thani

3sgf-stay+CAUS-CAUS 3sgf-go-AWAY

‘One day when she was going to the garden, he said, ‘Your son will stay with me, there are bananas, I will eat with him’, he said. ‘Yes’, she said, left the son and went.’

(43) du-a-kayami

diha du-siri

diha

3sgf-go-AFTER:DS he 3sgf-husband’s.brother he

(44) emite-tuki-nuku

di-sata-pidana dhima

child-DIM-TOP.NON.A/S 3sgnf-greet 3sgnf+hear

(45) kwe-nihka how-INTER.PAST.VIS

i-ni 2pl-do

ku:phe inu

i-yã-ka

fish

2pl+kill 2pl-stay-SEQ

(46) di-a-pidana

whalitu-ka

wa-yã-ka

3sgnf-say-REM.P.REP 1pl+fish-REC.P.VIS 1pl-stay-SEQ

(47) di-a-pidana

dhepa

diha emite-ne kaika pi-a phia

3sgnf-say-REM.P.REP 3sgnf-answer he child-AG wrongly 2sg-say you

(48) nhulitu-tahka

nu-yã-ka

maìa-peni

ku:phe

1sg+fish-FR+REC.P.VIS 1sg-stay-SEQ good-PL:AN fish

(49) ma-inu-kade-mahka NEG-kill-NEG-REC.P.NON.VIS

di-a-pidana 3sgnf-say-REM.P.REP

‘After she went, her husband’s brother asked the child, ‘How do you kill fish? ‘We fish’, said the child. ‘You lying, I fish in vain, and never get good fish’ he (the man) said.’

(50) puaya-mha

i-ni

else-PRES.NON.VIS 2pl-do

inu

ihia nu-na pi-kalite

2pl+kill you 1sg-OBJ 2sg-tell

(51) di-a-pidana

phia ma-kalite-kade-ka pi-na

3sgnf-say-REM.P.REP you NEG-tell-NEG-SEQ 2sg-OBJ

(52) nu-inu-de-niki 1sg-kill-FUT-COMPL

di-a-pidana 3sgnf-say-REM.P.REP

“You are doing it differently, tell me, if you don’t tell me, I’ll kill you’.’

(53) diha emite-tiki karu-khe-nha he child-DIM afraid-BECAUSE:SS-PAUS

di-kalite-pidana-niki 3sgnf-tell-REM.P.REP-COMPL

(54) hinipuku-se-ka

whepa wa-yã-ka

di-a-pidana

garden-LOC-REC.P.VIS 1pl+grab 1pl-stay-REC.P.VIS 3sgnf-say-REM.P.REP

‘Because the child was afraid, he said, ‘We get it in the garden’.’

LW/T 07

162

Tariana

(55) haw diwesewya-nuku

desu

wa wa-ka di-a-pidana

yes then-TOP.NON.A/S tomorrow 1pl+go 1pl-see 3sgnf-say-REM.P.REP

“Yes, we will see tomorrow’.’

(56) pa:-kada

duhua

one-CL:DAY she

uphe-do-ne

puare-pidana

long.ago+parent-FEM-AG else-REM.P.REP

(57) du-a-khani

maìa-ka

di-hwa-niki

3sgf-go-AWAY good-REC.P.VIS 3sgnf-sit-COMPL

nu-ine 1sg-INS

(58) ikasu now

nu-ine-pida 1sg-INS-3p.IMPV

di-hwa-niki 3sgnf-sit-COMPL

di-a-pidana 3sgnf-say-REM.P.REP

‘The next day the widow went elsewhere, he (the man) said, ‘It is good he (the child) stayed with me (yesterday), let him stay with me now.’

(59) duha du-a-kayami

wasã wa-ka-nha

di-a

dhita

she 3sgf-go-AFTER:DS let’s 1pl-see-PAUS 3sgnf-say 3sgnf+take

(58) di-a-pidana

diha emite-nuku

3sgnf-say-REM.P.REP he child-TOP.NON.A/S

(59) te hinipuku-se until garden-LOC

na:ka-pidana 3pl+arrive-REM.P.REP

‘After she went, ‘Let’s go and see’, he said, he took the child and they came in the garden.’

(60) kani-nihka

diha-puna

di-a-pidana

where-INTER.PAST.VIS he-CL:STRETCH 3sgnf-say-REM.P.REP

di-sata 3sgnf-greet

(61) dhima 3sgnf+hear

ku:phe hipa-ni-puna

fish

2pl+grab-TOP.ADV-CL:STRETCH

(62) di-a-pidana

di-sata

3sgnf-say-REM.P.REP 3sgnf-greet

dhima 3sgnf+hear

“Where is the spring where you get fish from’, he asked.’

(63) ai$-ka here-REC.P.VIS

di-a

dhita

3sgnf-say 3sgnf+take

di-a 3sgnf-go

(64) di-hˆeta-pidana

di-na

3sgnf-show+CAUS-CAUS-REM.P.REP 3sgnf-OBJ

“It was here’, he said, and showed (it) to him.’

(65) diha yakale-peni thuya-peni

na:-niki

naka:

LW/T 07 he village-PL:AN all-PL:AN

163 3pl+go-COMPL 3pl+arrive

Tariana

(66) na-ka-pidana 3pl-see-REM.P.REP

diha-puna-nuku

na-ka-pidana

he-CL:STRETCH-TOP.NON.A/S 3pl-see-REM.P.REP

‘All the villagers came to see, to see this channel.’

(67) harame na

ne maìa-da-pidana

ku:phe na-mara

fear

3pl+go then good-CL:ROUND-REM.P.REP fish

3pl-float

(68) diha-puna-nuku

thuya-pidana

ku:phe alia

he-CL:STRETCH-TOP.NON.A/S all.NON.INDIV-REM.P.REP fish

EX

‘They were frightened, there was good fish floating, all the fish was there.’

(69) diwesewya-nuku

me$da

wa-walita dikwe-se-peni-nuku

then-TOP.NON.A/S indeed 1pl-offer 3sgnf+upstream-LOC-PL:AN-

TOP.NON.A/S

‘Then they (said), ‘Let’s organise an offering feast to those upstream.’

(70) na:-pidana

na:

na-dia-kha

na-nu-pidana

3pl+go-REM.P.REP 3pl+go 3pl-return-AWAY 3pl-come-REM.P.REP

‘They went there and came back.’

(71) duhua she

uphe-do-ne

ne ma-yekade-pidana

long.ago+parent-FEM-AG NEG NEG-know+NEG-REM.P.REP

(72) naha kayu na-ni-nipe-nuku they so 3pl-do-NOM-TOP.NON.A/S

‘The widow did not know that they had done this.’

(73) pa:-kada

na:

na-kalite-pidana

one-CL:DAY 3pl+go 3pl-tell-REM.P.REP

(74) dikwe-se-peni-nuku 3sgnf+upstream-LOC-PL:AN-TOP.NON.A/S

diha-kada-mãˆa he-CL:DAY-MIDDLE

‘The other day they went to tell the ones upstream in the middle of the day.

(75) payaru i-ni

i-na

ku:phe wa-walita-kasu

caxiri

2pl-do 2pl-OBJ fish

1pl-offer-INT

‘Make caxiri (manioc beer), we will make a ritual offering of fish to you.’

(76) haw na:-pidana yes 3pl+say-REM.P.REP

naha-sini they-TOO

‘Yes, they said.’

LW/T 07

(77) kay na:-sita

ku:phe

so 3pl+say-PERF fish

164
neinu 3pl+kill

na-keˆa-pidana 3pl-start-REM.P.REP

Tariana

(78) pa:-kada-ya

na:

hanipa-iha-se-ya

one-CL:DAY-EMPH 3pl+go big+CL:CLOSED.SPACE-APPR-CONTR-EMPH

(79) nheka nhepa-pidana

hanupe-pidana

na-inu

3pl+dig 3pl+grab-REM.P.REP big+CL:CLOSED.SPACE-REM.P.REP 3pl-kill

‘They started killing fish, the very next day they killed a little too many, they dug, they grabbed and killed a lot.’

(80) ka:me-pe-ne watura.basket-PL-INS

nanapi 3pl+take.on.back

na-whanipa-ta-pidana 3pl-transport-REP-REM.P.REP

(81) duhua she

uphe-do

kay-na-ni-ka du-ka du-kalite-tha-pidana

long.ago+parent-FEM so-3pl-do-SEQ 3sgf-see 3sgf-tell-FR-REM.P.REP

(82) mhãi$da inu

du-a-tha-pidana

hanupe-se

PROH 2pl+kill 3sgf-tell-FR-REM.P.REP many-CONTR

(83) mara-kade-ka NEG-order-NEG-SEQ

dinu

diha-yawa

i-mina-ri

3sgnf+kill he-CL:HOLE INDF-boss-MASC

(84) du-a-tha-pidana 3sgf-say-FR-REM.P.REP

ma-na-kade-pidana NEG-want-NEG-REM.P.REP

nhema 3pl+hear

‘They took (fish) on their back in watura-baskets, they transported it, when the widow saw them do it she told them in vain, she said in vain, ‘Don’t kill, the boss of the hole ordered not to kill many.’ They did not want to hear’.

(85) kaika so

p(h)imeriku 2sg+mutter

na:-pidana 3pl+say-REM.P.REP

(86) kay du-a

i-siwa

i-yeka

so 3sgf-say 2pl-be together 2pl-know

du-a-pidana 3sgf-say-REM.P.REP

(87) i-na

nu-kalite-sita

2pl-OBJ 1sg-tell-PERF

nuhua I

du-a-pidana 3sgf-say-REM.P.REP

“You are just muttering for nothing’, they said. Then she said, ‘It is up to you, I have told you,’ she said.’

(88) kay na-ni so 3pl-do

na-inu na-dia 3pl-kill 3pl-return

naka

na-mita-pidana

3pl+arrive 3pl-smoke-REM.P.REP

(89) na-mita na-wa-ni-kada-maˆa 3pl-smoke 3pl-mark-TOP.ADV-CL:DAY-MIDDLE

na: 3pl+go

(81) na-walita-pidana

diha-kada

dekina

du-na

3pl-offer-REM.P.REP he-CL:DAY afternoon+ADV 3sgf-OBJ

LW/T 07
(90) diha-yawite he-CL:HOLE+CL:AN

165
di-mina-ri 3sgnf-boss-MASC

Tariana
di-kalite-pidana 3sgf-tell-REM.P.REP

(91) duha uphe-do-nuku she long.ago+parent-FEM-TOP.NON.A/S

‘So they killed, returned, smoked, they were going to offer (the fish) on the marked day. That day in the afternoon the boss of the hole said to the widow.’

(92) phia-misini pi-a

na-ine mhai$da pira

you-TOO

2sg-go 3pl-INS PROH 2sg+drink

(93) kiaku halia di-swa naha dai nema-pidana

pa-ka-kani

strong early 3sgnf-stay they sleep 3pl+close eyes-REM.P.REP IMP-see-REL:PL

(94) kanhina-mhade

pima

perceiving-PROB.FUT sound

hipe waliku-se earth inside-LOC

di-a-pidana 3sgnf-say-REM.P.REP

“You, too, go with them, don’t drink with them, when it dawns they will be fast asleep, you will recognise the sound in the earth’, he said.’

(95) haw du-a-pidana

duha-sini kay-na-ni pa-kada

yes 3sgnf-say-REM.P.REP she-TOO so-3pl-do one-CL:DAY

(96) na-pidana

khani-nha

3pl+go-REM.P.REP away-PAUS

na:

na-walita-nhi

3pl+go 3pl-offer-ANT

‘Yes, she said, so the next day they went to the offering feast.’

(97) na:ka na-walita kalisu 3pl+arrive 3pl-offer flute

na-phia 3pl-whistle

na-yami-ka 3pl-lose.conscience-SEQ

(98) diha depita-nuku

na-ira

halia-pidana

he night+AFF-TOP.NON.A/S 3pl-drink early-REM.P.REP

‘The next day they arrived and offered, and played the flute, lost conscience (of drinking) this night they drank until early in the morning.’

(99) duhua uphe-do-ne

hanipa-pidana

kawarikupeda

she long.ago+parent-FEM-AG big+CL:CL.SP-REM.P.REP be.sad

(100) kwe-mhade

di-a-sõ

du-a-pidana

dhumeta

what-PROB.FUT 3sgnf-go-INTER.INFR 3sgf-say-REM.P.REP 3sgf+think

‘The widow was very sad. ‘How will it be,’ she thought.’

(101) te halia until early

di-swa na-ira

hekwa-ka

maˆa payaru

3sgnf-stay 3pl-drink midday-SEQ middle caxiri

(102) di-sisa-pidana 3sgnf-finish-REM.P.REP

pa-kada-se-nuku one-CL:DAY-LOC-TOP.NON.A/S

(103) na-kama-pidana

thuy na

dai

LW/T 07

166

3pl-drunk-REM.P.REP all 3pl+go be.asleep

Tariana

(104) nema-ka-pidana

thuy

3pl+close.eyes90-SEQ-REM.P.REP all

na: 3pl+go

‘They were drinking until midday, in the midday the manioc beer finished, the next day all were drunk and fast asleep.’

(105) de:pi night

pa-muˆa duha uphe-do middle she long.ago-parent

dhuma 3sgf+hear

du-kwa 3sgf-hang

(106) maˆa-pidana middle-REM.P.REP

pima sound

mõtõ ìubuìubu.... mõtõ ìubuìubu

‘In the middle of the night the widow heard lying in a hammock, in the middle a sound mõtõ ìubuìubu could be heard,’

(107) kaida-pidana so-REM.P.REP

du-ˆu 3sgf-go.up

du-ema amaku-nuku 3sgf-stand hammock-TOP.NON.A/S

(108) du-panida du-wasa duri-tiki-nuku dhuta 3sgf-tie 3sgf-jump 3sgf+son-DIM 3sgf+take

du-wa-kha 3sgf-enter-AWAY

(109) du-a-pidana 3sgf-go-REM.P.REP

diha yakale whyume-ri-maˆa

keka

he village last-CONV-MIDDLE split

(110) di-uka 3sgnf-arrive

di-ema-pidana 3sgnf-stand-REM.P.REP

‘She got up, untied her hammock, took her little son, went away (into the jungle), in the end of the village it (the ground) was splitting.’

(111) diha-peku-nuku

du-yereta

du-yena-kha

he-CL:SPLIT.SPACE-TOP.NON.A/S

AWAY

(112) du-a-pidana

tuki du-yena

3sgf-go-REM.P.REP

little 3sgf-pass

3sgf-step.across

3sgf-pass-

du-a

diha yakale

3sgf-go he village

(113) maka-yakale di-solo-kha

di-ruku

di-a-pidana

large-village 3sgf-fall.off-AWAY 3sgnf-go.down 3sgnf-go-REM.P.REP

(114) nawiki-ne-ya

nawiki pani-si-pe

people-INS-EMPH people house-NPOSS-PL

(115) di-ˆare-kha

di-ruku

di-a-pidana

3sgnf-disappear-AWAY 3sgnf-go.down 3sgnf-go-REM.P.REP

90 The verb -ima ‘close one’s eyes, sleep’ is cognate to proto-Arawak *ima(ka) (see Payne 1991); it is frequently used in a serial verb construction with dai, dainu ‘be asleep’ to mean ‘sleep’.

LW/T 07

167

Tariana

‘She stepped across the split space, she went on a bit, the big village fell off (into this space), with people, people and houses disappeared and went down.’

(116) du-wa du-a

maka-pusita-tiki

du-ni syawa

3sgf-enter 3sgf-go large-CL:CLEARING-DIM 3sgf-do fire

(117) du-kuka amaku du-tutu duma-pidana 3sgf-lit hammock 3sgf-tie 3sgf+sleep-REM.P.REP

du-a 3sgf-go

‘She went to a small clearing, made fire, tied her hammock, and went to sleep.’

(118) halia di-swa du-nudu-ka-pidana

sede-pidana

early 3sgf-stay 3sgf-come 3sgf-see-REM.P.REP NEG.EX-REM.P.REP

(119) diha yakale maka-nai-pasi-pidana

di-wha-niki

he village big-CL:LAKE-AUG-REM.P.REP 3sgnf-sit-COMPL

‘Early she went to see, the village was not there, a big lake was there.’

(120) kayu di-a-ka

du-ka du-dia

so 3sgnf-go-SEQ 3sgf-see 3sgf-return

du-nu-pidana

te

3sgf-come-REM.P.REP until

(121) du-sani-ri-miki-ri

ya-pani-si-se

3sgf-spouse-MASC-NOM.PAST-MASC POSS-house-NPOSS-LOC

‘After this she went back to her late husband’s village.’

(122) pa-ita one-CL:AN

pedale-nuku

du-dia du-ka

old-TOP.NON.A/S 3sgf-return 3sgf-see

(123) du-kalite-pidana

pi-kisi-pe-wya

maìi-pu-ka-na

3sgf-tell-REM.P.REP

2sg-relative-PL-EXTRAL bad-AUG-SEQ-REM.P.VIS

(124) na-yãre-ka

thuy na

du-a

du-kalite-pidena

3pl-disappear-SEQ all 3pl+go 3sgf-say 3sgf-tell-REM.P.REP

‘She saw and old man and said to him, ‘Your relatives over there are in a bad way, they all disappeared’, she said.’

(125) pa:-kada

du-a

du-ka-pidana

diha-yawa-nuku

one-CL:DAY 3sgf-say 3sgf-see-REM.P.REP he-CL:HOLE-TOP.NON.A/S

(126) sede-pidana

di-ema-niki

kwe

pa-keta-hyu

NEG.EX-REM.P.REP 3sgnf-stand-COMPL what

IMP-meet-TARGET

(127) mahyuna-ma-pidana difficult-EXC-REM.P.REP

hiku-pidana appear-REM.P.REP

di-ni 3sgnf-do

(127) di-ya$⁄re 3sgnf-disappear

diha-yawa he-CL:HOLE

LW/T 07

168

Tariana

‘The next day she went to see the hole, it was not there, it was impossible to see it. This is how the hole disappeared.’

(128) kida ready

di-sisa 3sgnf-finish

‘Ready. The story is finished.’

Story 10. The Tariana language. Author: Graciliano Brito.

Taria yaru-pe Tariana thing-PL Tariana language

(1) hiku-na

di-a

hi$

waku wa-sape-nipe

appear-REM.P.VIS 3sgnf-go DEM:AN 1pl+speech 1pl-talk-NOM

(2) waya-nipe

di-sisa-kasu thuime-sawa-pe

yaru-pe

1pl+speak-NOM 3sgnf-end-INT all.INDIV-CL:GROUP-PL thing,language-PL

‘This is how it was for our speech, our way of talking to finish, for languages of all the groups (too).’

(3) waha we

wa-bueta-ka-rikuse

hi$

di-keˆa

1pl-learn-SEQ-WHILE:DS DEM:AN 3sgnf-begin

di-yã-nhi 3sgnf+stay-ANT

‘This had already started when we were studying.’

(4) kayu-maka this-AFF

kasina-nuku

diha pa-sape-nipe

now+ADV-TOP.NON.A/S he IMP-talk-NOM

(5) di-sisa 3sgnf-end

di-ruku 3sgnf-go.down

di-a-naka 3sngf-go-PRES.VIS

‘This is why now this talk (i.e. language) is finishing.’

(6) payape-se-nuku old.days-LOC-TOP.NON.A/S

waha wa-bueta-ka-rikuse-nuku we 1pl-learn-SEQ-WHILE:DS-TOP.NON.A/S

(7) pai-ne-ya-dapana

pa-yã-hyuna

father-PL-POSS-CL:HAB IMP-live-HABIT

paweya together

(8) taria-sawa

kuphemena-sawa-pe

panuma-pe

yase-ne

Tariana-CL:GROUP Piratapuya-CL:GROUP-PL Guanano-PL Tucano-PL

(9) thuya-sawa-pe

pa-yã-hyuna-na

ne-nuku

all:NON.INDIV-CL:GROUP-PL IMP-live-HABIT-REM.P.VIS then-TOP.NON.A/S

(10) naha they

pai-ne dalipa-se father-PL near-LOC

LW/T 07

169

Tariana

‘In the old days when we were studying we lived all together in fathers’ (i.e. missionaries’) house, the Tariana, the Piratapuya, the Guanano, the Tucano, all the groups together we used to live, at the fathers’ place.’

(11) kayu-maka hi$

yase-niku-mia-na

pa-sape-hyuna

thus-AFF DEM:AN Tucano-PL+AFF-ONLY-REM.P.VIS IMP-talk-HABIT

(12) ne-se-nuku

kayu-maka

then-LOC-TOP.NON.A/S thus-AFF

pha Taria-seri-kheya-nha IMP91 Tariana-INDIV-IN.SPITE-PAUS

(13) diha yase-niku he Tucano-PL+AFF

ma-sape-kadite

kayu ka:-kheya

NEG-talk-NEG+CL:AN thus REL+go-IN.SPITE

‘So we used to speak only Tucano. Though we were Tariana who did not speak Tucano,92 we were this way.’

(14) ne-se-na then-LOC-REM.P.VIS

pha pa-sape pa-bueta na-ine-nuku IMP IMP-talk IMP-learn 3pl-INS-TOP.NON.A/S

‘Then we learnt from them how to speak (Tucano).’

(15) pha pa-sape pa-bueta pa-dia-ka IMP IMP-talk IMP-learn IMP-remain-SEQ

pa:-se-nha IMP+go-LOC-PAUS

(16) pha-niri-ne

dalipa-se pa-dia-ka

IMP+parent-MASC-LOC near-LOC IMP-return-SEQ

paka-nha IMP+arrive-PAUS

(17) yase-niku-ne-mia-na

pa-sape-hyuna-nha

Tucano-PL+AFF-INS-ONLY-REM.P.VIS

IMP-talk-HABIT-PAUS

‘Having learnt how to speak, when we returned to our parents, we used

to speak only Tucano.’

(18) kapemani-ma-mhana

nu-a-ka

nuha

be.ashamed-EXC-MENT 1sg-say-SEQ I

(19) pa:ìi-sini other-TOO

kaya

hi$

kuphemena-ne-sini kaya

like.this DEM:AN Piratapuya-AG-TOO like.this

(20) kayu-mia-na

na:-nha

thus-ONLY-REM.P.VIS 3pl+go-PAUS

91 The impersonal pronoun is often used as first person inclusive, to match the Tucano patterns (cf. Aikhenvald forthcoming-c). 92 This statement indicates that Tucano was not their main language: in the Vaupés those who have some knowledge of a language which is not their father’s are often reluctant to admit they know it at all. This was the case of Maria Brito, the wife of Cândido Brito, a Piratapuya herself, who refused point blank to tell any stories in Tariana; however, her knowledge of at least some parts of the Tariana lexicon was superior to that of her children, ‘legitimate’ Tariana speakers.

LW/T 07

170

Tariana

‘They were really ashamed, I am saying, others, too, the Piratapuya, too, were like that.’

(21) hiku-na

di-a

di-keˆa di-a

hi$

wa-yaru-pe

appear-REM.P.VIS 3sgnf-go 3sgnf-start 3sgnf-go DEM:AN 1pl-thing-PL

(22) pa-sape-nipe kasina-nuku

di-hwe-ta-kasu-nha

IMP-talk-NOM now+ADV-TOP.NON.A/S 3sgnf-fall+CAUS-CAUS-INT-PAUS

‘This is how is started, [the process which led to] dropping our language, our talk.’

(23) kasina-nuku

naha

now+ADV-TOP.NON.A/S they

wa-inipe-se-nha 1pl-children-CONTR-PAUS

(24) na:-naka

na-sape kapemani-ma-naka

nhameta-nha

3pl+go-PRES.VIS 3pl-talk be.ashamed-EXC-PRES.VIS 3pl+feel-PAUS

‘Now our children talk, they feel ashamed (to speak Tariana).’

(25) ya:se-niku-mia-naka

na-sape-hna

Tucano-PL+AFF-ONLY-PRES.VIS 3pl-talk-PAUS

‘They speak only Tucano.’

(26) kasina-nuku now+ADV-TOP.NON.A/S

thuime-sawa-pe all.INDIV-CL:GROUP-PL

(27) dihya he

ya:se-niku-nuku Tucano-PL+AFF-TOP.NON.A/S

na-sape-naka 3pl-talk-PRES.VIS

(28) hiku-na appear-REM.P.VIS

di-a

di-yã-nhi

3sgnf-go 3sgnf-stay-ANT

(29) hi$

wa-yaru-pe

wa-sape-nipe

di-sisa-kasu

DEM:AN 1pl-thing-PL 1pl-talk-NOM

3sgnf-end-INT

‘Now all the groups speak Tucano, this is how it appeared and still is, for our language, our talk to come to an end.’

(30) kasina now+ADV

ka-tawina-kani

kwaka yase-niku-mia-naka

REL-grow-REL:PL what Tucano-PL+AFF-ONLY-PRES.VIS

(31) na-sape-hna wa-yaru-pe-nuku 3pl-talk-PAUS 1pl-thing-PL-TOP.NON.A/S

nhema-naka 3pl+hear-IN.SPITE

(32) nhema-kane

kapemani-ma-naka

3pl+hear-IN.SPITE93 be.shamed-EXC-PRES.VIS

diha-naku he-TOP.NON.A/S

93 -naka -kane is a discontinuous morpheme meaning ‘in spite of’.

LW/T 07
(33) na:-naka 3pl+go-PRES.VIS

na-sape 3pl-talk

171
kasina-nuku now+ADV-TOP.NON.A/S

Tariana

‘Those who grow up now speak only Tucano, in spite of the fact that they understand [Tariana], they are now ashamed of speaking it.’ References Aikhenvald, A. Y. 1994a. ‘Classifiers in Tariana.’ Anthropological Linguistics 36: 405-465. —. 1994b. ‘Grammatical relations in Tariana.’ Nordic Journal of Linguistics 17: 201-218. —. 1995a. Bare. Languages of the World/ Materials 100. München: Lincom Europa. —. 1995b. ‘Person-marking and discourse in North-Arawak languages.’ Studia Linguistica 49: 152-195. —. 1996a. ‘Areal diffusion in North-West Amazonia: the case of Tariana.’Anthropological Linguistics 38: 73-116. —. 1996b. ‘Multilingual and Monolingual Placenames in Tariana.’ Names. A Journal of Onomastics 44: 272-290. —. 1998a. ‘Transitivity increasing operations in Tariana’, pp. 47-60 of Typology of Verbal Categories, edited by L. Kulikov and H. Vater. Linguistische Arbeiten 382. Tübingen: Niemeyer. —. 1998b. ‘Warekena’, pp. 215-439 of Handbook of Amazonian Languages, edited by D. C. Derbyshire and G. K. Pullum, vol.4. Berlin: Mouton de Gruyter. —. forthcoming-a. ‘Arawak languages’, to appear in R.M.W. Dixon and A. Y. Aikhenvald (eds). —. forthcoming-b. ‘Areal diffusion and language contact in the Içana-Vaupes basin, North West Amazonia’, to appear in R.M.W. Dixon and A. Y. Aikhenvald (eds). —. forthcoming-c. ‘Areal diffusion, genetic inheritance and problems of subgrouping: a North Arawak case study.’ —. forthcoming-d. ‘The typology of serial constructions and verb compounding: evidence from Tariana (North Arawak).’ Studies in Language. —. forthcoming-e. ‘Reciprocals and associatives in Tariana: their genetic and areal properties’, to appear in Typology of Reciprocals, edited by V.P.Nedialkov. München: Lincom Europa. —. forthcoming-f. ‘Areal typology and grammaticalization: the emergence of new verbal morphology in an obsolescent language’, to appear in Grammaticalization in the Americas. (Papers from a Symposium, Rice University, Houston: March 1997), edited by Spike Gildea. —. forthcoming-g. ‘Transitivity in Tariana’, to appear in Changing Valency: Case Studies in Transitivity, edited by R.M.W. Dixon and A.Y. Aikhenvald. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. —. forthcoming-h. ‘Double marking of syntactic function in Tariana’, to appear in Festschrift for A.E. Kibrik, edited by E. Rahilina and Ja. Testelec. —. forthcoming-i. Classifiers: A Typology of Noun Categorisation Devices. Oxford: Oxford University Press. —. in prep. A Grammar of Tariana. — and the Brito family. ms. Tariana Vocabulary. —. and R.M.W. Dixon. 1998. ‘Evidentials and areal typology: a case study from Amazonia.’ Language Sciences, 20: 241-57. Amorim, António Brandão de. 1987. Lendas em Nheengatu e em Português. Manaus: Fundo Editorial - ACA. Barnes, J. forthcoming. ‘Tucano’, in R.M.W. Dixon and A. Y. Aikhenvald (eds). Bessa Freire, J. 1983. ‘Da “fala boa” na amazônia brasileira.’ Amerindia 8: 39-83. Béteille, A. 1998. ‘The idea of indigenous people.’ Current Anthropology 39: 187-191.

LW/T 07

172

Tariana

Biocca, E. 1965. Viaggi tra gli Indi. Alto Rio Negro-Alto Orinoco. Vol.1. Roma: Consiglio nazionale delle ricerche.
Brüzzi, Alconcílio Alves da Silva. 1961. Discoteca Etno-lingüístico-musical das tribos dos rios Uaupés, Içana e Cauaburi. São Paulo: Centro de Pesquisas de Iauareté da Missão
Salesiana do Rio Negro. —. 1967. Observações gramaticais da língua Daxseyé ou Tucano. Iauarete: Centro de
Pesquisas de Iauarete. —. 1977. A civilização indígena do Vaupes. Roma: Las. —. 1994. Crenças e lendas do Uaupes. Cayambe-Ecuador: Ediciones Abya-Yala Buchillet, D. 1994. ‘Prefácio’, pp. 5-19 of Brüzzi 1994. Coudreau, H. A. 1886-7. La France equinoxale. 2 vol. (Vol. 2. Voyage à travers les Guyanes
et l’Amazonie). Paris. Derbyshire, D. C. forthcoming. ‘Carib’, in R.M.W. Dixon and A. Y. Aikhenvald (eds). Dixon, R.M.W. 1994. Ergativity. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. Dixon, R.M.W. and A. Y. Aikhenvald 1997. ‘A typology of argument-determined
constructions’, pp. 71-113 of Essays on Language Function and Language Type, edited by J. Bybee, J. Haiman and S. Thompson. Amsterdam: John Benjamins. Dixon, R.M.W. and A. Y. Aikhenvald eds. The Amazonian Languages. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. Galvão, E. 1979. Aculturação indígena no rio Negro, pp. 135-193 of his Encontro de sociedades. Rio de Janeiro: Paz e terra. Giacone, p. 1962. Pequena Gramática e Dicionário da língua Taliaseri, ou Tariana. Salvador: Escola Tipográfica Salesiana. Goehner, M., B.West and W.R.Merrifield. 1985. ‘Tucano (Tucanoan) kinship terminology’, pp. 55-70 of South American kinship: eight kinship systems from Brazil and Colombia, edited by W. Merrifield. Dallas: Summer Institute of Linguistics. Goldman, I. 1948. ‘Tribes of the Uaupés-Caquetá region.’ Bureau of American Ethnology Bulletin 143: 763-98. —. 1979. The Cubeo. Indians of the Northwest Amazon. 2nd edition. Urbana: The University of Illinois Press. Grimes, B. F. 1985. ‘Language attitudes: Identity, Distinctiveness, Survival in the Vaupes.’ Journal of Multilingual and Multicultural Development 6: 389-401. —. ed. 1988. Ethnologue: Languages of the world. Eleventh edition. Dallas: Wycliffe Bible Translators, Inc. Gumperz, J. J. and R. Wilson. 1971. ‘Convergence and creolization. A case from the IndoAryan/Dravidian Border in India’, pp. 151-168 of Pidginization and Creolization of Languages, edited by D. Hymes. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. Harner, M. J. 1984. The Jivaro: People of the Sacred Waterfalls. Berkeley, Los Angeles: University of California Press. Hemming, J. 1987. Amazon Frontier. The Defeat of the Brazilian Indians. London: Macmillan. Huber, R. Q. and R. B. Reed. 1992. Comparative Vocabulary. Selected Words in Indigenous Languages of Colombia. Santafé de Bogotá: Asociación Instituto Lingüístico de Verano. Hugh-Jones, C. 1979. From the Milk River. Spatial and Temporal Processes in Northwest Amazonia. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. Hugh-Jones, S. O. 1979. The Palm and the Pleiades: Initiation and cosmology in Northwest Amazon. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. —. 1988. ‘The gun and the bow.’ L’Homme 106-107, XXVIII: 138-155. Jackson, J. E. 1974. ‘Language identity of the Colombian Vaupés Indians’, pp. 50-64 of Explorations in the Ethnography of Speaking, edited by R. Bauman and J. Sherzer Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

LW/T 07

173

Tariana

Jackson, J. E. 1976. ‘Vaupés marriage: a network system in the Northwest Amazon’, pp. 65- 93 of Regional analysis. Vol. II. Social systems, edited by C. A. Smoth. New York:
Academic Press. Jackson, J. E. 1983. Fish People. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. Kaufman, T. 1990. ‘Language history in South America: what we know and how to know
more’, pp. 13-74 of Amazonian Linguistics. Studies in Lowland South American Indian Languages, edited by Doris L. Payne. Austin: University of Texas Press. Koch-Grünberg, T. 1909/10. Zwei Jahre unter den Indianern, Reisen in Nordwest-Brasilien, 1903-1905. 2 vols. Berlin: Ernst Wasmuth. —. 1911. ‘Aruak-Sprachen Nordwestbrasiliens und der angrenzenden Gebiete.’ Mitteilungen der anthropologischen Geselschaft, Wien, vol. 41:33-153, 203-282. Loukotka, C. 1968. Classification of South American Indian Languages. Los Angeles: Latin American Centre, University of California. Martins, S. A. 1994. Análise da morfosintaxe da língua Dâw (Maku-Kamã) e sua classificação tipológica. MA Thesis: Florianópolis, Brazil. Martins, S. A. and V. Martins. forthcoming. ‘Makú’, in R.M.W. Dixon and A. Y. Aikhenvald (eds). Martius, K. F. 1867. Beiträge zur Ethnographie und Sprachenkunde Amerikas, zumal Brasiliens. 2 vol. Leipzig. Moore, D. L., S. Facundes and N. de Nascimento Pires. 1994. ‘Nheengatu (Língua Geral Amazônica), its history and the effects of language contact’, pp. 93-118 of Proceedings of the Meeting of SSILA July 2-4, 1993 and the Hokan-Penutian Workshop, July 3, 1993, edited by Margaret Langdon. SCOIL Report 8. Berkeley: University of California. Moreira, I. P. and A. B. Moreira. 1994. Mitologia Tariana. Manaus: Instituto Brasileiro do Patrimônio Cultural. Nimuendajú, C. 1982. Textos indigenistas. São Paulo: Ed. Loyola. Oliveira, A. E. de. 1975. A terminologia de parentesco Baniwa. Boletim do museu paraense Emílio Goeldi nº 56 (Anthropologia). Payne, David L. 1991. ‘A classification of Maipuran (Arawakan) languages based on shared lexical retentions’, pp. 355-499 of Handbook of Amazonian Languages, vol. 3, edited by D. C. Derbyshire and G.K. Pullum. Berlin: Mouton de Gruyter. Ramirez, Henri. 1997. A fala Tukano dos Yepâ-masa. Tomo 1. Gramática. Manaus: Inspetoria Salesiana. Reichel-Dolmatoff, G. 1971. Amazonian Cosmos: The Sexual and Religious Symbolism of the Tukano Indians. Chicago: Univeristy of Chicago Press. —. 1986. Desana. Simbolismo de los indios Tukano del Vaupes. Bogotá: Nueva biblioteca colombiana de cultura. Rodrigues, Aryon Dall'Igna. 1986. Línguas Brasileiras. Para o conhecimento das línguas
indígenas. São Paulo: Ed. Loyola. Silverwood-Cope, P. L. 1990. Os Makú. Povo caçador do Noroeste da Amazônia. Brasília:
Editora da UNB. Sorensen, A. P. Jr. 1967(1972). ‘Multilingualism in the Northwest Amazon’, American
Anthropologist, 69: 670-684 (reprinted in: (1972), pp. 78-93 of Sociolinguistics, edited by J. B. Pride and J. Holmes. Penguin Modern Linguistics readings). — 1985. ‘An Emerging Tukanoan Linguistic Regionality: Policy Pressures’, pp. 140-156 of South American Indian Languages: Retrospect and Prospect, edited by H. M. Klein and L. Stark. Austin: University of Texas Press. Stradelli, E. 1890. ‘Il Vaupes e gli Vaupes.’ Bolletino della Società Geográfica Italiana, 3rd ser., vol. 3: 425-453. Tatevin, P. C. 1910. La langue Tapîhîya dite Tupî ou Nee$ngatu. Grammaire, dictionnaire et textes. Vienne: Kaizerliche Akademie der Wissenschaften.

LW/T 07

174

Tariana

Wallace Alfred R. 1972(1853). A narrative of travels on the Amazon and Rio Negro. New York: Dover edition.
West, Birdie. 1980. Gramática popular del Tucano. Santafé de Bogotá: Instituto Lingüístico de Verano. Wright, R. M. 1992. ‘História indígena do noroeste da Amazônia: hipóteses, questões e
perspectivas’, pp. 253-266 of História do índios no Brasil, edited by Manuela Carneiro da Cunha. São Paulo: Companhia das Letras: Secretaria Municipal de Cultura: FAPESP.

LW/T 07

149

Tariana

Index
accent, 17 acculturation, also see cultural change, 14, 29 adjectives, 18, 19 affines, 29, 30 agnates, 29, 30 Aiari, 8, 9, 10 Amarizana, 8 Amorim, A., 16 Andes, 15 Apui, 10, 13, 86 Arawak, 8, 9, 10, 13, 14, 17, 18, 19, 20,
21 Arawak(an), 8, also see Arawak areal diffusion, see convergence and
Tucano influence artefacts, 22 Aruák, see Arawak aspect, 18
Baniwa, 8, 9, 10, 11, 14, 15, 17, 20, 22, 25, 28, 30, 32, 35, 38, 88
Baniwa, Tariana relations with, 28 Baniwa of Guainia, 8, also see Warekena Baniwa of Içana, see Baniwa Bará (East Tucano), 9, 32 Bará, 28, also see Kakua-Nukak Barasano, 9, 29, 33 Bare, 8, 9, 20, 33 Barnes, J., 9, 10, 18 Beks&ta, C., 13, 16, 28 belief system, also see mythology, 30, 32 Bessa Freire, J., 9 Béteille, A., 10 beverages, 22 Biocca, E., 16, 21, 26, 28 Brito, Cândido, 11, 15, 28, 29, 37, 39,
45, 69, 83 Brito, Graciliano, 16, 17, 38, 103, 141 Brito, Jusé, 38, 132 Brito, Juvino, 37, 38, 88, 110 Brito, Maria, 35, 142 Brito, Olívia, 35, 38, 93

Brito family, 11, 16, 17, 21, 27, 28, 29, 36, 37
Brüzzi, A., 10, 11, 13, 14, 15, 16, 21, 22, 25, 26, 28, 29, 30, 35, 36
Buchillet, D., 14 Buopé, 13
Carapana, 9, 20 Carib, 28
Catholic church, see Catholic missionaries Catholic missionaries, 9, 11, 12, 15, 16,
30, 38, 142 causatives, 17, 18 Central Tucano, 9, 20 ceremonies, 10, 34 Christianity, 30 cigar, 10, 34 classifiers, 18, 19, 21 clause linking, 18 convergence, also see Tucano influence,
10, 11, 17-20, 142 Coudreau, H., 16 Cubeo, 9, 10, 20, 28, 29, 33 cultural change, 11, 14, 29
dabucuri, also see festivals, 36 Dâw, 9, 20 Dekwana, 28 demonstratives, 17, 18, 19 Derbyshire, D.C., 28 Desano, 9, 11, 14, 15, 28, 33, 29 Dixon, R.M.W., 17, 18, 36
East Tucano, 8, 9, 10, 11, 14, 17, 19, 20, 21, 33
ergativity, 17 ex-Makú, 10, 26 exchange between tribes, 10, 28 exogamy, 8, also see marriage
Ferreira, A. R., 13, 15 festivals, 22

LW/T 07

149

Tariana

fishing, 22 food, 22 food taboos, 33 fruit, 22
Galvão, E., 21, 25, 26 garments, 25 gender, grammatical, 19 gender roles, 22 Giacone, p., 16 Gilij, p., 8 Goehner, M., 29 gold, Tariana knowledge of, 15 Goldman, I., 21, 26, 29 Grimes, B., 9 Guanano, 9, 11, 12, 13, 15, 20, 28, 29,
44, 102, 142 Guarequena, see Warena Gumperz, J.J., 10 Harner, M.J., 22, 25, 33 Hemming, J., 15 hierarchical organisation, 10, 17, 26, 28 Hohôdene, 15, 28, 38, also see Baniwa Huber, 16 Hugh-Jones, C., 21, 25, 26, 29, 30 Hugh-Jones, S., 21, 26, 29, 33, 35, 36 hunting, 22 Hupda-Yuhup, 9, 20
Iauarete, 8, 14, 15, 25 Iauarete, Tariana of, 17 Içana, 8, 9, 10, 11, 22, 25, 35 identity, language as, 10, 16 Indo-European languages, 9 initiation, female, 33 initiation, male, 33 innovations of Tariana, 8, 17, 19 Ipanoré, 14, 15, 16 Ipanoré, Tariana of, 17 Iyäine, Iyemi, 16
Jackson, J.E., 9, 11, 21, 26, 29, 30, 32, 33, 35, 38
Ji-Ponta, 8 Jivaro, 25, 33

Kakua, 28 Kakua-Nukak, 9 Kaline (a Tariana subtribe), 16, 26, 28, 36 Kaufman, T., 8 kinship terms, 21, 30, 31 kinship system, 29, 30, 31, 32 Koch-Grünberg, T., 8, 10, 13, 15, 16,
17, 25 Koreguaje, 20 Kumandene, 16 Kupwar, 10 Kurripako, 8, also see Baniwa
language attrition, see language obsolescence
language endangerment, 10, 11, 15, 16, 21-22
language obsolescence, 8, 10, 11, 15, 16, 21-22
lexical shifts, 20 loanwords, 20 loanwords, inhibition against, 8, 10, 20 longhouse, 25, 26, 27 lingua franca of the Vaupes, 9, 11, 16 lingua franca, Nheengatu as, 9, 11 lingua franca, Tucano as, 9, 11, 16 Língua Geral, see Nheengatu Loukotka, 16
Macuna, 9 Maipuran, or Maipurean, 8, also see
Arawak Makiritare, 28 Makú, 8, 9, 10, 11, 14, 15, 19, 21, 22,
26, 28, 30 Makú, Tariana relations with, 28 Manao, 8 Mandawaca (Mawaca), 8 marriage, 9, 10, 21, 29, 30, 31, 32 mythology, 30 Martins, S., 9, 10, 28 Martins, V., 9, 28 Martius, K., 15, 16 Mayhene, 29 meals, 25 menstruation, 33, 35

LW/T 07

149

Tariana

Merrifield, W., 29 missionaries, see Catholic missionaries mood, 18 moon, myths about, 30, 34, 35 Moore, D., 9 Moreira, I., 8, 16, 36 Moreira, A., 8, 16, 36 multilingualism, 8, 9, 10 Muniz, Anibal, 16 Muniz, Eliseu, 16
Nadëb, 20 naming, 36 Natterer, J., 15 Nheengatu, also Língua Geral, 9, 11, 12,
14, 15,16, 20 Nheengatu, Tariana name for, 9 Nheengatu, as lingua franca, 9, 11 Nimuendajú, C., 8, 10 Noronha, J., 13, 15 North Arawak, see Arawak
offering, 34 Old Warekena, see Warena Oliveira, A.E., 32
Paca (river), 9 Papurí, 9, 13, 15 Passe, 8 passive, 18 Payne, D.L., 8, 139 phonology, 17, 20 phratry, 26 Piratapuya, 9, 10, 26, 29, 33, 102, 142 place names, 11-14 plural, 18, 30 poison, fish, 22 polysynthesis, 17, 18 Portuguese, 9, 10, 11, 12, 20, 21, 22, 26,
30, 33, 35, 36 possession, 19 pronouns, 19, 21 Proto-Arawak, 8, 17, 139
Querarí, 9, 13, 50

Ramirez, H., 18 Reed, R.B., 16 Reichel-Dolmatoff, G., 21, 25, 35 Rodrigues, A.D., 8, 9, 16 Rodrígues, Marcília, 38
Salesians, see Catholic missionaries Sampaio, F.X.R., 13, 15 season, dry, 23, 24 season, rainy, 23, 24 Secoya, 20 serial verbs, 18, 22 shamans, 21, 33, 34 sib, 26 Silva da, Candelário, 25, 33 Silverwood-Cope, P., 10, 28 Siona, 20 Siriano, 9 snake people, 33 ‘soldiers’, or underlings, 10, 28, 29 Sorensen, A., 9, 10, 21, 26, 29 Spanish, 9, 10 spirits, 36 Spruce, R., 15 Stradelli, E., 16 subtribes,also see hierarchical
organisation, 10, 17, 26, 28 switch-reference, 17, 18, 21
taboos, 25, 35 Taiwano, 9 Tanimuca-Retuama, 20 Tariana, autodenomination of, 16 Tariana, dialects of, 16, 17, 26 Tariana, putative migrations of, 11 Tatevin, P.C., 20 Tatuyo, 9, 20 tense, 18 Tiquié, 9, 15 Tucanised Makú, 10 Tucano, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 17,
18, 19, 20, 21, 22, 25, 26, 28, 29, 30, 33, 35, 36, 38, 110, 142, 143 Tucano, loans from, 20 Tucano, as lingua franca, 9, 11, 16 Tucano, putative migrations of, 11

LW/T 07

149

Tucano influence on Tariana, see convergence
Tucano-speaking Tariana, 14, 16 Tupí-Guaraní, 9 Tupinambá, 9 Tuyuca, 9, 10
Uaupé, 15 Upper Aiari, see Aiari Upper Rio Negro, 8, 9, 13, 15, 33
Vaupés, cultural homogeneity of, 21, 22, 30
Vaupés, language contacts in, 11, 15 Vaupés, multilingualism of, 8, 11 Vaupés, names of, 13
Waimaja, 9, 20 Wainuma, 8 Wallace, A., 15,16 Wamiarikune (the only Tariana subtribe
which has preserved the language), 12, 16, 26, 28, 37 Warekena, 8, 9, 17, 20 Warena, 8, 28 West Tucano, 20 West, B., 29 Wheeler, A., 16 white people, 33 Wilson, R., 10 Wirina, 8 Wright, R.M., 13
Xié, 8, 28 Xinguan Arawak, 18
Yabaana, 8 Yanomami, 9, 28 Yawi, Yavi (an erroneous name for
Tariana), 16 year, structure of, 23, 24 Yumana, 8 Yurupary-tapuya, 16 Yurupary flute, 28, 30, 35, 37, 39, 40,
41, 83, 84, 88 Yuruti, 9, 20

Tariana

