CLAUSE TYPES IN TATANA

CLAUSE TYPES IN TATANA9

Inka Pekkanen

Q-Ut.lia.e-

0 1 2 2.1 2.2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 16.1 16.1.1 16.1.2 16.1.3 16.2

Introduction Tritransitive clause Bitransitive clauses Bitransitive clause # Transitive clause with designation complement Declarative transitive clause Reciprocal clause Compound transitive clause Formulaic transitive clause Declarative intransitive clause Descriptive clause Ambient clause Stative clause Existential clause Location clause Possession clause-1 Possession clause-2 Equational clause Modifications of clauses Interrogative, modification Information interrogative clause Yes-no interrogative clause Alternative interrogative clause Command modification

ABBREVIATIONS

acto alt, altera atemp aux benef cl classif comm compl conn decl def descr, descript du ex exist ind intrans inc

actor alternative atemporal auxiliary verb benefactive clause classifier command suffix completive marker connector declarative definite description, descriptive dual exclusive existential indefinite intransitive inclusive

176

SABAH SYNTAX PAPERS

loc mod n*n perf phr pmkr pprn, pred^ qu. recipr ref RF
krel
trans, transit UF vb wd i?
0 Introduction

location modifier noun initial consonant perfective phrase plural person marker pronoun predicate question reciprocal referent referent focus relator particle sentence singular stauve transitive undergoer focus verb word underlying consonant material added for clarification gloss unknown clause break of a root

The Tatana’ language is spoken by approximately 5,500 people in the Kuala Penyu district in the southwestern part of the state of Sabah in Malaysia.

The purpose of this paper is to make an initial study of clause-level struc­ tures in Tatana’. Verb morphology is not within the scope of this study. Also, cer­ tain features are perceived as pertaining to sentence level and are therefore excluded. They include such things as dependent versus independent clauses, topicalization, and the use of modifiers.

The research for this paper was conducted in 1980-81 and 1983-84 in the vil­ lages of Kinontungan and Kulung-Kulung under the auspices of the Summer In­ stitute of Linguistics. The findings were analyzed and written up in a linguistic workshop held in Kota Kinabalu in April-May 1984. I wish to thank the workshop consultant, Dr. Charles Peck, for his help and suggestions. I also wish to thank the following Tatana’ speakers who have contributed texts for analysis: Encik Matthew Hunggim, Encik Cosmas Ah Gang, Puan Moto Elong, and Puan Aniang Wong Kiau.

CLAUSE TYPES IN TATANA’

177

1 Tritransitive Clause

The Tritransitive Clause expresses the action of doing something for some­ one for someone else. It uses, for instance, transitive verbs that express modes of cooking or serving food, with the meaning that the actor makes or does something for another person so that he can enjoy it, and at the same time does it for another person, thus relieving him.

The imperative Tritransitive Clause has a predicate and an undergoer as obligatory elements. Benefactive and referent are optional elements that follow the predicate but precede the undergoer. All the examples have at least one optional element in addition to the obligatory ones.

In the datathat was available atthe time ofthis study, theTritransitive Clause occurred only in commands.

Imperative Tritransitive Clause

+ Pred + Benefactive

_±_Referent

+ Undergoer

trans. vb pronoun

pronoun noun phrase

noun phrase

Examples of the Tritransitive Clause:

The next example has a full array of constituents.

PRED 1 Tuang -i’
make-comm

BENEF gulu’ daki’ mod for.me

REF

UNDERGOER

ulun dogiano do kupi’

people those rel coffee

‘Make some coffee for those people for me!’

The following example has a Referent but no Benefactive.

PRED 2 lib-i’
pour-comm

REF

aku po

I

mod

UNDERGOER do kupi’ rel coffe

‘Pour me some coffee!’

178

SABAH SYNTAX PAPERS

The following example has a Benefactive but no Referent.

PRED

BENEF UNDERGOER

3

Iib-i’

daki’

do kupi’ in!

pour-comm for.me rel coffee that

Tour that coffee for me!’

2 Bitransitive Clauses

2.1 Bitransitive Clause

The Bitransitive Clause involves three participants: an actor, usually a per­ son; a referent to whom something is given or done; and an undergoer, usually in­ animate. The verbs that have been found to occur in Bitransitive Clauses include such verbs as taak ‘give’, bagi 'give, share’, tuduk ‘teach, show9, tanda’ ‘make a thing/person into something’.

The Bitransitive Clause in its full form has an array of predicate, actor, referent, and undergoer. Only one example has been found with all the constituents in the data. Usually a constituent is omitted if it can be understood from the con­ text.

Most of the examples in the data are relativized Bitransitive Clauses. In those clauses, the predicate plus one other constituent are always obligatory. It is very common, however, to have three constituents. The relativized clause cannot have all four constituents because the missing one is expressed by the head of the noun phrase in which the Bitransitive Clause is embedded.

Bitransitive Clause

+Bitr. Pred. JiActor JJReferent

+ Undergoer

bitransit, vb taak ‘give’ bap ‘share, give’ tuduk ‘teach, show* tanda9‘make’

pronoun pronoun noun phrase

noun phrase.

CLAUSE TYPES IN TATANA’

179

Rule:

The Bitransitive Clause often occurs as a relative clause, in which case either referent or undergoer or both are omitted. Examples of the Bitransitive Clause:

The next example has the full array of constituents.

PRED 4 Ma-m{b}agi
...-give

ACTOR REF UNDERGOER

kau ovo daki’ do antalu’. songkuo

you(pl) if for.me rel egg

how.much

bagu kau mod you

mongi-rogo daki’ so- linsou?

...-charge

for.me one-classif

I f you give me some of your eggs, how much do you charge for one?'

The following example has no undergoer.

5 No-

PRED

ACTOR

pongo poyo, pa-taak-on nisifi do

finish when caus-give-UF by.her rel

REFERENT gonyupi priestess

‘When that is finished, she gives [it] to the priestess.’

The following example has a relative clause which has neither referent nor undergoer.

6 Na, gii well that

PRED ACTOR

no makanan mai taak nu orang puti.

compl food

our(ex) give

by people white

‘Well, that was the food that was given to us by the Westerners.’

The following example is a clause with no actor. The actor is understood from the preceding clause, and the referent is understood from the preceding sen­ tence, to which the deictic gil ‘that’ refers.

180

SABAH SYNTAX PAPERS

7 Gii that

no bagu compl mod

tonokon boil

PRED

UNDERGOER

mai tanda-an do akanon. akanon

we(ex) make-RF rel food eat

jangan daging. with meat

‘That was what we cooked and made into food, which we ate with meat/

2.2 Transitive Clause with Designation Complement

The Transitive Clause with Designation Complement is structurally similar to the Bitransitive Clause. It is different from it in that both the referent and un­ dergoer (or designation complement) are non-human and often also inanimate. The only verb that has been found to occur in the clause type is the verb stem pungaran ‘to call, name a thing something’. Examples of the Transitive Clause with Designation Complement:

The next example has the full array of constituents.

8 Jadi intad dino so from that

om conn

PRED

ACTOR

no-pungaran-an bagu nu ulun dogiari

...-name-RF

mod by people those

REFERENT DESIG.COMPL ionon dogii do Kampung Supra, place that rel village Sugira

singkoit Kampung Kosugira nowadays village Kosugira

‘So from that time on those people called that place Sugira Village, nowadays Kampung Kosugira.’

The following example illustrates the occurrence of this clause as a relative clause. The referent is absent.

9 ...

kokito niro bagu songinan lulu miad do nipo gayo saw they mod one.classif animal like rel snake big

PRED gii p-in-ungaran-an that *-past~call-RF

ACTOR DESIG.COMPL.

mm

da Jxffllfflk...

they

rel boruruk

CLAUSE TYPES IN TATANA’

181

‘.. they saw an animal which was like a big snake and which they called a boninik.’

3 Declarative Transitive Clause

The Declarative Transitive Clause has a transitive verb or a transitive verb phrase as its nuclear constituent.

The verb phrase comprises two verbs. The first verb is most commonly ongol ‘go’or a form of an auxiliary verb mang ‘do, want’, but such verbs as pongo ‘finish’, kinam ‘try5, timpuun ‘start’, and alap ‘can, be able, get’have also been found in this slot. The verb mang usually occurs in the referent focus forms mangi’, minangan, or minaan. The second verb is a declarative transitive verb. In undergoer focus it has the atemporal form with the suffix -o’. In actor focus the second verb has the pform of a prefix.

The actor, undergoer, instrument, location, and manner of the transitive clause are optional constituents. The majority of examples have an actor and an undergoer. In the data, the instrument occurs only in clauses where the verb is in undergoer focus. Transitive Clauses with instrument occur mostly in activity dis­ courses where the actor is a general person and is not explicitly expressed. The un­ dergoer is obvious from the context. Location and manner are relatively rare constituents in the Declarative Transitive Clause.

The Declarative Transitive Clause occurs as a dependent clause expressing purpose or undergoer within a sentence. Such a clause is preceded by the relator particle do.

Declarative Transitive Clause

+ Decl.Trans. JiActor Pred

+ Under- -hlnstru-

goer

ment

+ Loc

,+ Manner

decl.trans. vb
verb phrase

pronoun
noun hr
proper nn

pronoun noun phr
noun hr
embedded cl

loc.wd loc.phr

manner phr

182

SABAH SYNTAX PAPERS

Rules:

1. Actor may permute in such a way as to split the predicate. Only a pronoun acted this way in the corpus of data.

2. Actor, undergoer, or location may permute to a prepredicate position for emphasis.

3. Location and manner have not been found to cooccur in the corpus of data.

4. Undergoer may permute to a position following the predicate but preced­ ing the actor. In the only example available, the verb is in undergoer focus and the undergoer is a pronoun.

5. A dependent Declarative Transitive Clause is preceded by the relator par­ ticle do.

Examples of Declarative Transitive Clause:

The next example illustrates a maximum expansion.

10 Kaalap

po

niro boruruk dogiiom

go mod they boruruk that and aux

mango’o niro tataa’ .. they cut.open

PRED

ACTOR UNDERGOER

tinoi’ no om

kito no nisiro inan m

anak andu’

belly its and ...

-see compl they body of

child female

LOCATION dogii sino do that there in

tinoi’ nu belly of

boruruk i boruruk def

‘They got the boruruk (mythical beast) and cut its belly open and they saw the body of the girl in the boruruk’s belly.’

The following example illustrates a minimal clause.

PRED 11 ... kulit nu lulu
skin of animal

dogii minaan niro tuugo’

that aux

they dry

tinau om put.away and

CLAUSE TYPES IN TATANA’

183

gmuna’ do used rel

tinanda’ made

do gandang... rel drum

‘... the skin of that animal they dried, put [it] away, and used [it] to make a drum

The following example illustrates the actor permuting to split the predicate.

PRED 12 Kogura’ po anak andu’ dogii ongov-o’
mod child female that go-atemp

ACTOR q nisio .. she

PRED gomit-o’ take.in.hand-UF

UNDERGOER bunga’ dogii tu flower that for

kasalanan like.a.lot

o

kopio nisio busak dogii ..

very she flower that

Then the girl went to take that flower, for she liked that flower very much

The following example illustrates the forefronting of location and actor.

LOCATION ACTOR

PRED

13 ...sabap sino no ulun dogiari n-ongoi alap do

because there compl people those past-go get rel

■UMPJEEGQEE
tataun marabau
wood ‘marabau’

do pino..ny{s}ugira’ niro do rel lift.up.with.lever they rel

boruruk i. boruruk def

‘... because it was there that those people went to get hardwood called ‘marabau’, which they used as a lever to lift the boruruk up.’

The following example illustrates rule 4, according to which the undergoer may permute to a position between predicate and actor.

184

SABAH SYNTAX PAPERS

PRED UNDERGOER ACTOR

14 Ipag-on kau nu raja* rnuvun. raja* Suleiman.

call-UF you(pl) by

king your(pl) king Suleiman

‘Your king, King Suleiman, is calling you.’

The following example has m instrument tagmeme. All the examples con­ taining an instrument tagmeme m the corpus have the verb in undergoer focus. None have an undergoer either because it is obvious from the context or because the clause is relativized.

PRED

INSTRUMENT

15 Om poykaan poyo om sumboli-on ho bagu j |o sandung

conn tieiegs when conn slaughter-UF mod mod with bushknife

‘And when they have tied [the buffalo’s] legs, they will slaughter it with a bushknife.’

The following example illustrates a quoted Declarative Transitive Clause.

16 Jadi intad dogii nokolodong o pobanar buayo

om

so

from that gotangry

... really crocodile and

bajanji’ promise

o nogii isiro ... mod they

TIME do kas nogii rel not more

PRED

UNDERGOER

mo-n{t}ulung do palanuk

...-help

rel mousedeer

dogii. that

‘So from then on the crocodiles got really angry and promised they would never again help that mousedeer.’

4 Reciprocal Clause

The Reciprocal Clause has the meaning of two or more people doing some­ thing to each other. The verb has the reciprocal prefix mi- (or nl-/pi-). Actor is obligatory and is expounded by a dual or plural pronoun in all the examples in the data. Actor may be forefronted to a prepredicate position, probably for emphasis. The Reciprocal Clause has an optional time margin.

CLAUSE TYPES IN TATANA’

185

iT im e time phrase

Reciprocal Clause

+ Recipr. Pred.

+ Actor

trans.vb with mi-/ei-/pi- dual/pl pn

Examples of the Reciprocal Clause:

The next example has a full array of constituents.

TIME 17 Ontok odou koturu’
time day seventh

PRED

ACTOR

mi-tamu kito

bagu.

recipr-meet we(du) mod

‘On the seventh day we two will meet.’

The following example has a forefronted actor.

ACTOR PRED

18 Isiro

ni-wal.

they

recipr-quarrel

‘They quarreled with each other.’

5 Compound Transitive Clause

The Compound Transitive Clause involves the transitive verb ibit ‘take, bring’ and another verb that expresses motion or direction. Other verbs express­ ing modes of carrying may occur in place of Ibit, but so far only one example has been found, and in it do occurs preceding the verb of motion. It might be argued that such clauses should be analyzed as sentences with two clauses. However, the clauses seem to be very closely knit.

Both elements, taking a thing and getting it to a destination, are vital to the meaning of the clause. Apparently, then, one could not say, "He will take you to his house," without using a motion verb as well.

Actor and undergoer are optional elements of the Compound Transitive Clause. Actor is present in most of the examples. Undergoer is obligatorily absent in a relativized clause when the transitive verb is in undergoer focus. Location, or

186

SABAH SYNTAX PAPERS

destination, is an obligatory constituent except with the verb uIP 'return home’, in which case it is implicit.

Compound Transitive Clause

+Pred JiActor

Jjjnder- + Pre goer

+ Location

trans.vb ibit vbof ‘carrying’

pronoun

pronoun

intrans.vb loc. phrase motion vb

Examples of a Compound Transitive Clause:

The next example has a full array of constituents.

PRED 19 Ibit-on
take-UF

ACTOR ku I

UNDERGOER PRED LOCATION

okou

m-ongoi do baloi nu ulun.

you(sg)

...-go rel house of people

‘I’ll take you to someone’s house.’

The following example has the verb babo* ‘carry on back’ as the first verb.

20 Kogura’ po sumandak dogii puruto’ o nisio lapung i om mod maiden that pick.up ... she python def and

posuango’ o nisio do bakul

om

put inside ... she in back.basket and

PRED PRED
kib.Q.-.Q.’ carry.on.back-atemp

dn mikbuli’. rel ...-past-go.home

‘Then the maiden picked up the python and put it into the back basket and took it home on her back.’

The following example is a relativized clause with no undergoer. Location is implicit in the verb e lf ‘return home’.

CLAUSE TYPES IN TATANA’

187

21 Koiso no wanang is.not compl catch

PRED ACTOR

PRED

do in-ibit nisiro

m-uli’.

rel past-take they

...-go.home

There was no catch which they could take home.’

6 Formulaic Transitive Clause

The Formulaic Transitive Clause has a quoted clause or sentence as its un­ dergoer. It is common for the Formulaic Transitive Clause both to precede and fol­ low the quote. It can also occur in the middle of a quoted sentence. Another verb of saying may occur with the usual quote verb kon.

kon ‘say5has the following forms in different persons:

ka ku ‘I said’ ka mu ‘you (sg) said’ kon nisio ‘he/she said’ ka muyun ‘you (pi) said’

ka takau

‘we (inc) said’

ka mai’

‘we (ex) said’

ka kito

‘we (two) said’

kon nisiro ‘they said’

Formulaic Transitive Clause

+ Predicate

+ Actor

quote verb verb phrase

pronoun noun phrase proper name

Examples of a Formulaic Transitive Clause:

The next example illustrates the occurrence of the clause preceding and fol­ lowing the quote.

22 Jadi, pokosuang o Gipun

so

have.entered .. Japanese

PRED ACTOR do Langkun, mang kon j&u in Langkon aux say the

kabqjauan, lfkaa nini’ maraat Gipun, moonsoi," kon.

Bajaus not mod bad Japanese good

say

188

SABAH SYNTAX PAPERS

‘So when the Japanese had come to Langkon, the Bajau people said, "The Japanese are not bad, they are good," they said/

The following example illustrates the occurrence of the clause utterance-initially and medially.

23 Jadi so

PRED

mang kon

aux

say

ACTOR nu Bajau the Bajau

PRED mamara’ do inform

Gipun, "Mogumu’," Japanese are.many

PRED ACTOR

kon nisio, "anu

say he

ind

Amerikan pn American

sino do Pinggan-Pinggan." there at Pinggan-Pinggan

‘So the Bajau said, informing the Japanese, "There are many," he said, "Americans at Pinggan-Pinggan."’

The following example illustrates the occurrence of the clause utterancemedially in the first person.

PRED ACT

24 "Ala!" ka ku "Pogidu’

O.God say I

flee

PRED ACT

o," ka

ku, "maatoi ko!"

say

I

die you(sg

‘"O God!" I said, "Flee," I said, "or you’ll die!

7

Declarative Intransitive Clause

The Declarative Intransitive Clause has an intransitive verb or verb phrase as its nuclear element. In all the instances in the data where the predicate is a double verb phrase, the actor, if present, is expounded by a full noun phrase. Time, loca­ tion, and manner are optional constituents. Location is by far the most common of the three; time and manner occur quite seldom. (The only example of manner in the data is a loanword from Bahasa Malaysia.) When the clause is dependent, it is preceded by the relator particle do and has no actor.

Declarative Intransitive Clause

+ Decl.Intrans.Pred

jfActor JLTime JhLocation + Manner

declintrans. vb verb phrase

pronoun time phr noun phr

loc. phr

manner phr

CLAUSE TYPES IN TATANA

189

Rules:

1. Actor may be forefronted for emphasis.

2. Time may permute to clause-initial position.

3. No more than two of time, location, and manner have been found to cooc­ cur in the data.

Examples of a Declarative Intransitive Clause:

The next example has the basic array of predicate, actor, and location.

PRED ACTOR 25 Ko-rikot isio
...-arrive he

LOCATION sino dfi suborong dogii pogigia* bagu there on other.side that speak mod

isio do he rel

buayo

dogiari do kon nisio..

crocodile those

rel say he

‘Having arrived on the other side, he spoke to those crocodiles saying...’

The following example has a forefronted time tagmeme and a forefronted actor.

26 Jadi so

kalapas nopo after topic

TIME

ACTOR PRED

dogii intalu kali’ mo.

indakod

that third time she

go.up

LOCATION

sino do kapal i.

there in

ship def

‘So after that she went up on board the ship for the third time/

The following example has an auxiliary plus an intransitive verb in the verb phrase filling the predicate slot.

27 Jadi so

PRED imang q aux ...

ACTOR atur buayo dogiari do mogi- sunu-sunu line.up crocodile those relmany- side.by.side

190

SABAH SYNTAX PAPERS

sampai intad do until from rel
do suborong rel other.side

suborong bawang other.side river
. miso 1
one def

om conn

noko- rikot perf- arrive

‘So those crocodiles lined tip side by side until they reached from one side of the river to the other/

8 Descriptive Clause

The Descriptive Clause expresses what someone or something is like. Its nuclear element is a descriptive verb. The distinction between a Descriptive Clause and an Intransitive Clause does not seem very clear in all cases, because descrip­ tive roots can be inflected: they can take various verbal prefixes and infixes express­ ing tense and aspect, and they can be made transitive by affixing a causative prefix to the root. Thus, for instance, the descriptive root gayo ‘big* has such forms as magayo ‘is big5, g-um-ayo ‘will become big5, g-in-tim-ay© ‘became big5, uoko-gayo ‘has become big5, mopo-gayo ‘cause to become big; raise, grow (transit)5. The descrip­ tive root also occurs as a modifier within a noun phrase and is unaffixed.

Description Clause

4-Description JLTopic -I-Location _±Time

descript, vb phr pronoun loc. phrase time phrase noun phr

Rules:

1. Topic may be forefronted.

2. Location and time tagmemes have not been found to cooccur in the data.

Examples of a Descriptive Clause:

The next example illustrates the maximum expansion.

DESCR 28 Mo-pmm5a
...-many ...

TOPIC

TIME

kopio ulun Bisava5 dQ ontok dogii om kaa

very people Bisaya at time that and not

CLAUSE TYPES IN TATANA

191

tupo nu mod by

ulun Tatana’ mataanan om ... people Tatana’ endure and

The Bisaya people were very numerous at that time, so the Tatana peuple could not endure, but...’

The following example illustrates a Descriptive Clause with a forefronted topic.

TOPIC DESCR 29 Ansi nopo nisio
meat topic its

om mo-itom. conn ... -black

‘Its meat is black.’

9 Ambient Clause

The Ambient Clause has no participants. It refers to weather conditions. The Descriptive Clause can also describe weather conditions, but its structure dif­ fers from that of the Ambient Clause.

Ambient Clause

+Ambient.Pred

+ Location

JiTime

ambient vb phr

loc. word loc. phr

time phr

Rule:

Time can permute to a clause-initial position.

Examples of an Ambient Clause:

The next example has a full array of constituents.

AMBIENT PRED 30 Mog-odou
... -day/sun

LOC

TIME

situ! dfi watu’ di|L

here rel time

this

‘It is the dry season here at this time.’

192

SABAH SYNTAX PAPERS

The second example illustrates the forefronting of time.

TIME 31 Musim diti
season this

AMBIENT.PRED man-dasam am’, ... -rain only

‘During this time it just keeps raining/

The third example illustrates a minimal clause.

AMBIENT.PRED

32 DumasMa. rain

(= ~ m t dasam) ( = -will- rain)

‘It’s going to rain/

10 Stative Clause

The Stative Clause describes the state or physical position of an animate or an inanimate actor. It includes postures such as sitting, standing, crouching, kneel­ ing, and lying in various positions. The Stative Clause does not express an action or event; it just states how things are.

The Stative Clause has a stative verb as its nuclear element. It consists of an intransitive verb root plus the stative prefix poi(N)-. Actor and location are option­ al constituents of the clause.

The Stative Clause often occurs embedded within a noun phrase, in which case the actor is obligatorily absent.

Stative Clause

+ Stative Pred. + Actor + Location

stative vb poi(N)-

pronoun loc. phrase

CLAUSE TYPES IN TATANA5

193

Examples of a Stative Clause:

The next example has the full array of constituents.

PRED ACTOR 33 Poing-ion aku
stat- live I

LOCATION sino do there at

Kikuta’. Kikuta’

‘I am staying at Kikuta.’

The following example has two stative clauses, both with no actor tagmeme.

34 Adat nopo intad do komotutuaan do kon, kaa noponoko-ongoi

custom topic from rel ancestors

rel say not topic perf-go

noko-ongoi perf-go

idang offer .food

PRED

LOCATION

do kon, $om d!H iwg m ° doiana’,

rel say stat-si

there rel ground

PRED poin-tingaa’. stat-look.up

The custom according to what the ancestors say is that, if one does not go and offer food [to the ancestral spirits], [they] will be sitting on the ground and looking up [i.e. expecting to be fed].’

The following example illustrates the occurrence of a Stative Clause em­ bedded in a noun phrase.

35 Somumua no mongoi sumbayang do poibanta’ do motutuo.

all

compl go

worship rel isiying rel parent

STAT.CL nisio poim-pato! his stat-dead

‘All go to worship where they lay their parent who is dead.’

194

SABAH SYNTAX PAPERS

11 Existential Clause

The Existential Clause states the fact that someone or something exists or is or has been there. The existential word kiaro/ar© ‘there is’ or koiso/koroyo ‘there is not* is used as a nuclear element. The Existential Clause is semantically similar to Possession Clause-1 in that it may express that something belonging to someone is there. For instance, one can say there-is money-my, meaning ‘I have got money5. The Possession Clause-1 would have the structure of with-money I, ‘I have got money5. The existential word is followed by the actor, which is also nuclear. Loca­ tion and time are optional constituents and follow the actor. They are structurally quite similar.

The Existential Clause often occurs in the beginning of a narrative discourse and serves to introduce participants. It is often preceded by a sentence topic.

Existential Clause

+ Existential

4-Actor 4-Location 4-Time

exist, word

noun phr loc. word time phr loc. phr

Rules:

1. Location and time have not been found to cooccur in the data. Location word may permute to a position preceding the actor.

2. Existential Clause may be preceded by the relator particle do.

Examples of an Existential Clause:

The next example illustrates the occurrence of the clause in the opening sen­ tence of a narrative discourse introducing the main participant.

EXIST ACTOR 36 Insan odou kiaro song-inan palanuk do noko-kito do bua5
once day there.is one-class mousedeer rel perf-see rel fruit

sino da there rel

suhamiig h m m gother.side river

CLAUSE TYPES IN TATANA’

195

‘Once upon a time there was a mousedeer, who saw fruit on the other side of the river.’

The following example illustrates the occurrence of the relator particle do preceding the existential clause.

37 Kampung nopo diti Kosugira om Marabaunga’ magaad do isan village topic this Kosugira and Marabau link nearel shore

bawang Kipolupu river Kipolupu

kira’-kira’ sabatu galud intad do about one.mile far from rel

Kayul om Kayul and
intad do
from rel

kurangJabi dati

do

more.or.less perhaps rel

EXIST ACTOR

kiaro balu ngobatu

is

eight miles

Kuala Panyu. Kuala Penyu

‘These villages of Kosugira and Marabau are near the shore of Kipolupu River, about one mile from Kayul and approximately eight miles from Kuala Penyu [town].’

12 Location Clause

The Location Clause is a verbless clause and it conveys information about where someone is. Its nuclear elements are the actor and the location. It has an op­ tional time constituent, which expresses the duration of stay in a certain location. Time precedes the actor. Location follows the actor, but there is an example in which a location word precedes the actor and a location phrase follows the actor. The location phrase is expounded by do plus noun phrase. The Location Clause functions in settings and in background information on the paragraph level.

Location Clause

+ Time

+ Actor 4-Location

time phr

pronoun loc. phr proper name noun phrase

196

SABAH SYNTAX PAPERS

Examples of a Location Clause:

The next example has the full array of constituents.

TIME
38 So-minggu* one.week

ACTOR

LOCATION

akai lagi’ da Bmdm-

we(ex) still at Bandau

'We were at Bandau for one more week/

The following example has an actor and a location.

ACTOR

LOCATION

39 Iain ngwim omng-.puti, kon, Mo da EingganzEioggan.

three people white.people say there at Pinggan-Pinggan

Three Europeans are there at Pinggan-Pinggan, they say/

13 Possession Clause-1

The Possession Clause-1 has the basic meaning of ‘being with something', having something. A possessed item is a noun root with the prefix W-. It is followed by two optional elements, a possessor and a complement. The complement is ex­ pounded by a noun phrase or (an intransitive) clause, both preceded by the relator particle do.

Possession Clause-1

+ Possessed

.^Possessor

^.Complement

ki- + noun root pronoun pronominal phr noun phrase

do + noun phr (intrans) clause

Rules:

1. Possessor may be forefronted to a topic position.

2. Possession Clause may occur embedded in a noun phrase.

Examples of Possession Clause-1:

CLAUSE TYPES IN TATANA’

197

The next example has the full array of constituents.

POSSESSED PO!SSESSOR COMPLEMENT

40 Ki-andu’

isio

do andu’

songon.

with-woman he

rel woman beautiful

‘He had a beautiful woman for a wife.’

The following example has the possessor forefronted to the topic position.

POSSESSOR POSSESSED
41 Kusffl n o m M-siia’ . man topic with-shirt

COMPLEMENT
da hatangJima. rel Chinese.shirt

‘The groom had a Chinese shirt.’

The following example shows the Possession Clause embedded in a noun phrase.

42 Ma-ng{k}akat pobaguisiro

... - carry

mod they

POSSESSED

do pasu’

ki-suang

rel jar with-contents

COMPLEMENT do inasi. rel rice.beer

‘They carry a jar that has rice beer in it.’

14 Possession Clause-2

The Possession Clause-2 has the basic meaning of something belonging to someone, someone possessing something. Both possessor and possessed take the undergoer form. Topic may occur clause-initially and it is expounded by a deictic. In an information question, ‘Whose is such-and-such?’, the interrogative pronoun Isal ‘who’ occurs, but it is not in undergoer form.

198

SABAH SYNTAX PAPERS

Possession Clause-2

+ Topic + Possessor

+ Possessed

deictic

pronoun (undergoer form: d-)

do 4* noun phrase deictic (undergoer form)

Examples of Possession Clause-2

The next example has the full array of constituents.

TOPIC

POSSESSOR POSSESSED

43 Infi nfi dami*

do karaja*.

that compl for.us(ex)

rel work

That is our work.’

The following example has the question word isai ‘who’.

POSSESSOR POSSESSED 44 Isai do baloi dino?
who rel house that

‘Whose is that house?*

15 Equational Clause

The Equational Clause has the basic meaning of equating two elements, ‘A is B’. In most cases the clause has an actor and an equivalent. There are a couple of instances in which only the equivalent occurs, both of them are negative.

The Name Clause is a subtype of the Equational Clause. It has two elements: the actor (noun phrase) and the equivalent (proper name). The actor is topical­ ized with topic marker nopo and the link nga5. The proper name is preceded by the person marker i.

CLAUSE TYPES IN TATANA’

199

Equational Clause

+ Equivalent

4-Actor

proper noun deictic noun phrase

pronoun deictic noun phrase

Rules:

1. Actor may be forefronted, probably for emphasis. 2. In a few cases the actor does not occur but is obvious from the context.

Examples of Equational Clause:

The next example has a topic, an equivalent, and an actor.

TOPIC

EQUIVALENT ACTOR

45 Okou nopo om ulun susa’ kfi om maraat lag?.

you(sg) topic conn person poor you and bad

also

‘You, you are a poor person and also bad.’

The following example has a forefronted actor.

ACTOR

EQUIVALENT

46 Nipo dogii kusoi songon.

snake that man handsome

‘That snake (had become) a handsome man.’

The following example has no actor. Such examples are rare and have been found to occur in dialogues only.

NEG

EQUIVALENT

‘Om kaa aku no manyasal, loin..ko macam ina’ kM,’

conn not I

compl regret not

like mothe my

do kon nisio. rel say he

‘I don’t regret, for [you are] not my mother,’ he said.

200

SABAH SYNTAX PAPERS

The following example illustrates the Name Clause.

ACTOR 48 Ngaran nisio
name his

nopo nga topic link

EQUIVALENT i Anggang. pmkr Anggang

‘His name is Anggang/

16. Modifications of clauses

Interrogative, Command, Negative, and Relative Clauses are treated as modifications. This reduces the number of potential clause types and subtypes con­ siderably. All clause types, with the exception of the Formulaic Transitive Clause, can have interrogative, command, and negative modifications.

16.1 Interrogative Modification

There are three types of interrogative clauses: a) information, b) yes-no, and c) alternative questions.

16.1.1 Information Interrogative Clause

The Information Interrogative Clause has an interrogative word or pronoun in a clause-initial position. The following interrogatives are members of this closed class. (The list may not be exhaustive.)

asai
muhu
songkuo ombo’, nombo9 songgian pirayan

‘who’ ‘what’ ‘how much’ ‘where, which’ ‘when’ ‘how many days’

fmpiro

‘how many times; which’

(in order)

poingkuo

‘how5

ingkuo

‘how; how come’ (often

rhetorical)

nokuo

‘why’ (usually accusing

or exclamatory)

nunu sabap

‘why*

Examples of Information Interrogative Clause:

49 Isai irak-on who laugh-UF

muyun? you(pl)

‘Who are you laughing at?’

CLAUSE TYPES IN TATANA’

201

50 Numx ongoyon what going

mu do kadai? your to town

‘What are you going to town for?’

The following example illustrates the rhetorical use of ingkuo ‘how\

51 Jadi ingkuo lap’ tumalib? Mau’ kaa mau’, mangantos

so

how then pass

want not want take.shortcut

o

bagu ulun.

...

mod people

‘So how could one pass through? Whether they wanted or not, people had to take a shortcut/

The following example illustrates the accusatory use of nokiio ‘why*.

Nokuo tupo ko why mod ...

moghrak ko okou daki’? Mangkaii’ laugh you you me probably

ko tupo dak?. you mod me

‘Why do you laugh at me? Maybe you look down on me/

16.1.2 Yes-No Interrogative Clause

This modification is used for polar questions where the expected answer is yes or no. The question word toi ‘or’ is commonly used but it is optional. When toi does not occur, higher pitch throughout the clause indicates that the clause is in­ terrogative. Some personal pronouns, most notably the second person pronouns, have a different form from topic pronouns: ko vs. okou ‘2nd person singular pronoun’ and kau vs. akau ‘2nd person plural pronoun’.

Examples of Yes-No Interrogative Clause:

The next example is a modification of an Intransitive Clause with the ques­ tion word toi.

202

SABAH SYNTAX PAPERS

53 Suab

mongoi

tomorrow go

ko loi do kadai? you qu to town

‘Are you going to town tomorrow?’

The following example is a modification of a Descriptive Clause with the question word toi.

54 Mogumu’ toi karabau muyun situ’?

many qu buffalo

your(pl) here

‘Have you got many buffaloes here?’

The following example is a modification of an Equational Clause with the question word toi.

55 Anak mu

o

child your ...

toi ino? qu that

‘Is that your child?’

The following example is a modification of an Transitive Clause without the question word toi.

56 Nilong kau

do tilivisin

do morondom

i?

watched you(pl) ... television ... night

def

‘Did you watch TV last night?’

The following example is a modification of a Descriptive Clause without the question word toi. The actor precedes the description.

57 Bogok mu mogumu’? pig your many

‘Have you got many pigs?’

16.1.3 Alternative Interrogative Clause

The Alternative Interrogative Clause asks which one of two alternatives is true. Alternatives are expounded by noun phrases or verb phrases. In the case of verb phrases it may be better to analyze the construction as a sentence consisting

CLAUSE TYPES IN TATANA’

203

of two clauses. Question word and alternative link are obligatory constituents of this modified clause. The corpus of data seems to indicate that Alternative Inter­ rogative Clauses are relatively rare in the language, for only a couple examples have been found.

Alternative Interrogative Clause

+ Altera-1

4*Qu.word

4-Topic

4-Altern link

4-Altern-2

noun phr
(verb phr?)

(po) toi (nua*)

deictic

(ko) ata atau
ataupun

noun phr
(verb phr?)

Rule:

Topic occurs when the alternatives are noun phrases.

Examples of Alternative Interrogative Clauses:

The next example has noun phrases as alternatives.

ALTERN-1 QU 58 Ulun po toi
person mod qu

nua’ mod

TOPIC ALT LINK ALTERN-2

ino ko..atau asu?

that or

dog

Is that a person or a dog, I wonder?’

The following example has verb phrases as alternatives. The construction may be better analyzed an an alternative sentence with two clauses.

59 Nokuo..nokuo po nua’

why

mod mod

ALTERN-1 QU ALT LINKALTERN-2

isio nokoodop toi ataupun nugad?

he slept

qu or

went.away

‘I wonder what happened to him: has he fallen asleep or has he left?’

16.2 Command Modification

Transitive and Intransitive Clauses can be modified to create commands. The actor is not usually explicit, but if it is, the clause has a hortatory sense.

204

SABAH SYNTAX PAPERS

A transitive verb has the suffix -o’ (-a*) in undergoer focus or 4 9in referent focus. A prefixed stem takes the p-form (atemporal). An intransitive verb occurs in its root or stem form with no suffix.

Examples of Command Clause:

The next example illustrates a transitive command clause. In the second one, the undergoer focus command suffix is -a9because the verb root ends in -a.

60 Alap-o* nio take-comm there

pisau ngalor, asa-a*

isio!

knife dull sharpen-comm it

Take that dull knife and sharpen it!’

The following example illustrates a transitive command clause with the referent focus suffix -I9.

61 Akan-o’, ruang-i* lagi’ kanon! eat-comm add-comm more cooked.rice

‘Eat, take more rice!’

The following example has an explicit actor. The verb is in p-form.

62 Ea- m{w}ara? inform

kau ani* bagu daki’! you(pl) just mod me

‘Just let me know!’

The following example illustrates an intransitive command clause. The verb has no suffix.

63 Suang situ’! enter here

‘Come in here!5

CLAUSE TYPES IN TATANA’

205

The following example illustrates an intransitive command clause with an ex­ plicit actor.

64 Ongoi kau q come you(pl) ...

sakoi situ’ do likud ku! climb here rel back my

‘Come on and climb up onto my back!’

This completes the list of clauses we have found in Tatana’ so far.

