© 2014 SIL International®
For an interactive version of this dictionary, visit: akawaio.webonary.org
This work is licensed under:

Akawaio-English Dictionary and English-Akawaio Index
Acknowledgements

Special thanks to these people who contributed significantly to the production of this work:
David Captain, SIL International Dictionary Editor and Consultant
Nico Doelman, SIL International Regional Director for the Caribbean, Project Sponsor

Credits

Cover design: Stephen M. Echerd Cover photo: “Jawalla Village” © Ray Stegeman

© 2014 SIL International®

1

Akawaio-English Dictionary and English-Akawaio Index
Introduction
The Akawaio language is spoken by 5,000 to 6,000 people, most of whom live in the northwest section of Guyana, South America, with some living in far eastern Venezuela and far north-central Brazil. The data in this bilingual dictionary was collected and organized over a period of 14 years by Ray Stegeman and Dee Stegeman, language development staff affiliated with SIL International, with the participation of many members of the Akawaio language community throughout the Upper Mazaruni River area. The Stegemans worked with the Akawaio community to complete various Akawaio language development projects, including: a practical alphabet based on Akawaio phonology and morphophonology; over 30 literacy primers and reading books; the lexical database for this dictionary; and a translation of the New Testament.
We hope that the Akawaio language community will continue to develop the lexical database, to preserve this important part of their cultural heritage.
The Akawaio Alphabet
There are 17 letters in the Akawaio alphabet:
aeiɨkmnoprstuʉwyꞌ
The Akawaio-English part of the dictionary is arranged alphabetically according to the above order, with the exception of the "apostrophe" character ꞌ, which is ignored in ordering.
Map
The reader is referred to relevant language maps on the Ethnologue website showing locations of the Akawaio people group in Guyana and Venezuela at the following links:
 Guyana language map - Ethnologue  Venezuela language map - Ethnologue

© 2014 SIL International®

2

Akawaio-English Dictionary and English-Akawaio Index
Abbreviations

add adv attrib cal cf comp conj der dev dir gen id indir interj n nom nprop

address adverb attributive calendar confer compound conjunction derivative development direct generic idiom indirect interjection noun nominal proper noun

opp phon pl poss postp pron prop quant scal spec stat syn var vi vr vt

opposite phonological plural possessive postposition pronoun property quantifier scalar specific status synonym variant intransitive verb reflexive verb transitive verb

Note: In the English definitions all references to he, him, his etc. should also be taken to refer to she, her, hers etc.

© 2014 SIL International®

3

Akawaio-English Dictionary and English-Akawaio Index
Dictionary Entries explained
By: David Captain
Akawaio-English Dictionary
The Akawaio-English dictionary entry has three primary parts. First is the Akawaio headword, which appears in bold, slightly enlarged, blue type. Second is the abbreviation for the grammatical part of speech, which is shown in italic type. (See the List of Abbreviations where these are expanded.) Third is the definition, which gives the meaning of the Akawaio word in English. This meaning may be expressed by one or more equivalent words in English or by phrases that explain or clarify the meaning.
Sometimes an Akawaio word may have more than one meaning. These related meanings are called senses. Multiple senses are introduced by consecutive numbers in bold type, followed by a right parenthesis. If all the senses function as the same part of speech, that designation is given before the first sense number. However, if any of the senses functions differently, then every sense is marked with its own part of speech immediately following the sense number.
There are times when two or more Akawaio words are spelled the same but with unrelated meanings. These are called homonyms. Since they are actually different words, each will occur as a separate entry with a small, lowered number at the end of each headword to distinguish them.
Some entries include one or more example phrases or sentences following the definition. These help to illustrate the meaning and use of the headword in a natural context. Each Akawaio example in blue type is followed by its free translation in English in distinctive black type.
A number of Akawaio words may have one or more alternate pronunciations, as used by different speakers or in different areas. These variant forms are listed in parentheses immediately after the headword in bold blue type, following the abbreviation var:. The variant forms may also be found as minor entries in their respective alphabetised locations. But these merely refer the reader to the main entry where the lexical information is found.

© 2014 SIL International®

4

Akawaio-English Dictionary and English-Akawaio Index
Another type of variation, for the noun class of Akawaio words, is that of the possessed form of a noun. Some Akawaio nouns must always occur in their possessed form, others may never be possessed, and the rest may optionally be possessed or not. A description of noun possession is to be included in an Akawaio grammar sketch that is in preparation. Unfortunately, information on possession has not yet been obtained for all of the nouns in this dictionary, but for those entries where it has been, the possessed form for second person singular ("your ...") is placed in parentheses after the abbreviation poss:, following the headword. Basically, the possessor of a noun is indicated by a preceding possessor noun or by a possessor prefix on the noun. For example, the noun pʉroroi, 'yard', may be possessed by a noun, Father pʉrorooi, 'Father's yard' or by a pronominal prefix, ɨpʉrorooi, 'your yard'. However, many possessed nouns, though not all, require an additional possessive suffix, as in the preceding example. It is the form of these possessive suffixes (and whether or not they are required) that is not predictable for any given noun. It is for this reason that the possessive forms, when known, are being included in their respective dictionary entries. Finally, for those nouns known to never be possessed, that is noted in parentheses at the beginning of the first sense of the entry. A fuller documentation of noun possession remains open to future research.
In some cases, two or more different Akawaio words may share a lexical relation, based on meaning or function. When these relationships have been noted, the related words are cross-referenced to one another. An abbreviation of the label, in italics, for the type of relationship they share is presented following the definition of the headword and any examples that may be given. The related word or words, in bold blue type, then follows the label, separated by a colon. Some common types of these relationships are: synonyms, opposites, part-whole, generic-specific. There are other, less common, relationships as well. For example, the calendar relationship cross-references the names for the days of the week as well as for the seasons of the year. Stages, such as in the ripening of fruit, is referenced by the development relationship. Corresponding forms for direct and indirect address for some of the kinship terms are likewise cross-referenced. In a number of cases, a simple confer label cross-references a word for which the nature of the relationship has not been precisely identified. If a lexical relation applies to the headword without regard to any sense distinctions, the cross-referenced word is presented before any of the senses. If a cross-reference is to a specific sense of another word, that sense number is appended to the cross-referenced word.

© 2014 SIL International®

5

Akawaio-English Dictionary and English-Akawaio Index
In the Akawaio language, there are a substantial number of complex forms: words that are derived from other words, as well as compounds or idiomatic phrases formed from two or more other words. In this dictionary these are usually presented as main entries containing their full lexical information. The word from which they are formed and the type of formation is included in parentheses following the headword. Generally, each complex form is also included as a sub-entry, with limited lexical information, under the entry for the word from which it is formed. This helps to demonstrate the relationship between the two. The sub-entry is formatted like the main entry in which it occurs except that it is indented from the left.
When it has been identified for some plant and animal terms, the scientific name is given, in italics, immediately following the definition.
In a few cases, an entry, especially when it consists of a phrase, will have a meaning that is different from the sum of its parts. Where this has been noted, the literal meaning is given in parentheses after the abbreviation lit: at the end of the entry.
This dictionary also includes a number of affixes as entries. These can be recognised by the hyphen that precedes or follows the "headword". These are not independent words but rather are joined before (as a prefix) or after (as a suffix) to a suitable independent word and modify that word's meaning in the way indicated by the explanatory definition.
English-Akawaio Reversal Index
The English-Akawaio reversal index presented here is not intended to be a dictionary. Rather, it is generated from the database of the Akawaio-English dictionary and only includes very basic information. Its purpose is to enable the user to search an index of English glosses that reference one or more related Akawaio entries so that he or she may then find the full dictionary information there in the Akawaio-English dictionary.
In the Browse section, the English gloss is presented in the first column, in black type. Then the related Akawaio word or words are presented in the second column in purple type.
In the Download section, a PDF file of this reversal may be accessed. It presents somewhat more information in a limited dictionary-format style. There the English gloss, in bold black type, is given first. Then the headword from the related Akawaio entry is presented in bold blue type. If the English word refers to a specific sense of the Akawaio entry, that sense number follows the Akawaio word. Next the Akawaio part of speech is given in italics,

© 2014 SIL International®

6

Akawaio-English Dictionary and English-Akawaio Index
followed by the full English definition as given in the Akawaio entry. When the same English gloss was generated from more than one Akawaio entry, this same basic information is presented for each of those several Akawaio entries in their respective alphabetical order within the English entry. No attempt was made to include the appropriate parts of speech for the English words in this reversal index.

© 2014 SIL International®

7

Akawaio-English Dictionary and English-Akawaio Index

Demographic and Ethnographic Information
By: Ray Stegeman
The name of the language The language group is known to outsiders as Akawaio. No one I have met can give a meaning for this term. It is a term used by other groups of Amerindians when referring to the Akawaio.
The Akawaio use the term [kapoŋ] /ka'pon/ in reference to themselves, which seems to mean merely 'person' or, more specifically, 'Amerindian'. (This is opposed to /ene/ – their term for a foreigner or outsider.) As a postpositional phrase, ka’ pon can mean 'from the sky', and they have stories about how the Akawaio people came to exist on the Earth, having descended from Ma'kunaimɨ, a demigod who came down from the sky through a hole in the clouds. There is some disagreement, however, as to the veracity of this ‘myth’ / ‘history’. Some of them refuse this story outright, perhaps because of their relatively recent embrace of Christianity, now feeling confident they have descended from Adam and Eve. Some Akawaio use the term Ka'pon interchangeably with Akawayo to refer to themselves.
The 3-letter Ethnologue code for Akawaio is ake. Akawaio is the most common English spelling of the people group name, while akawayo better reflects the syllable structure of the word, as I understand it.
Ethnology The dominant economic activities of the Akawaio are subsistence farming, fishing, hunting, and more recently, mining for gold and diamonds. What little money can be made from "porkknocking" (the coastland culture's term for small-scale mining) is spent on essential items they cannot grow: matches, soap, clothes, etc. Alcoholism and prostitution are relatively recently introduced social behaviors that sap some families of what little economic advantages mining might bring. Also, environmental problems inherent with mining have become endemic, including the pollution of river water – the main source of drinking, washing and bathing water. The destruction of fish habitats is also a concern, since fishing is the main source of local protein available to the Akawaio. The Akawaio ecosystem includes fishing, hunting for wild game, and farming of both virgin forest plots and those they return to after fallow times, usually 2 – 10 acres at a time for any one extended family. The family’s land is often split into two or three different plots, started at different times of

© 2014 SIL International®

8

Akawaio-English Dictionary and English-Akawaio Index

the year. The crop is harvested little by little to provide for the immediate needs of the family.
Their material culture is in a major flux at present with the changing economic picture mining activities have brought. The Akawaio have a heritage of living very simply, with most of what they need coming straight from the rain forest. In the past, many items from the forest were used or fashioned into something useful to serve their unique, forest way of life. But more recently, clay pots made from locally found clay have been largely replaced by plastic and aluminum containers. Gourd scoops traditionally used as eating utensils have been replaced by plastic and metal tableware. Metal knives and soup spoons are ubiquitous, along with aluminum griddles used to make the traditional cassava bread. They used to cook cassava bread – their solid staple – on large, flat stone griddles. Salt was found by drying a particular river grass and grinding it up, but now, most people buy salt from a nearby village store – if they have some recent income from mining, teaching or one of the other few paying jobs. Fine (small) fish hooks are used with plastic fishing line, and perhaps a third of all families have a gun with which to hunt, largely replacing bows and arrows and blow guns, although these are still made and often used by young boys to practice hunting. The government is very careful to check for firearm licenses, and some Akawaio men have been charged with carrying an unlicensed firearm (often using a gun belonging to a relative or a deceased relative, before being able to transfer ownership).
Housing as practiced by the Akawaio is usually a compound method. A simply-made, thatch roofed cookhouse is surrounded by sleeping houses, the number and size being dependent on the size of the extended family living together. This constitutes their living situation in and around the village, but village living is a relatively recent, adopted way of life for them. Before missionary exposure on a continual basis, the Akawaio were living near their farms and away from rivers and each other in extended family settlements. More recently, the benefits of living near the rivers (for steady water supply and ease of travel) and, in particular, being nearer to schools, churches and clinics, the Akawaio have adapted to more of a communal village life; however, they prefer to spend school holidays away from the village, and their housing “in the bush” is usually much more simple. Often, their farm house consists of a wood frame with plastic tarpaulin tied down to the frame with rope made from bark or vine. This provides shelter for the night, and during the day, they are all out in the field taking care of their crops or hunting or fishing.
The Akawaio generally dislike traveling long distances by foot. This is probably due to their beliefs about many malevolent bush spirits. They much prefer to travel by canoe, along the

© 2014 SIL International®

9

Akawaio-English Dictionary and English-Akawaio Index
creeks and rivers in the area. (It is also possible to fish while traveling this way.) Akawaio boats are usually of two indigenous varieties; one is the yʉipi'pɨ, or "woodskin" canoe, and the other is the kanau, or "dugout" canoe. Outside influences have introduced the wood plank boat and outboard motors, the latter of which can be put on the transoms of dugouts as well as the wood plank boats – although not on the woodskin ones. The woodskins are made from the inner bark of the purple heart trees, mɨ' ye', so they are often called mɨ' pi'pɨ as well. After peeling away the outer bark of the tree, the boat maker peels back an inner layer of the fallen tree and removes it from the trunk. After that, he trims the ends down, cuts the sides of the ends away from the center third of the boat, and ties them up with twine through holes. This holds the ends of the boat up and keeps water out. The cuts down the sides need to be filled with clay, cotton or other materials, and often a clay dam is put into the front and rear ends to temporarily allow the boat to take on more cargo or persons without taking on water. The dugout canoes can be quite large and hold 40 or more people all the way down in size to fit 2 to 4 people. In the making of a dugout canoe, the trunk is cut down, burned out and shaved inside and outside to a uniform thickness. The sides are often forced apart with sticks, to give the boat a wider cross-section. Then, seats are installed, and the back end often has a transom installed – the only way an outboard engine can be put on. These dugout canoes can last a very long time – 10 years or longer – as opposed to the more quickly made but more easily lost or borrowed woodskin variety. Woodskins sink when swamped, but the dugouts float and are not as easily lost. Woodskins can be brought back to the surface easily enough, if they are not carried away by under water currents. It is a common habit to swamp one’s own woodskin, so that no one else knows it is there, so it will not “be borrowed” to cross the river and leave the real owner stranded.
Cosmology The Akawaio have stories about the beginning of humankind and about human – that is, Akawaio – history. Ma'kunaimɨ and his brother, Sikɨ, came down to earth through a hole in the sky. They enjoyed living on the earth and somehow (the woman part of the equation was not mentioned to me) their progeny was begun. The Akawaio also have stories about Akawaio people who turn into animals or stars, etc., possibly evoking a certain type of “brotherhood” with the rest of creation. They also have certain ideas about death and burial, a woman’s first menstruation, sickness and health, etc., that are unique to the Akawaio people and cause them to have a unique way of thinking about their universe.

© 2014 SIL International®

10

Akawaio-English Dictionary and English-Akawaio Index
For the past three or four generations the Akawaio have been in contact with a variety of different Christian denominations. This has led to a number of different changes in their indigenous culture, outlook and worldview. It is difficult for most Akawaio to distinguish between the older stories and the way Christianity is being lived out in their area. Often the stories are mixed together. I have heard certain preachers talk about good and evil in a perpetual battle, which is more similar to the story of Ma'kunaimɨ and his brother and less similar to the Christian teaching of Christ’s eventual, complete victory over Satan and sin.
Demography The Akawaio language is spoken by 5,000 to 6,000 people sparsely populating the Lower and Upper Mazaruni river basins, north and east of Mount Roraima, the dividing point between Guyana, Venezuela and Brazil. Some Akawaio travel between the three countries in search of work or carrying out evangelistic missions, although I am uncertain of the number of Akawaio who consider themselves residents of either Venezuela or Brazil. The opinion of those in the Mazaruni area of Guyana is that relatively few do.
One largely Akawaio village, Chinauyeng, is located on the higher Pakaraima plain, a 4 – 5 hour walk from the highest navigable point on the Upper Mazaruni. It is the only Akawaio village on the savannah. The others are in the rain forest. In this village, the people are a mixture of Akawaio and Macushi (mbc), who are otherwise mostly in Brazil. Philipai village, located along the upper reaches of the Kukui river (a tributary of the Upper Mazaruni), is a mixture of Akawaio and Patamona (pbc) people. The Waramadong/Kai'kan area, in the upper reaches of the Kamarang river, is a mixture of Akawaio and Pemon (Arekuna (aoc), mostly located in Venezuela). The more centrally located villages with mostly all Akawaio residents are Kambaru (the one small village near the mining town of Imbaimadai), Jawalla, Kako and Kamarang, Kamarang being the district seat, with the only post office in the Upper Mazaruni.
The Akawaio are the largest Amerindian group residing in the Upper Mazaruni and Pakaraima plains. The other language groups coexisting with the Akawaio in this area (listed above) are all related, Cariban languages. Other language groups that inhabit the Lower Mazaruni with the Akawaio are the Caribs (car) and the Arawaks (arw). These two groups are said to have lost most of their linguistic and cultural heritage, having co-existed with the Afro- and Indo-Guyanese, along with the various European colonial influences, for extended periods throughout the past few centuries.

© 2014 SIL International®

11

Akawaio-English Dictionary and English-Akawaio Index
The Akawaio interact easily with their fellow Amerindian groups, although, by-and-large, they prefer to keep to themselves. They mix easily on social and friendly terms, especially when relating within the unique Alleluia religious tradition, which was started among the Macushi and readily adopted by the Akawaio. They seem to have a basic, mutual understanding of their languages, but a few Akawaio stand out as being fluent across language boundaries, either by their extensive travel or through intermarriage. The Akawaio have a past reputation for being more war-like than their neighbors. (See bibliography, including Riviére, 2006.) In my observation, no one Amerindian language group in the area is dominant over or marginalized by any other, although the fact remains that they call the other groups by names different from what they call themselves, and some of these terms convey denigrating connotations. This may carry over into some negative interactions to which I have not witnessed.
Amerindians in general are often socially and economically marginalized in the larger, national scene, with Afro- and Indo-Guyanese often mistreating or taking advantage of Amerindians, both along the coast and and in Amerindian communities, where the Afro- and Indo-Guyanese often start small stores or mining operations. They feel free to employ Amerindians for menial labor and then often don’t pay them for long periods of time or otherwise abuse them physically and emotionally. The Akawaio often feel marginalized because of their lack of fluency in English (or, rather, in the Guyanese Creole English (gyn) used by nearly all Afro- and Indo-Guyanese) and their lack of experience in matters related to money and other unfamiliar cultural items.
Genetic affiliation The Akawaio language belongs to the Carib language family. The languages closest to Akawaio (ake) are the Pemon (aoc) (main Ethnologue entry under Venezuela), the Patamona (pbc), and the Macushi (mbc) (main entry under Brazil). This is confirmed in the data presented in Abbott's work (1991) and Gildea's (1998).
Previous research There is very little linguistic work done on the Akawaio language. Dr. Audrey Butt-Colson (1973, 1998, and in collaboration with H. Deiter Heinen, 1983-84) has done much anthropological research, and some of her work is anthro-linguistic in nature, tying linguistic features to cultural items with interesting conclusions. Gildea (1998) has written much about reconstructing Cariban words and syntax, and he has included some Akawaio data from various sources.

© 2014 SIL International®

12

Akawaio-English Dictionary and English-Akawaio Index
The sociolinguistic situation Most Akawaio adults residing in Guyana are marginally bi-lingual in English (the national language), although almost all their children are raised learning Akawaio first. The parents believe they teach their children English, and they do, in a pedantic fashion, using simple commands and very limited vocabulary. But they say their children learn Akawaio when they go to school, from their classmates, who are all also being taught only English at home! This reflects an interesting understanding of language and learning. They don’t see themselves as having “learned” their first language – an insight into how completely indivisible they see their ethnic and linguistic identities.
A few of the Akawaio people cross over into Venezuela and, to a lesser extent, Brazil, in search of work. There, they learn some Spanish or Portuguese, but not usually at a fluent level. Very few Akawaio are completely monolingual, since a school education is highly valued, and has been for the past 50 years or so. Many Akawaio are very good English readers, but in conversation, it is obvious that most have trouble understanding and communicating well in English. It is perhaps true that more Akawaio women than men are monolingual, since it is more common for the men to work with outsiders in mining. For a few Akawaio, their English abilities are better than many Afro- or Indo-Guyanese, who are often not well-educated and mostly speak the Guyanese Creole English. This is another reason for the Akawaio feeling marginalized in their dealings with this set of people. Almost all Akawaio – adults and children – choose to use Akawaio in oral communication settings with their peers. They use English in church services and sermons (where denominational literature in English is prevalent). They also record meeting minutes in English, although most meetings are conducted in Akawaio.
The Akawaio feel that their language is not a real language, but only a dialect. (They are told this by many Afro- and Indo-Guyanese.) They do not often correct each other in their speech, but they talk about how funny or oddly some other Akawaio people speak, when using a particular idiolect. They do not seem proud of their language and culture, but tend to be shy and embarrassed, speaking little about these in the presence of outsiders. When asked to repeat something, they will nearly always restate/rephrase it, instead of repeating word-for-word. I feel this may be in part due to a cultural effect that reflects an embarrassment about their use of their language, perhaps brought about by this common way of talking about another’s speech. The question is often asked to confirm some word or grammatical feature, but when the idea is rephrased, the word or feature is lost and left unconfirmed. The Akawaio adults are often ashamed to attend literacy classes, even though

© 2014 SIL International®

13

Akawaio-English Dictionary and English-Akawaio Index
their oral ability in their mother tongue is completely fluent. This may also be due to the fact that many school children do attend the literacy classes, and the adults do not want to be grouped together with them in a pupil/teacher social context. Akawaio people will often switch to English when outsiders are present, even when speaking with “foreigners” who know Akawaio. Multilingual Akawaio speakers almost completely use Akawaio in peer situations, family situations, and in the unique Alleluia tradition, which could be considered using part Akawaio and part Macushi (from which the Alleluia tradition comes). They use English (or the Guyanese Creole English) in schools and churches, especially to read prayers, English Scripture, sing hymns, etc., although preaching is often done in Akawaio (peppered with English phrases for Christian concepts not easily translatable/not yet translated).
Almost all Akawaio children learn Akawaio as their first language. They remain monolingual through to their first year in grade school. There are pressures to learn more English as children grow older and have a chance to gain a secondary education or to work with coastlander miners. There seem to be no pressures to reject their own language, except in relation to interacting with outsiders. The recently retired Anglican Bishop, for example, is Afro-Guyanese, and in his visits to the Anglican churches in the Upper Mazaruni, he insisted on no Amerindian language being spoken at any official function or meeting while he was present, although he knows they use their first language when he is not present. The recently new Anglican Bishop has encouraged Anglican Akawaio to translate portions of the Anglican prayer book, including the Eucharist service. Akawaio are pressured to reject using their first language among coastland miners in the area. In villages with a Seventh-Day Adventist (SDA) presence, Akawaio are encouraged to use more English than in other Akawaio villages, possibly due to the relatively greater amount of denominational resources available to them from the outside, most often from the United States. These pressures are often localized so that, in my opinion, the Akawaio language is not endangered by them. I believe there are no partially competent speakers, unless they are first from another language group or from a mixed marriage, of which there are relatively few. There are cultural pressures that seem to restrict the amount of Akawaio who marry outside their own culture/language.

© 2014 SIL International®

14

Akawaio-English Dictionary and English-Akawaio Index

There are loan words in regular use by the Akawaio from the following languages, often

representing items introduced to their worldview by outside forces:

English tepi' - tablet (referring to pills, or any medicine)

kʉra' - clock

ensin - engine

ti'sa - teacher

so'si - church

mai'pʉremu - my friend (borrowed as a phrase, to mean 'friend')

Spanish pero - dog

kone'o - rabbit

sapato - shoe

paka - cow

pʉrata - money (plata is Spanish for 'silver,' or 'money')

Dutch puru'ku - pants

Many English verbs are easily borrowed with the productive Akawaio suffix -ma, as below:

to' e-

mari –ma –'pʉ

N detrans- V

-denom T

3.pl

marry

-p

'They became married.'

Many words are shared with nearby, related languages and possibly other nearby, unrelated

ones, including the vocabulary used in the Alleluia church, but this has not yet been a focus

of my research.

Dialects The Akawaio themselves often talk of fellow Akawaio speakers from different areas and how they speak differently from themselves. This difference often represents the relative use or disuse of certain affixes common within the language. Pronunciation is often mentioned as a difference, where certain regular vowel changes are made. Some vocabulary is different, possibly due to the influence of surrounding languages on the borders of Akawaio territory, as mentioned earlier. Examples: The word ɨs i'kɨ ‘come’ is pronounced ɨi'kɨ in Chinauyeng. The suffix -pɨtʉ ‘continuous or repetitive action’ is used more in Pipiri'pai village, and often it is reduplicated, –pɨ'pɨtʉ, which is rare elsewhere. Pipiri'pai people use the -na'ne' (describe it here) suffix more often than Akawaio from other villages.

© 2014 SIL International®

15

Akawaio-English Dictionary and English-Akawaio Index
I have not studied dialect variation. Some differences in vowel pronunciation and syllable deletion have been noted, but no significant or regular variation within the language boundaries or among the people who understand each other has been confirmed. The late Dr. Desrey Fox (2003) has described in her PhD thesis the 3 dialects she believes exist in her home village of Waramadong. I have most often spent time in the village of Usariwara'pai (the indigenous pronunciation of Jawalla, meaning ‘group of jaguars’), along the Upper Mazaruni river at the mouth of the Kukui river. This has served well as a central location among the Akawaio of the Upper Mazaruni and, I feel, has led to collecting Akawaio linguistic data of a more pure nature than, say, collecting data from some of the villages that are closer to or intermingled with other language influences.

© 2014 SIL International®

16

Akawaio-English Dicftiiolen:a/r/y/C:/Users/Public/Akawaio_dictionary_2014-06-14.xhtml

Aa

aꞌ n 1) mortar ayakʉ your mortar opp: aino2 1 . 2) hole in wooden trunk, used for pounding corn or other grain
a- (phon. var: ay-) (cf: ɨmɨrɨ, ɨ-) 1) you, second person verb prefix Aupakaꞌpʉ. You woke up. 2) your, second person noun prefix ayarokooi your
hat
-a var. of -ya
aꞌai (cf: amai, noꞌnoꞌ, koꞌkoi, waꞌwa) n 1) mother, direct address indir add: san 1 . 2) mother, direct address to a woman who serves the role of one's mother or grandmother 3) grandmother, direct address 4) aunt, in particular, one's father's brother's wife or one's mother's sister, direct address cf: naꞌnaꞌ ; indir add: san 2 .
aiꞌ n a variety of wild dog
-ai var. of -i2
aika vt clear a plot of land of underbush, the start of cutting for farming Tʉmainarʉ kon aikaꞌpʉ ina uya. We cleared the underbush from our farm.
aiko 1) nom something small Aiko pe kanau esi. The canoe is small. opp: eke 1 . 2) interj expression of regret 3) interj expression of surprise
aiꞌku (cf: tuna pe) nom 1) rainy weather Aiꞌku pe pata esi. The place is wet. (It's a rainy day.) 2) something wet opp: aꞌmun .
aiꞌkwa vt a chemical burn, as pepper on skin anta aiꞌkwakɨ! Burn your mouth (with pepper)!
aiꞌma vt poke, as a stick into a hole Aiꞌmapɨtʉꞌpʉ iya, eꞌkwapiꞌ yaꞌ rɨ ɨkʉi ewonsaꞌ pe eꞌkamaꞌpʉ iya. He poked at it,

making the snake come out from the tree trunk.
aima vt sew Pon ton aima uya. I am sewing
clothes.
aimaꞌ var. of eimaꞌ
aimara n a variety of large, river fish, good for eating, found in Lower Mazaruni River region Macrodon trahira
aimenka vt 1) judge someone's behaviour as worthy of punishment or acclaim syn: menka 1 . 2) check a dead body for marks of abuse or cursing
aimerunpa vt cause someone to be in pain utaimerunpa (der.) 1) vi restless 2) vi itch 3) vi writhe 4) vr pained
aimuꞌnan n
aimuꞌne (var: taꞌpimʉꞌnan; var: aimutun) something or someone white Wakʉ pe aimuꞌne wɨꞌsɨꞌ esiꞌpʉ iwoi. There was nice, white sand there. opp: iꞌkʉrʉn 2 . (attrib.: aimuꞌnan)
aimutun var. of aimuꞌne
aimʉrʉnpa vt scatter
ain interj Oh!; expressing regret Ain! Toꞌ utɨꞌpʉ.
Oh! Too bad! They went away.
ainɨ var. of aino1
aino3 n 1) lock 2) bolt ainoꞌtɨ (der.) vt lock
aino4 n a long muscle that holds the kidneys in place
aino2 n 1) pestle, as for grinding corn opp: aꞌ 1 . 2) a long stick used to stretch the matapi when squeezing grated cassava tenkiꞌ aino matapi
stick

© 2014 SIL International®

18

Akawaio-English Dictionary

aino1 (var: ainɨ) vt fry, parch Moroꞌ aino uya. I
am frying the fish.
ainoꞌtɨ (der. of aino3) vt lock, bolt ainʉmʉ vi escape (der.: ainʉnpa)
ainʉnpa (cf: iꞌtapa) vt chase, cause to run or escape Iyainʉnpaꞌpʉ iya. He chased him. aꞌkwarʉ ainʉnpa (id.) vr grieve
Aipiripin nprop the name given to a prophet in the Alleluia church
aipita vi scream Iyaipitaꞌpʉ. She screamed.
aipo vt smoke out wasps or other pests from one's house or other building Marupaꞌ amʉꞌ aipoꞌpʉ uya pʉmʉi ke. I smoked out the bats
with pepper.
aipʉ nom something dry; something dead, as in grass or trees Aipʉ pe wanaꞌ esi. The grass is dry. opp: isenan 1 ; opp: aserʉ 1 . (der.: aipʉta)
aipʉta vi 1) be or become withered or skinny Ɨꞌrɨ pe iyesi ke ayaipʉtasaꞌ? What has made you skinny? Iyaipʉtasaꞌ. He became skinny. 2) be or become dried (der.: aipʉtanʉkʉ)
aipʉtanʉkʉ vt make dry Pata ipʉtʉ aipʉtanʉkʉꞌpʉ iya. She dried flowers.
airɨ1 adv exactly Mɨrɨ kasa piyaiꞌma amʉꞌ airɨ uꞌmatʉꞌpʉ. And so those very same giants came to an end. Nai airɨ iyentuꞌpʉ? Where exactly was
he born?
airɨ2 postp near Pero eꞌwasuꞌpɨꞌsaꞌ father pʉrorooi airɨ. The dog messed nearby Father's
place.
aisaraku var. of aitaraku
aisin nom busy aisiꞌtɨ var. of asiꞌtɨ1

aita (cf: rui) n 1) brother; indirect address 2) father; indirect address cf: kʉipʉnʉ1 1 .
aitanʉkʉ vt boil down a liquid until it becomes thick Toꞌ uꞌma aitanʉkʉꞌpʉ iya. She boiled
down their pepper pot.
aitaraku (var: aisaraku) n a variety of fruit that has a bumpy, yellow skin; sour flavour
aitawaiꞌnan nom plenty Apʉne pʉra itunaꞌkwaai ton esiꞌpʉ wakʉ ton nɨ aitawaiꞌnaꞌ nan nɨ. Because there are plenty
places to bathe where there is good water.
aiꞌtɨn n a variety of woodpecker
aiꞌtou something flat Piꞌta enukuꞌpʉ aiꞌtou pan ɨutɨ nakapu pona ɨpʉremaiꞌ. Peter went up to
the house's flat roof to pray.
aituma vt make something or someone go fast Mɨrɨpan ipan pe nin si, Sir Benson uya insin aitumaꞌpʉ mɨrɨ. When (he realized) I was
so sick, Sir Benson sped up the engine.
aitun var. of aituneꞌ
aituneꞌ (var: aitun) nom one who is fast or quick Iyeꞌsaraꞌtɨꞌpʉ aituneꞌ pe. He started quickly. opp: tɨnɨn . (der.: aituma)
aiyunu n onion
aka2 (var: kaka) interj an expression of experiencing unexpected pain
aka1 vt 1) dig Waꞌ yen akaꞌpʉ uya. I dug a latrine. akasaꞌ pit (lit. an old digging) 2) pick Utɨn pai kayaꞌraꞌpɨ akaseꞌna sapa pe ikonekaton.
Let's go to pick kaya'ra'pɨ to make face paint.
Aꞌka nprop the name given to a creek about 20 minutes above Enpɨimɨtʉi, along the Upper Mazaruni River Aꞌka ken A'ka creek mouth
akama vt 1) spoil 2) destroy the use of something, make something so that the intended user is unable to enjoy the intended benefits of

© 2014 SIL International®

19

Akawaio-English Dictionary

it 3) wound, injure Usari akamaꞌpʉ uya. I injured the deer. 4) fail to achieve one's intended goal akaman var. of akamana
akamana (var: akaman; poss: ayakamanaai) (cf: mʉtaꞌna yeꞌ, mʉtaꞌna pen) nom hunter Akamana pe utɨ serɨ. I go now as a hunt man. syn: ontʉman .
akami n a variety of wild bird easily tamed, similar to powis bird, warakabura, trumpet bird syn: namai .
akamisarai n a group of tigers, bad ones, that eat people
akaꞌneꞌ n a short time or visit Akaꞌneꞌ pe utɨ mɨrɨ. I am going for a short visit.
akanʉkʉ vt spill out Mɨrɨpan yau, imaꞌtaꞌpʉ, iyeꞌtoiꞌkwaꞌpʉ, tʉweꞌ takanʉꞌse. In that place,
he died, he burst open, and his own insides spilled out.
akapʉ n a part of something Enpoikakaaꞌpʉ rʉꞌkwɨ rɨ Akawayo pe ta tane, Enkereꞌsi pe akapʉ rɨ kanan. When I translate into Akawaio,
part of it is still in English.
akarasa (cf: wairawoꞌ; cf: kuran; cf: maipa; cf: poro1) n a variety of fruit tree, waiti (brown pods)
akare n (non-possessed) alligator
akaru var. of aꞌkwa1 akaruꞌtɨ var. of aꞌkwarʉꞌtɨ
akaruwa (cf: tennankɨꞌ) n a variety of small, colourful fish, often caught in traps gen: kuraꞌ .
akiꞌnɨ (cf: saꞌman) 1) nom a dry quality, especially referring to grass when it is hard to cut, after the dew has evaporated Akiꞌnɨ pe wanaꞌ esi. The grass is dry. 2) n (non-possessed) hard-to-cut grasses and weeds

aꞌkiꞌtarɨ n the middle one of a set of older and younger objects, like siblings toꞌ aꞌkiꞌtarɨ iyesi. He is their middle one - in height or in age.
akitiꞌkwa vt break up Eki akitiꞌkwakɨ. Break up
the cake of cassava bread.
utakitiꞌkwa (der.) vr broken
aꞌkiyau (var: aꞌyau) n a variety of spinytrunked palm tree with small nuts for fruit
aꞌkɨ adv a form of agreement with what has just been said "Kʉsekamai!" "Aꞌkɨ." "Don't say it!"
"That's right (don't say it)."
aꞌkɨrɨ (cf: poi) postp with Toꞌ utɨꞌpʉ Wrenton aꞌkɨrɨ. They went with Wrenton.
akɨtʉ var. of akʉtʉ
aꞌko nom 1) something near Aꞌko pe toꞌ esi. They are nearby. 2) something closed Itaꞌkosaꞌ. It is closed. opp: aꞌkoka .
aꞌkoka (cf: ekariꞌma) vt open Shop aꞌkokaꞌpʉ uya. I opened the shop. opp: aꞌko 2 ; syn: warauka 1 . utaꞌkoka (der.) vr open
akon (poss: ayakon) n 1) younger brother for a male; direct address and also indirect address Ina akon ton our brothers 2) Christian brother 3) sister, for a woman, direct address and also indirect address
akono n someone false in his behaviour, a hypocrite, a liar
akonoꞌ n neighbour
akonoma1 vt offer, as in an item of food or drink, to a visitor Nakonomakapʉi kanan. He
offered him (drink) again.
akonoma2 vt 1) beat, hit Mɨrɨpan akonomapɨtʉꞌpʉ inoꞌpʉ uya. And his wife beat him. 2) punish

© 2014 SIL International®

20

Akawaio-English Dictionary

akonpi n 1) brother-in-law, direct address toꞌ akonpi their brother-in-law indir add: eꞌse 1 . 2) cousin, direct address indir add: eꞌse 2 . 3) male
akonta n neighbour; not close family relations
aꞌkoro vt 1) dam, usually damming a stream to catch fish Maꞌ aꞌkoro uya. I am blocking (the stream with) a ma'. maꞌ aꞌkonin one who blocks a creek with a ma' 2) block Toꞌ uya eposaꞌ aꞌtai, ɨnʉꞌ uya rɨ nawon imʉraꞌtaai apai tɨꞌ amasaꞌ eneꞌpʉ toꞌ uya aꞌkoroꞌpʉ ike. When
they found it (the tomb), someone had moved from the doorway what was blocking it.
akoroka vt 1) sweep Ɨutɨ akorokaꞌpʉ uya. I swept out the house. syn: iseꞌka . 2) clear land of grass or trees
aꞌkoron (poss: ayaꞌkoron) n foam on the surface of the river, due to rapids or falls in the vicinity
aꞌkoronta vi foam, especially foaming at the mouth Mɨrɨpan mʉta aꞌkoronta. And his mouth
foams.
akoruwan nom 1) something beautiful, colourful, especially referring to birds Akoruwan pe toron esi. The bird is colourful. 2) the male bird, or the more colourful of any bird pair syn: tʉmenukenan ; cf: makuꞌpɨ 3 .
akorʉka n a variety of grape-like fruit, green in colour, turning purple when ripe syn: makarin
1.
akoto (cf: kanau) n (non-possessed) a variety of tree used for making woodskin canoes, tritle tree
aku n (non-possessed) agouti Dasyprocta agouti (id.: aku pana)
Aꞌku ken nprop the name given to a creek mouth along the Upper Mazaruni River, between Ipana'muru pai and Imbaimadai

aku pana a variety of mushroom, similar in shape to an agouti's ear Mycena filicina
akukumiri n a variety of plant part of which is used as medicine
akuꞌnɨ vt 1) colour Kareta akuꞌnɨꞌpʉ Hannah uya. Hannah coloured the paper. 2) spread, cover Urɨ bake akuꞌnɨꞌpʉ uya peanut butter ke. I
spread my bake with peanut butter.
akupisi n 1) a variety of wild bean plant, bora Vigna sesquipedalis 2) a variety of black-eyed beans 3) a variety of red or brown beans
Akuꞌpɨꞌta nprop the name given to a creek along the path between Pipiri pai and Amoko kupai
akuruꞌta2 vi be or become sick or ill Tikin nan nɨ soisa akuruꞌtasaꞌ esiꞌpʉ. One of the soldiers
became sick.
akuruꞌta1 vt 1) pick Iyakuruꞌtasaꞌ rʉꞌpʉ aroiꞌ tʉnase. He picked cashew fruit to eat it. 2) harvest
akusa (poss: ayakusaai) n 1) sewing needle 2) syringe
akuꞌsaꞌ n half a metal drum used to set the cassava drink pot on to cook the cassava drink
akuse (poss: ayakuseei) n a soft type of cassava bread, made from cassava grated the same day; fresh cassava bread sclr prop: ekeꞌnan 1, akuse, pɨyɨ .
aꞌkuꞌtɨ vt using something for the first time Sarai aꞌkuꞌtɨ uya. I am using my new comb.
akʉ2 (poss: ayakʉ) n 1) contents of pepperpot; fish, meat, etc. tuma akʉ contents of the tuma 2) contents or items contained in something tʉnono kon akʉ the minerals in their land
akʉ3 n a variety of weevil
aꞌkʉ n jewellery; adornaments to the body
akʉ1 n (non-possessed) bee wʉi akʉ day's bee,
locust (so named because it sings during the day, especially during hot, sunny periods)

© 2014 SIL International®

21

Akawaio-English Dictionary

akʉꞌpʉ nom something nearly ripe, soon to be ready to eat, as in fruit Akʉꞌpʉ pe mango esi. The mango is soon ripe. dev: aꞌkʉra 1, akʉꞌpʉ, isaramenu, isuweyu, ukɨta .
aꞌkʉra (cf: isenan) nom 1) fruit that is green, unripe Aꞌkʉra pe apaꞌ esi. The avocado is not ripe. dev: aꞌkʉra 1, akʉꞌpʉ, isaramenu, isuweyu, ukɨta ; opp: isuweyu . 2) premature, as in a baby born prematurely syn: amiyu .
aꞌkʉranʉkʉ vt tickle syn: sakaiꞌsakaiꞌma .
aꞌkʉre keꞌ something insufficient to meet the need Aꞌkʉre keꞌ pe toꞌ iꞌkiyari esi. Their food
is insufficient.
aꞌkʉreꞌtɨ vt 1) endure aꞌkʉreꞌtɨtoꞌ pe Kʉrai nʉtʉrʉꞌpʉ the endurance that Christ gave syn: moronka . 2) withstand; put up with
akʉta vt bore, make a hole in something like a weevil, or akʉ Iyakʉtasaꞌ. It was bored.
aꞌkʉꞌtɨ vt decorate
akʉꞌtɨ vt add meat to soup
akʉtʉ (var: akɨtʉ) vt 1) cut Warawoꞌ uya piyaiꞌma apon sinkokoiꞌ akʉtʉꞌpʉ. The boy cut the vine, the giant's seat. Yʉi akɨtʉꞌpʉ uya. I cut down the tree. syn: iꞌtaꞌka . 2) harvest 3) shear
aꞌkwa1 (var: akaru; poss: ayaꞌkwarʉ) n 1) spirit Papa Aꞌkwarʉ God's Spirit 2) sense; good sense or wisdom Mɨrɨ rɨ aꞌsiꞌpʉ uya uꞌpai tau nin si, uꞌpai aꞌkwarʉ ke. I held that in my head; with my good sense. 3) life, the essence of a person (comp.: Papa Aꞌkwarʉ (see under Papa) )
aꞌkwaꞌ (poss: ɨyeꞌkweꞌ) n 1) hammock 2) bed
aꞌkwa2 (poss: ayaꞌkwarii) 1) nom something

bright 2) n light aꞌkwaka vt brighten Ɨutɨ aꞌkwakakɨ. Brighten up
the house. (Turn on the lights.) (der.: utaꞌkwaka)
aꞌkwarʉ ainʉnpa (id. of ainʉnpa) vr grieve Ayaꞌkwarʉ kʉsainʉnpai! You mustn't grieve!
aꞌkwarʉ iꞌmaꞌka (id. of iꞌmaꞌka) vr grieve
aꞌkwarʉ moꞌka (id. of moꞌka) vr grieve Ayaꞌkwarʉ kʉꞌmoꞌkai! Don't grieve!
aꞌkwarʉka2 vt 1) force, compel ayaꞌkwarʉkakapʉ uya pen nɨ I didn't keep on forcing you 2) take something by force (lit: take away oneꞌs spirit)
aꞌkwarʉka1 vt 1) depress 2) beg, implore, ask strongly or with strong feeling Toꞌ uya aꞌkwarʉkaꞌpʉ, "Tʉpikaꞌtɨsen yeꞌ pe kuru pʉse rɨ warawoꞌ esi," taꞌpʉ toꞌ uya. They
begged him, "This man is our great helper," they said.
(der.: utaꞌkwarʉka)
aꞌkwarʉꞌpʉ n 1) shadow 2) spirit of a dead person
aꞌkwarʉꞌtɨ (var: akaruꞌtɨ) vt fill (der.: utakaruꞌtɨ)
aꞌkweta var. of aꞌweta
ama1 vt move Amakɨ. Move it. Aponoꞌ amaꞌpʉ uya. I moved the bench. utama (der.) vr move
ama2 (poss: ayamaai) n hammer
amaꞌ (poss: ayamato) nom thief Amaꞌ pe warawoꞌ esiꞌpʉ. The boy was as a thief (he was
secretive/thief-like).
Ama nprop the name given to a creek on the Upper Mazaruni, topside from Jawalla on the left.
Ama Arepu nprop the name given to a place along the Upper Mazaruni River (but where?)

© 2014 SIL International®

22

Akawaio-English Dictionary

amai (cf: aꞌai, noꞌnoꞌ, koꞌkoi, waꞌwa) n 1) grandmother, direct reference (?) syn: koꞌkoi . 2) mother, direct address
amaꞌma vt steal, take something belonging to someone else
amamʉ vi be or become wet
aꞌmamʉ vi swell up, as an abcess Tanporo ipun aꞌmanpɨtʉꞌpʉ ipikaꞌtɨnin pʉra rɨ. All his
abcesses swelled up (so they were) no help (to him).
aman n boa constrictor Constrictor constrictor
amanawʉ n a type of music
amanka vt soak Oꞌ kanpʉ amankaꞌpʉ uya. I soaked the dried meat. opp: aꞌmunaka ; syn: iꞌkurinsaꞌ 1 .
amaꞌnon (poss: ayamaꞌnomʉ) nom 1) something or someone beautiful; a nice, young woman Amaꞌnon pe iyesi. She is beautiful. 2) someone or something pretty
aꞌmansaꞌ n abscess
amara n stick with forked end, used to pick fruit
amariwaꞌ n 1) a variety of snake 2) a folkloric snake
amariwakʉꞌpan nom 1) an evil spirit Sises uya kaꞌpon amʉꞌ epiꞌtɨpɨtʉꞌpʉ paran pokon kon, mɨrɨ awonsiꞌkɨ amariwakʉꞌpaꞌnan nɨ.
Jesus was healing many people of their diseases and
evil spirits. 2) someone having seizures or fits, someone suffering from the bite of an amariwa' snake aꞌmerumɨ vi make a sound, like rain in the distance as it approaches Tuna aꞌmerumɨ. The
rain is sounding.
amiꞌka vt lick, especially to lick one's lips Teꞌpi amiꞌkaꞌpʉ iya. He licked his lips.
aꞌminta vi 1) be or become heated Turare ewan si aꞌminta eꞌsaraꞌtɨꞌpʉ. Turare began to feel hot

in his belly. ewan aꞌminta heartburn, or a hot belly 2) reheat, as in warming up leftover food for the next meal aꞌmintanʉkʉ vt 1) heat, make something hot Tʉꞌma aꞌmintanʉkʉꞌpʉ iya. She heated her own tuma. 2) arouse violence in someone by one's talk aꞌmiꞌpɨ (poss: ayaꞌmiꞌpɨ) 1) nom the smallest one of a group opp: epoto ; whole: miyaꞌ ; syn: miyaꞌ aꞌmiꞌpɨ . 2) nom last child born in a family 3) n last in a line of brothers and/or sisters 4) n baby toe 5) n baby finger emiya aꞌmiꞌpɨ smallest finger; pinky
amiso n a variety of soup (tuma) made with cassava leaves (eki are)
amiyu nom premature Amiyu pe iyesi. He is premature. syn: aꞌkʉra 2 .
amɨ vt build; as in a house Ɨutɨ amɨꞌpʉ uya. I built a house. Eta mamɨyan peꞌ? Are you putting up leaves (for a trash roof)? syn: usewaꞌtɨ 2 .
amma vt catch Aimara ammapai tesi pɨꞌ eꞌneꞌ rɨ moronkaꞌpʉ iya. He wanted to catch aimara
fish so bad he was willing to suffer for it.
amokoꞌma vt 1) roll into a ball, coil 2) put one's hair into a bun Uyiꞌpai amokoꞌmaꞌpʉ uya. I
put my hair up in a bun.
amoꞌkoro vt 1) wrestle Ipi amoꞌkoroꞌpʉ iya. He wrestled his older brother. 2) crumple or mash something utamoꞌkoro (der.) vr 1) wrestle each other 2) wrestle oneself
amon (poss: ɨyamon) n 1) bundle Mɨrɨ aꞌtai insin uya sikaru amon auromʉꞌpʉ eke pe.
Then, an engine wrapped/tied large bundles of sugar
cane. 2) coil aꞌmoro nom 1) something rotten kaiꞌkan
aꞌmoroꞌpʉ a rotten armadillo 2) something brittle or easily broken Aꞌmoro pe wariꞌsa esi. The

© 2014 SIL International®

23

Akawaio-English Dictionary

warishi is broken/rotten/falling apart.
aꞌmoroko n grandfather
aꞌmorʉka vt 1) throw down 2) break eꞌsaꞌmorʉka (der.) vr feel bad
utaꞌmorʉka (der.) (var iꞌmo1) vr thrown down
aꞌmota vi be or become rotten Ɨutɨ puru uya iyaꞌmota namaiꞌ. I am smoking the thatch on the
house so it doesn't rot.
aꞌmu (poss: ayaꞌmu) n 1) source, head Kukui aꞌmu Kukui River head 2) river bottom 3) the bottom of any object kanau aꞌmu the bottom of the boat 4) base Mɨrɨpan uya iyaꞌmu yau tɨꞌ pona yapon nonka. And he puts (the foundation
of the house) on the rock at the base.
amuku vt 1) collect Imʉnʉ si amukuiꞌma eta pona. He collected his blood in a leaf. 2) pack up Teꞌkweꞌ amʉꞌ rʉꞌkwɨ rɨ amuꞌpɨtʉꞌpʉ toꞌ uya. They packed up their hammocks. 3) pick up
aꞌmun n (non-possessed) dry land Iyekanwakaꞌpʉ toꞌsarɨ aꞌmun pona. Straight away, he got out of the boat onto dry land. opp: aiꞌku 2 .
aꞌmuna vi 1) be or become dried up Tuna yen aꞌmunaꞌpʉ. The puddle dried up. 2) be or become warm Mɨrɨpan inonkaꞌpʉ toꞌ uya apoꞌ piyaꞌ iyaꞌmunatoꞌ pe. And then they set
him aside by the fire so he could warm up.
aꞌmunaka vt dry Uꞌpai aꞌmunakaꞌpʉ uya. I dried my hair. opp: amanka .
amuru n dust
amʉꞌ more than one Mʉre amʉꞌ uyeeꞌpɨꞌpɨtʉꞌpʉ. many children kept on coming.
amʉi n something that causes something to happen ɨkɨruwa amʉi sugar - what causes a

tooth ache
amʉipa vt draw, perhaps
amʉra vi gather, collect, crowd together eke pe iyamʉrasaꞌ kon the large gathering Mɨrɨ aꞌtai aiko ton rʉꞌkwɨ amʉraꞌpʉ. At that time, many small (fish) came together. (der.: amʉranʉkʉ)
amʉranʉkʉ vt collect Sises uya tʉpoitorʉ ton amʉranʉꞌsaꞌ. Jesus gathered his own disciples. eki amʉranʉꞌsaꞌ a backpack full of
cassava tubers
amʉreꞌ nom 1) someone acting greedily Amʉreꞌ pe pʉra eꞌtɨꞌ! Don't you all be greedy! 2) someone who collects things, often for himself
amʉreꞌnʉmʉ vi 1) hoard, keep to oneself Pʉrata eposaꞌ tʉuya ꞌnokon aꞌtai toꞌ amʉreꞌnʉmʉꞌpʉ itonpa pe rɨ pʉrata arɨꞌpʉ itaanꞌpʉ uya Peter piyaꞌ. They got money, kept
some for themselves, and took the rest to Peter. 2)
withhold (der.: amʉreꞌnʉnpa)
amʉreꞌnʉnpa vt make someone hoard something
amʉtʉ nom among Ina amʉtʉ pe iyesiꞌpʉ. He was among us. syn: itaperʉꞌka .
an var. of anɨ
aꞌnaiꞌ (poss: ayaꞌnasi) n corn Gramineae
anaikaꞌ (var: kanaꞌai) n (non-possessed) a variety of fan-headed parrot Deroptyus accipitrinus
anakoꞌ n a variety of red-bellied bird
Aꞌnaren nprop the name given to a settlement up the A'taro River, off the Kukui River
anaꞌsakaꞌwa n 1) a variety of locust 2) a variety of bird
aꞌneꞌ nom something hot, as in temperature or intensity of the sun Aꞌneꞌ pe pata esi. The place/weather is hot. opp: komiꞌ ; sclr prop:

© 2014 SIL International®

24

Akawaio-English Dictionary

aꞌneꞌ, iꞌnɨꞌkenan, komiꞌ .
ani (poss: ayanii) n tongue
ani kʉrʉkʉrʉ var. of aniꞌkura
aniꞌkura (var: ani kʉrʉkʉrʉ) n 1) gill of a fish moroꞌ aniꞌkura fish's gill 2) the base of the tongue
anɨ (var: an) vt eat fish or other meat Moroꞌ anɨꞌpʉ uya. I ate fish. tansen edible, referring to
fish and meat
anɨnpa vt separate Ɨnʉꞌ uya ɨmoꞌka kon? Ɨnʉꞌ uya ayanɨnpa kon? Who can take you away?
Who can separate you?
anɨꞌsaꞌ var. of tukuiꞌ1
Ankauri tɨpʉ nprop the name given to a mountain (where?)
ankoruwa n a tattoo, given to Akawaio women on the inside of the forearm
annaꞌ adv publicly Isenpoikaꞌpʉ annaꞌ Israel amʉꞌ koroꞌtaꞌ. He appeared publicly to the Jews.
annoꞌta n (non-possessed) a small, forested area surrounded by savannah
aꞌno (var: aꞌnomʉ) vt put something in the sun or near the fire for warmth Yʉi po rʉꞌkwɨ taꞌnopɨꞌsen pe. He was on a stick warming himself in the sun. Wʉi yau aꞌnonpɨꞌ esiꞌpʉ. I was getting warm in the sun. Apoꞌ piyau aꞌnonpɨꞌ esiꞌpʉ. I was getting warm by the fire.
anoꞌma vt 1) misplace, lose Upon anoꞌmaꞌpʉ uya. I lost/misplaced my shirt. 2) charm, make someone lose their senses 3) confuse someone, cause someone to stray from what they know is right Pʉse rɨ uya kaꞌpon amʉꞌ anoꞌma. This
one is confusing the people.
utanoꞌma (der.) 1) vr lost 2) vi lost 3) vi mad
aꞌnomʉ var. of aꞌno
anomʉraꞌ n (non-possessed) midnight

Anomʉraꞌ aꞌtai, pʉraki pataꞌtɨꞌpʉ ina uya.
At midnight, we planted the flag.
anontɨ n a variety of tree, the fruit of which is used to make body paint, annato Bixa orellana syn: karapiyaꞌpɨ1, sapa1 1 .
anpaꞌ n (non-possessed) a variety of frog good for eating, Krapo Hyla sp.
anpisin 1) nom many items, especially people anpisin eporiꞌmatoꞌ pe plenty happy people 2) n a crowd of people Iyeraꞌtɨꞌpʉ anpisin kaꞌpon amʉꞌ taꞌkɨrɨ tʉweꞌsan winɨkʉiꞌ. He turned
toward the crowd that was with him.
anpokoma var. of anpokʉma
anpokʉma (var: anpokoma) vt disturb, trouble Umʉre uya uyanpokʉmaꞌpʉ. My child
disturbed me.
utanpokʉma (der.) vr bother
ansaꞌma (var: eꞌseꞌma) vt set a trap for any kind of animal
anꞌti n aunt; more specifically the sister of one's mother
anuku (cf: anʉmʉ1) vt 1) collect Toꞌ pʉꞌtaꞌpʉ nin si anukuꞌpʉ iya. He collected their footprints. 2) pour syn: entɨ 3 .
anʉ vt 1) scratch 2) plow Non anʉnin pɨꞌ iyesiꞌpʉ He plowed the ground.
aꞌnʉkʉ vr to be or become scattered syn: eꞌtʉrʉꞌkwa 1 .
anʉkʉ 1) vi overflow Kasiri anʉkʉꞌpʉ iwaai apai. The cassava drink overflowed from its container. 2) vt make a gas, as in the cassava drink becoming alcoholic 3) vt give water to a plant Aꞌporos uya nin si inanʉkʉ mɨrɨ.
Apollos waters it.
aꞌnʉmʉ vi groan iyaꞌnʉmʉ pʉra rɨ he was not
groaning

© 2014 SIL International®

25

Akawaio-English Dictionary

anʉmʉ1 (cf: anuku) vt 1) receive 2) take 3) pick up Anʉmʉꞌpʉ uya. I picked it up. 4) buy syn: eꞌma1, enna2 . 5) accept 6) carry Mɨrɨpan anʉꞌnʉkʉꞌpʉ toꞌ uya. They carried her. 7) choose utanʉmʉ (der.) 1) vr select 2) vi selected 3) vi lifted
anʉmʉ2 vt meet eꞌsanʉmʉ (der.) vi jump
anʉꞌnʉkʉ vt bury Mɨrɨpan anʉꞌnʉkʉꞌpʉ iya saꞌne si itekepu. So he buried her, her body. syn: uꞌnaꞌtɨ .
anʉpʉ vr full Tuna uyeeꞌpʉ iten anʉpʉ pʉꞌkʉ pona rɨ. The rain came until the container was full.
anwana n (non-possessed) king vulture
apaꞌ (poss: ayapakʉʉi) n pear, avocado Lauraceae
apa1 vi 1) be or become lower, as in the water level of a river Tuna apa. The river is getting lower. opp: uꞌma2 . 2) disappear Epʉn mɨrɨ awonsiꞌkɨ non apatoꞌ oton tikin nɨ ikonekasaꞌ main apa rawɨrɨ. Heaven and earth
will disappear before one law disappears.
apa2 n kidney; the kidney of larger animals and humans syn: kuima2 .
Apa nprop the name given to a creek along the Kukui River between Jawalla and Pipiri pai
apai1 postp from in Epaꞌkakɨ warawoꞌ apai!
Come out from the boy!
apai2 nom shallow, low water level, so that boats can't pass Tuna esi apai pe. The river is low (so
that boats can't pass).
apaiꞌpɨ shallow, especially as refers to water Apaiꞌpɨ yau ekuꞌpɨtɨꞌ. You all bathe in the
shallow (water).

Aꞌpasi nprop the widow at Zarephath, the woman in the Bible whose flour and oil never ran out, found in 1 Kings 17
Apatoꞌka nprop the name given to a settlement along the Middle Mazaruni, near Merumɨ creek
Apau nprop the name given to a creek near Imbaimadai
ape vi confess tape esi aꞌtai when you confess, . . .
api vi 1) fall, in a figurative sense Itewan apikapʉ. His belly is falling./He is feeling disheartened. 2) deflate, as in a balloon or rising bread dough Pʉreti apikaaꞌpʉ. The bread dough
deflated.
apiꞌ (var: apisi) vt 1) hold Wakʉ ayaponoꞌ po, Seiso Kʉrai; puꞌpʉnon apiꞌkɨ, Seiso Kʉrai.
The seat of Christ is good; the senseless must
hold/understand/appreciate it. Kareta uyapisi pɨꞌ uwaai, Papa. I am holding the book as my container, God. 2) understand 3) appreciate aꞌpimuꞌ n a type of skin disease that leaves one with scaley skin apiremʉ var. of apirinta
apiri (poss: ayapiri) (cf: iꞌpoꞌ) n 1) the wing of a bird 2) the fin of a fish
apiriꞌka vt pluck feathers from a bird or fowl Kɨrɨtɨkɨ apiriꞌkaꞌpʉ ipa uya. His grandchild plucked the chicken. syn: iꞌpoka .
apirinta (var: apiremʉ) vt cause to fly, make a bird fly Toron apirintaꞌpʉ uya. I made the bird
fly.
apisi var. of apiꞌ
aꞌpiꞌtanʉkʉ vt toast some bread or meat with a little oil on a griddle
apiꞌtɨmɨn 1) nom something or someone thin opp: iꞌsin . 2) n the wafer given in Anglican communion, so named because of the thin character of the wafer

© 2014 SIL International®

26

Akawaio-English Dictionary

Aꞌpiu nprop the name of a small creek in back of A'piu pai settlement, for which the settlement is named
Aꞌpiu pai nprop the name given to a settlement in the Jawalla District, along the Mazaruni River, top-side of Wari'kwaima settlement
apiyoꞌ (var: apiyotoꞌ) n 1) slave 2) servant Wakʉ pe kuru iyesi mɨrɨ kamoro iyapiyoꞌ ton itenupɨkɨrɨ teꞌsan, ɨꞌrɨ pe pʉra rɨ ewarupɨ nau rɨ iyeꞌtane. It will be good for his
servants who are waiting, nothing (bad will happen) even if it is in the night (that he comes).
apiyoꞌma vt 1) give orders to work ayapiyoꞌmatoꞌ uya rɨ I order you (to do something) 2) enslave
apiyon vt command Ina uya ayapiyontɨꞌ kon. We command you. Ina uya ayapiyoꞌmaꞌpʉ. We
commanded you.
apiyotoꞌ var. of apiyoꞌ
apɨ1 vt touch Se aꞌpɨꞌkɨ. Touch this. Toꞌ enu aꞌpɨtʉꞌpʉ iya. He touched their eyes. aꞌpɨꞌpʉn
not married (not touched)
apɨ2 (cf: enkoꞌma) vi 1) chew Apɨtanʉꞌkɨ. Come and chew it. 2) gnaw, chew on one's own lip
apɨkamʉꞌ n a traditional variety of necklace
apɨn (poss: patawa yeꞌ apɨmu) n a variety of palm leaf Toꞌ utɨꞌpʉ iteꞌmatai patawa yeꞌ apɨmu ton itenauꞌne. They went behind him with
patawa palm leaves with them.
apɨꞌneꞌ var. of apʉꞌneꞌ
apɨnsaꞌ n a cramp in the leg
apɨrɨmʉ var. of apʉrʉmʉ
apɨrɨnpa var. of apʉrʉnpa
apɨru nom something rigid or firm Apɨru pe paranka esi. The board is rigid.
apɨrʉ (cf: paru1) n (non-possessed) creek,

stream syn: paru1 . apɨta2 n a variety of snail
apɨta1 vi be or become stiff Tanporo se amʉꞌ apɨtapɨꞌsaꞌ esiꞌpʉ. Everything was becoming stiff. (der.: apɨtanʉkʉ)
apɨtanʉkʉ vt make something stiff or rigid Apɨtanʉꞌkɨ. Make it stiff.
apɨtari var. of apɨtarɨ
apɨtarɨ (var: apɨtari; poss: ayapɨtarii) n decorated armbands worn in ceremonies
apoꞌ (poss: aꞌkamaꞌtu) (cf: kamaꞌtu) n fire Apoꞌ ipoꞌtɨkɨ. Light a fire. apoꞌ eꞌseꞌ (comp.) tripod
apoꞌ keme (comp.) fire wood
apoꞌ ren (comp.) embers
aꞌpo vt 1) dig out Mɨrɨpan teusan aꞌpoꞌpʉ iya.
And then he dug out the honey (from the tree). 2)
uncover apoꞌ eꞌseꞌ (comp. of apoꞌ) tripod on which to
cook food in a pot, made of three logs or three rocks apoꞌ keme (comp. of apoꞌ) fire wood, wood used in a cook fire apoꞌ ren (comp. of apoꞌ) embers, coals of a spent fire aꞌpoi (poss: ayaꞌpoi) n 1) back 2) backbone, spine apon (poss: ayaponoꞌ / ayapon) n 1) shelf ayaponoꞌ your shelf 2) bench 3) seat 4) place of residence, home Makoi apon pe rɨ man, Orʉ man pasikon. Sister, this world is the home of the
devil.
aꞌpoꞌnan 1) nom something sweet-smelling or fragrant Toꞌ uya aꞌpoꞌnan karapa eꞌmaꞌpʉ. They bought some sweet-smelling oil. opp: kɨ . 2) smelling as it should, especially as it refers to

© 2014 SIL International®

27

Akawaio-English Dictionary

cassava drink, after it has fermented for a time Mɨrɨ nin si iyaꞌpoꞌnansaꞌ aꞌtai, ina uya iparʉka nin si. When it smells just right, then we pour it. 3) n (non-possessed) incense aponka2 n a variety of fish (what kind?)
aponka1 vt hunt Oꞌ aponkaꞌpʉ toꞌ uya. They
hunted meat.
eꞌsaponka (der.) vr hunt for oneself
aporoꞌ (var: aporoꞌpon) 1) nom the middle of something as in the length of river known as the Middle Mazaruni River Aporoꞌ po sikuru iwʉꞌ esiꞌpʉ. The school building was in the middle. 2) n mediator Kaꞌpon amʉꞌ uyepʉ Papa rakʉiꞌ taporoꞌpon ke. People come before God with a
mediator.
aporoꞌpon var. of aporoꞌ
apotoimɨ n (non-possessed) comet
apuinan n a type of intestinal disease
apurɨ1 vt 1) believe Toꞌ uya Papa apurɨnin nan pen nɨ. They were not believers in God. apurɨtoꞌ eneiꞌma pʉra faith without seeing 2) worship 3) obey 4) have faith 5) praise 6) boast tɨwɨ intapurɨi Papa pɨꞌ rɨken nɨ. only boast in God. 7) welcome Mɨrɨpan ekaꞌtumʉꞌpʉ apurɨseꞌna. And he ran to welcome him. utapurɨ (der.) vr 1) brag 2) believe
apurɨ2 vt 1) eat with a spoon and plate Apurɨ uya. I am eating with a spoon and plate. 2) use Aparapii ton apurɨꞌpʉ uya. I used your dishes.
apuru (poss: ayapuruui) n belongings, personal effects tesanon apuruui its owners'
belongings
apuruka vt 1) stab Uyapurukaꞌpʉ iya. (The large stick/nail/object) stabbed me. 2) wound
apuruꞌtɨ vt block Ina eꞌmaꞌpʉ winɨ nin si

tʉyeꞌsan uya asanta apuruꞌtɨsaꞌ eneꞌpʉ mɨrɨ. Those coming after us saw that the path was
blocked.
aputa vi drown Mɨrɨpan kon si ekaꞌtumʉꞌpʉ tuna kaꞌ, mɨrɨpan kon aputaꞌpʉ. They rushed
into the water and drowned.
apʉꞌ vi be or become tired Menyan si ayapʉꞌkapʉ. See how tired you are?
apʉiꞌkeꞌ (poss: ayapʉiꞌketʉ) n strength Uyapʉiꞌketʉ kon our strength. opp: aꞌtuꞌmʉn ; syn: meruntɨ 1, panaꞌ pan 1 .
apʉima 1) vt curse someone by giving them many different symptoms ene uya apʉimasaꞌ
an ene cursed him (and he began showing
symptoms). 2) vr be or become possessed by an evil spirit Iyapʉimasaꞌ man. He has become
possessed.
apʉꞌka vi starve, be or become hungry Kapʉꞌkaꞌtʉu! (All of you) don't starve! Wakʉ kamoro tapʉꞌkaꞌsan, toꞌ utaꞌreꞌtɨtoꞌ oton.
Blessed are those who are hungry, they will be full.
opp: utaꞌreꞌtɨ . apʉꞌkaꞌnʉkʉ (der.) vt starve
apʉꞌkaꞌnʉkʉ (der. of apʉꞌka) vt make someone starve
apʉne (cf: masa) interj wait Apʉne enkɨ! Wait and see! (command form for one person) Apʉne pʉra si asaꞌrɨ tʉꞌta po iyesi aꞌtai, pata umaꞌta tukaiꞌ. Because when he touches two feet, the world will be destroyed. syn: enuripʉ .
apʉꞌneꞌ (var: apɨꞌneꞌ) 1) nom rushing as in the swiftness of a rising river Apʉꞌneꞌ pe mɨrɨ korʉme uꞌmasaꞌ esiꞌpʉ. It was rushing when Korʉme creek was rising. 2) n current of a river or flow of water Apɨꞌneꞌ pe tuna esi. The river has a strong, swift current. 3) n tide of the ocean
apʉrʉmʉ (var: apɨrɨmʉ) 1) vi run toꞌ

© 2014 SIL International®

28

Akawaio-English Dictionary

apʉrʉmʉ koroꞌtau teꞌsen kasa rɨ while they were running, as before 2) vt escape 3) n escape apʉrʉnpa (der.) (var apɨrɨnpa) 1) vt chase 2) abduct
apʉrʉnpa (var apɨrɨnpa) (der. of apʉrʉmʉ) 1) vt chase, cause to run Usari apʉrʉnpaꞌpʉ ina uya. We chased a deer. 2) abduct Mʉre amʉꞌ apɨrɨnpaꞌpʉ toꞌ uya. They abducted the
children.
apʉsin var. of ausin
ara n 1) (non-possessed) horizontal rafters in a roof to support shingles or tin roofing 2) the ribs of the inside of a boat kanau ara the boat's rib
Ara nprop the name of a creek between Imoi ken and Pipiri pai
Araꞌea nprop the name for the second set of rapids on the way up the Partang (?) River to Maipuri Falls
arai n (non-possessed) spider, general term Ananeae sp.
araikʉ vi feel sudden pain in one's side Itaraikʉꞌpʉ. He felt a sudden pain in his side.
araiꞌkwaꞌ n animal, maybe a variety of monkey cf: iwaruwana 1 .
araira n (non-possessed) a variety of tree from which roofing slats are cut, yariyari tree,from which fishing rods are also made Ducuetia decurrens
Araitai pai nprop the name given to a bay along the Upper Mazaruni River, above Imbaimadai
araka var. of aranka
arakaka n (non-possessed) a variety of small, swamp turtle; not found in rivers
arakapʉꞌsa (cf: urapa) n gun
aramari n a six-headed snake in some Akawaio stories
aranka (var: araka) 1) vi be or become loosed

syn: eukwa 2 . 2) vt untie Toꞌ arankaꞌpʉ uya. I untied them. Tenkoꞌmasaꞌ iya aꞌtai, itarankaꞌpʉ itewan yau. After being swallowed, he loosed himself in his belly. syn: eukwa 1 . 3) vt demolish, break down Ɨutɨ arankaꞌpʉ toꞌ uya. They demolished the house. 4) vt sort a group of things Arankapɨtʉꞌpʉ iya inke rɨ. He sorted (them) for a long time. 5) vt unroll utaranka (der.) vi untied
arapɨ (poss: ayarapɨɨi) n 1) a large, oval bowl made from a calabash 2) calabash, the plant or the gourd Crescentia cujete
arara n a variety of tree, black yarri-yarri tree Guatteria sp.
arata n rib Captain arata eꞌwɨsaꞌ. Captain's rib
was hurting.
araꞌtɨ vt build; in particular, putting up the vertical rafters Ɨutɨ araꞌtɨ ina uya. We are
building a house.
Aratʉi nprop the name given to a place between Pipiri pai and I'moi ken; where the Roberts family lives
arauta n 1) (non-possessed) a variety of howler monkey Mycetes seniculus 2) a variety of reddish brown caterpillar, so named because of its similar color to the howler monkey
arauta aukwʉ n a variety of poro fruit (lit: monkeyꞌs tail)
arautaimɨ n 1) whooping cough 2) cold, cold symptoms syn: aton .
arawera n (non-possessed) a musical instrument of questionable origin and makeup
Arawewa nprop a variety of animal
arawo n owl
araꞌya n (non-possessed) a variety of wild guava tree or fruit
are n spleen

© 2014 SIL International®

29

Akawaio-English Dictionary

aꞌreꞌ n food, a general term
areꞌka1 vt carry leaves in bundles Eta amʉꞌ areꞌkaꞌpʉ toꞌ uya. They carried lots of leaves in
bundles.
areꞌka2 vi for a tree to drop leaves Itareꞌkaꞌpʉ. It
lost its leaves.
Arekuna nprop 1) a person of the Arekuna tribe 2) the name given to the Arekuna tribe
areꞌna (poss: ayareꞌna) n 1) tip of an animal's tail 2) tail syn: aukwʉ . areꞌnaꞌtɨ (der.) vt attach a tail
areꞌnaꞌtɨ (der. of areꞌna) vt put a tail on something like a kite Areꞌnaꞌtɨkɨ. Put a tail on it.
Areruya nprop the traditional religion of certain groups of Amerindians in the circum-Roraima region, most recently embraced by the Akawaio tribe
areta vi be or become leafy, for a tree to grow new leaves
aꞌreꞌtɨ vt feed Umʉre aꞌreꞌtɨꞌpʉ uya. I fed my
baby.
utaꞌreꞌtɨ (der.) vr feed oneself
ariꞌkata n a variety of small, brown bee
ariꞌkeꞌ (var: ariꞌkenaꞌ) nom something or someone industrious Ariꞌkeꞌ pe iyesi. He is industrious. opp: emiyaꞌneꞌ ; syn: emiyaꞌpokeꞌ 2 .
ariꞌkenaꞌ var. of ariꞌkeꞌ
ariꞌku (poss: ayariꞌku) n flower itariꞌku its flower syn: ipʉrʉ .
ariꞌma vt 1) cause something to swing Wanaꞌ ariꞌma aꞌsetun uya. The wind causes the grass to swing back and forth. 2) wave Paarʉ eꞌmʉꞌsaꞌkaꞌpʉ, enwoꞌneꞌ temiya ariꞌmaꞌpʉ iya, eꞌpana toꞌ eꞌtoꞌ pe. Paul stood up, and he

waved his right hand so they would be quiet.
arimaraka n a variety of tiger, (what type? size? colouring? Real or mythological?)
arin n 1) a queen bee Ina arin saꞌne ɨmɨrɨ ko! You really are our queen! syn: kororoꞌ 2 . 2) queen ant 3) queen termite or other insect
arinta1 (arintanʉkʉ) vi fly, as a bird does syn: ariwomʉ .
arinta2 vi become big Warawoꞌ arintasaꞌ man.
The boy has become big/become a man.
arintanʉkʉ arinta1 vt make something fly Kurun kanwa arintanʉkʉꞌpʉ iya. He made
the airplane fly.
ariꞌnʉnpa vt encourage another person with one's talk opp: emiyaꞌnʉnpa .
ariꞌpokʉ (var: iꞌpokʉ) vt beat, strike Poro yeꞌ ariꞌpokʉꞌpʉ uya. I beat the poro tree.
ariꞌsa n a variety of tree that thrives with its trunk under water, found on river banks
arita vi 1) be or become blue, as in the colour of dead flesh Toꞌ pun aritaꞌpʉ. Their flesh turned blue. 2) bruise
ariwomʉ vi fly, as a bird flies Toron ariwomʉꞌpʉ. The bird flew. syn: arinta1 .
ariya (cf: piyan) n (non-possessed) a variety of hawk or eagle Buteo magnirostris
arɨ vt carry Se akɨ. Carry this. Anapai. I want to
carry it.
usarɨ (der.) vi walk
arɨn n a variety of animal that eats plenty arɨꞌtɨ var. of arʉꞌtɨ
aroꞌ (poss: ayarokooi) n hat ayarokooi your hat arʉkoꞌtɨ (der.) vt wear
Aroꞌ Awon (cf: Meꞌkoro Awen) nprop the name of a large rock in the Upper Mazaruni

© 2014 SIL International®

30

Akawaio-English Dictionary

River between Kako and Jawalla, meaning "Anvil Rock" or "Hat Rock" aroiꞌ n a variety of red cashew tree
arosimɨ n a variety of logo-logo-like fish
Arosimɨ pai nprop the name given to a rock along the Upper Mazaruni River, between Jawalla and Imbaimadai
aru n porcupine Sphingurus prehensilis aru iꞌpoꞌ
porcupine quill
Aru Paru nprop the name of a creek off the Kako River that runs behind the Jawalla village area
arukʉimɨ n a variety of large black bee found in rotten tree stumps or other rotten wood Genus bombus
aꞌrunpa (var: iraꞌrunpa) vt 1) lift up Mɨrɨpan kuwata uyeeꞌpʉ aꞌrunpaseꞌna. And then the gorilla came to lift her up. 2) pick up
aruwai n a variety of scaled fish, hassar Callichthys littoralis gen: tʉpiꞌpɨkenan .
Aruwe pai nprop the name given to a settlement along the Kukui River above Irɨtɨ pai
arʉ2 postp inside Mɨrɨpan esiꞌpʉ tʉpona rɨ, iyarʉ pʉra. And it was by itself, nothing inside it. arʉꞌtɨ (der.) (var arɨꞌtɨ) vt 1) fill 2) load
arʉ1 n clitoris
arʉka n wasp, marabunta
arʉkɨꞌ (poss: ayarʉkɨtʉʉi) n scissors
arʉkoꞌtɨ (der. of aroꞌ) vt to give someone a hat to wear, to make someone wear a hat Ina arʉkoꞌtɨpɨꞌsaꞌ toꞌ uya esiꞌpʉ. They gave us hats
to wear.
arʉꞌtɨ (var arɨꞌtɨ) (der. of arʉ2) vt 1) fill Ɨꞌrɨ toꞌ pe makoi uya ɨyewan arʉꞌtɨsaꞌ kasi yeꞌ pe ɨyesi pe tekonekaiꞌ? What evil fills your belly to speak lies? Mɨrɨ awaai arɨꞌtɨkɨ. Fill your

container. 2) load a gun Tʉurapaai arʉꞌtɨꞌpʉ iya. He loaded his own gun. asaꞌken (der. of asaꞌrɨ) two people living together, often as a married couple Asaꞌken toꞌ esiꞌpʉ. They lived together. asakɨrɨꞌnan (attrib. of asakɨrɨꞌne) n
asakɨrɨꞌne n (non-possessed) the number four, 4 Itasakɨrɨꞌpanno the fourth (one) asakɨrɨꞌnan (attrib.) n
asamaꞌpʉ 1) behind Asamaꞌpʉ winon pɨꞌ kaꞌkɨ. Say you are coming behind. 2) after
aꞌsamʉtʉ n togetherness, fellowship wakʉ pe kuru aꞌsamʉtʉ yau it is very good to be in
fellowship
aꞌsaꞌmʉyai half Mɨrɨpan uya aꞌtɨꞌpʉ aꞌsaꞌmʉyai. Then they cut it in half.
aꞌsan n blanket
aꞌsanaꞌ postp into the midst of Mɨrɨpan anʉmʉꞌpʉ piyaiꞌma uya tʉpana aꞌsanaꞌ. And
then he put it into his ear.
aꞌsanau postp between Yaranta uya kuwaꞌkʉꞌsaꞌ kon, kuyaꞌsanauꞌnokon iyesi. A
valley is our barrier between us.
aꞌsaꞌnota vi be or become mildewed Iyaꞌsaꞌnotasaꞌ upon esiꞌpʉ. My clothes became
mildewed.
asanta (cf: eꞌma2) n path, trail, line aꞌsantɨ vt wrap or pack or cover or surround
aꞌsaꞌreꞌ n a variety of tree, silk cotton tree, has edible seeds, brown cotton is used on arrows for blow guns syn: kumaꞌ .
asaꞌrɨ n (non-possessed) the number two, 2 asaꞌken (der.) together
asaꞌron (attrib.)

© 2014 SIL International®

31

Akawaio-English Dictionary

asaꞌron (attrib. of asaꞌrɨ)
aꞌsaruta vi be or become swollen, swell up, inflate, rise Iꞌsi ton aꞌsarutapɨꞌsaꞌ. His legs had
become swollen.
aꞌsarutanʉkʉ (der.) vt raise
aꞌsarutanʉkʉ (der. of aꞌsaruta) vt make something rise, as in adding yeast to bread dough aꞌsarutanʉꞌnin yeast
aꞌseꞌku n (non-possessed) something sweet opp: iꞌneꞌ ; opp: koꞌtʉmʉn ; opp: kataꞌpan1 .
aserʉ nom 1) something or some place wet opp: aipʉ . 2) something fresh 3) something new
aꞌseta n a variety of rope
aꞌsetʉn windy place or condition Aꞌsetʉn pe pata esi. This is a windy place.
asi1 n older sister, direct address cf: yakon1 3 ; indir add: pasi .
asi2 nom silly aꞌsi vt 1) grab 2) hold Eta aꞌsiꞌpʉ uya. I held a
leaf. 3) touch 4) catch fish, using a net Tuꞌke toꞌ maꞌsii peꞌ? Did you catch many (fish)? 5) hold someone captive or in prison Uyennoꞌsaꞌ iya serɨ ekamaseꞌna aꞌsisaꞌ kon ponaroꞌ pe. He
has sent me to speak to those in captivity.
utaꞌsi (der.) 1) vr held 2) vi shake
asiꞌ n list Sises tamokori ton eseꞌ asiꞌ the list of
Jesus' ancestors
aꞌsiꞌkɨtɨꞌpɨ n a variety of cotton twine, especially when rotten
aꞌsin n thick bush
asiꞌono something light, not heavy opp: eꞌtamɨꞌneꞌ .
aꞌsipʉ vt glue Aꞌsiꞌkɨ. Glue it.
asiꞌtɨ1 (var: aisiꞌtɨ) vt 1) string, thread as in beads

2) arrange things in rows aꞌsiꞌtɨ vt repair, mend, patch Toꞌ esiꞌpʉ kanau
yau moroꞌ amʉꞌ aꞌsitoꞌ tʉuyaꞌnokon yai aꞌsiꞌtɨpɨtʉ pɨꞌ. They were in the boat mending that
with which they caught fish.
asiꞌtɨ2 vt poison fish aꞌsoꞌka vt stab
utaꞌsoꞌka (der.) vi stabbed
aꞌsokoꞌpɨ n the remains of the sifted cassava flour, not used as a food source
aꞌsuꞌka vt 1) suck on a sweet or something similar 2) kiss utaꞌsuꞌka (der.) 1) vi kissed 2) vr kiss
utaꞌsuꞌkan (der.) n kiss
aꞌta1 vi 1) sprout Iyaꞌtaꞌpʉ. It sprouted. 2) grow aꞌtai (cf: ewaiꞌ) 1) postp when Mɨrɨpan aꞌtai toꞌ
utɨꞌpʉ. When that happened, they went. Mɨrɨ yaꞌ itɨsaꞌ aꞌtai, . . .. When he went there, . . .. 2) n time Ɨꞌrɨ aꞌtai ɨyeꞌtoꞌ oton? (At) what time will
you come?
ataiwaꞌnan nom thin, as in liquid quality opp: eꞌpiꞌnan .
Aꞌtaro nprop the name given to a creek on the Kukui River
Atatai nprop the indigenous name given to Piyai'ma in direct reference; Dai-dai being the creolized version indir add: piyaiꞌma .
aꞌtɨ vt 1) cut 2) harvest Eki aꞌtɨ uya. I am
harvesting cassava root.
aꞌtɨꞌka var. of aꞌtʉꞌka
aꞌtoma (var: aꞌtomapɨ) vt 1) interrogate 2) ask a lot of questions, show interest in something Umʉre uya tʉtamokori aꞌtomapɨ panton pɨꞌ. My child asked his grandfather many questions.

© 2014 SIL International®

32

Akawaio-English Dictionary

Urɨ uya nɨrɨ si aꞌtomasaꞌ pɨꞌ tanporon nɨ, iyeꞌsaraꞌtɨꞌpʉ siꞌkɨrɨ. I, also, have been with
questions about everything, from the beginning.
aꞌtomapɨ var. of aꞌtoma
aton n cold, the symptoms related to having a cold syn: arautaimɨ 2 .
atuꞌ nom 1) someone well opp: takuruꞌ ; opp: eꞌneꞌ1 1 . 2) someone healthy
aꞌtuꞌma1 vt 1) push off, leave shore in a boat 2) cast out Ɨri aꞌkwarʉ aꞌtuꞌmanin pe iyesiꞌpʉ.
He was one casting out evil spirits.
utaꞌtuꞌma2 (der.) vi 1) push off 2) float
aꞌtuꞌma2 vt make worse utaꞌtuꞌma1 (der.) vr worsen
aꞌtuꞌmʉn nom someone or something weak opp: apʉiꞌkeꞌ ; syn: ɨꞌsɨꞌmʉn .
aꞌtuneꞌ 1) straight-shooting, as in a slingshot's ability Aꞌtuneꞌ pe uropaai esi. My slingshot shoots straight 2) accurate, as in the ability of a slingshot to hit its operator's intended target
atʉ n 1) from the English word "yard" meaning 3 feet in length 2) new, unshrunk cloth, so named because of the borrowed word 'yard'
aꞌtʉi n a type of basket, customarily used to hold meat over a lighted fire to prevent the meat from spoiling
aꞌtʉꞌka (var: aꞌtɨꞌka) vt 1) bore, prick, pierce, stick into one's skin Yʉi ke uꞌta aꞌtʉꞌkaꞌpʉ. A stick bored my foot. 2) inject, give an injection Uyaꞌtɨꞌkaꞌpʉ iya. She injected me.
aukwʉ (poss: ayaukwʉ) n tail kari aukwʉ
squirrel's tail; also the name of a deer, said to be the
colour of a squirrel's tail syn: areꞌna 2 .
aure n the stern of a boat Kanau aure the stern of
the boat
auroꞌka vt tell Ɨnʉꞌ rɨ auroꞌkaꞌpʉ toꞌ uya pen.

They didn't tell anybody.
auroko (var: aurokʉ) vt speak to someone Kamoro warawoꞌ amʉꞌ aurokoꞌpʉ uya. I
spoke with those boys.
usauroko (der.) (var usaurokʉ; var usauroꞌ) vr speak aurokʉ var. of auroko
auromʉ vt tie, bind Ewa auromʉꞌpʉ uya. I tied the fishing line. Tauronpɨꞌse ɨiwʉꞌ koneka auya. You make your house by tying it (together).
auroꞌsa (poss: ayauroꞌsaai) n a variety of wild calaloo
ausarako var. of kaisarako
ausin (var: apʉsin) nom 1) someone willing Ausin pe iyesi. He is willing. 2) someone excited utausinpa (der.) vr excited
auya ( uya) you (singular), as subject of a transitive sentence
awaiꞌkara n old clothes, full of holes
awaiꞌna vi be or become melted or turned into a liquid state Ikasiꞌ awaiꞌnaꞌpʉ. The fat melted.
awaiꞌnan nom something clear or transparent Awaiꞌnan pe tuna esi. The water is clear. opp: ikuꞌ .
awanakʉiꞌ adv in the morning Awanakʉiꞌ ina utɨ mɨrɨ. We will go in the morning. opp: ukoꞌmamʉ 3 .
awanapairɨ n tomorrow Awanapairɨ ina utɨ soꞌsi taꞌ. Tomorrow, we will go to church. cal: mʉꞌkuꞌ koꞌmamiyau, koꞌmamiyau, serɨ, awanapairɨ, awanapairɨ eꞌmaꞌpʉ .
awanapairɨ eꞌmaꞌpʉ day after tomorrow cal: mʉꞌkuꞌ koꞌmamiyau, koꞌmamiyau, serɨ, awanapairɨ, awanapairɨ eꞌmaꞌpʉ .

© 2014 SIL International®

33

Akawaio-English Dictionary

awara n 1) a variety of tree with hard, sour fruit 2) the fruit of the same tree
awara akʉ n a variety of bird, blue in colour, similar in variety to the green sɨkɨi
aware n (non-possessed) opossum Metachinus nudicaudatus
awarimɨ n (non-possessed) a variety of poisonous, colourful snake that lives in the bush
awaroto
Aweiꞌka nprop the name given to one of the head creeks of the Upper Mazaruni River
awen n a bay of water along a river syn: kupai .
aꞌweta (var: aꞌkweta) vi 1) be or become full Maꞌwetayan peꞌ? Are you full/satisfied? 2) satisfied
awɨrɨ postp 1) during, with aworon pe teꞌsan those who are with him 2) through Paarʉ mɨrɨ awonsiꞌkɨ Sairas utɨꞌpʉ Anꞌpiꞌpores mɨrɨ awonsiꞌkɨ Aꞌporoniya pata ton awɨrɨ. Paul
and Silas went through Amphipolis and Apollonia places.
awɨron (attrib.) n

awɨron (attrib. of awɨrɨ) n
awoino n a traditional variety of necklace
awon n leader tanporon kon pata awon all the
leaders
awonsiꞌkɨ 1) conj and . . ., mɨrɨ awonsiꞌkɨ, . . . . . ., and . . . 2) postp from Aqaba awonsiꞌkɨ iyeꞌsaꞌ mɨrɨ. He has come from Aqaba. syn: ponsiꞌkɨ .
aꞌwoꞌpʉ (poss: ayaꞌwoꞌpʉrʉʉi) n a rotting tree trunk, standing or fallen
ay- phon. var. of a-
aya (poss: ayarii) n root used to poison fish
ayan (poss: ɨyiwɨ) n louse Pulex capitus
ayannʉꞌ nom chigger-infested; to have plenty chiggers Kitata iꞌmoi ansaꞌ auya yau, ayannʉꞌ pe ɨwesi, tawon nan kamoro. If you
eat grasshopper eggs, you will become chiggerinfested, so they say.
aꞌyau var. of aꞌkiyau
aꞌyaupɨ n (non-possessed) a variety of bitter cassava

Ee

eꞌ3 var. of esi eꞌ2 var. of yeꞌ1 eꞌ1 n form, shape kanau eꞌ the form of a canoe e- phon. var. of ɨ-
eꞌ- to cause to be; detransitivizer, changing a transitive verb into an intransitive one Iyeꞌmakoimaꞌpʉ. He sinned. Iyeꞌkawaiꞌtɨꞌpʉ.
He smoked (tobacco/a cigarette).
eeꞌkwa vi leak out of something for which the fluid should stay in Tuna eeꞌkwaꞌpʉ calabash

poi. The water leaked out from the calabash. useeꞌkwa (der.) vr leak
eiꞌ var. of eikʉ eiku var. of eikʉ eikʉ (var: eiꞌ; var: eiku) vt 1) speak 2) answer
Toꞌ eikʉꞌpʉ iya. He answered them. syn: maimukʉ 1 . eimaꞌ (var: aimaꞌ; poss: ɨyeimakʉ / ɨyeimakʉʉi) n griddle used for baking cassava

© 2014 SIL International®

34

Akawaio-English Dictionary

bread eimarare n a variety of snake
Eimaꞌtɨi nprop the name given to a place near Paruima; a place where eima' is found around the savannah area
eisika vt sift Eki eisikaꞌpʉ iya. She sifted the
cassava.
eꞌkaaiꞌma (der. of kaaiꞌma) vr fight each other; wrestle each other Ɨꞌrɨ pe si ke kaꞌpon ɨnennoꞌpai pʉra ɨwesikon urɨ aꞌkɨrɨ ina eꞌkaaiꞌmatoꞌ pe? Why don't you want to send
someone from you to me so we can fight?
ekaamꞌpo var. of ekamaꞌpo
ekaaꞌpo var. of ekamaꞌpo
ekainʉmʉ (var: ekainʉn) vi 1) climb Tɨꞌ pona iyekainʉmʉꞌpʉ. He climbed onto the rock. 2) go in an upward direction 3) ascend
ekainʉn var. of ekainʉmʉ
ekainʉnpa vt carry up Mɨrɨ ton ekainʉnpaꞌpʉ uya. I carried these up (from the river).
ekama vt 1) tell 2) preach Itekareei ekamapɨtʉꞌpʉ iya. He used to preach. 3) prophesy 4) read Betty uya kareta menu ekamaꞌpʉ. Betty read a book. syn: ene2 2 . 5) show Asanta ekama iya mɨrɨ, itenaꞌ rɨ ekama iya. He will show him the path. usekama (der.) 1) vi confess 2) vr tell
eꞌkama (der. of kama) 1) vr get oneself ready; prepare oneself Aino pɨꞌ nin si toꞌ eꞌkamaꞌpʉ mɨrɨ. They prepared them in the fry pan. 2) vi plan for oneself Iyeꞌkamaꞌpʉ. He planned. 3) vi take on the stance of a boxer, "square up" 4) vi ready oneself, be or become ready for something
ekaꞌma var. of eraꞌma
ekamaꞌpo (var: ekaamꞌpo; var: ekaaꞌpo) vt ask, request Toꞌ ekamaꞌpoꞌpʉ uya. I asked

them (a question). syn: enna3 . usekamaꞌpo (der.) vr asked
ekamʉ (var: ekan) vt 1) distribute, give out Ipoitorʉ ton uya ekamʉ aꞌtai, When his disciples distribute, 2) serve Kasiri ekannin iꞌse eꞌaiꞌ. I need someone to serve kazak. 3) share Mekamʉi peꞌ? Are you sharing? Ewaiꞌ, sekamʉi. Yes, I am sharing.
ekamʉn n 1) (non-possessed) danger 2) hardship
ekamʉra nom 1) having hateful feelings toward another Ekamʉra pe itɨꞌpʉ. He went as one having hateful feelings. 2) troublesome, being in trouble 3) miserable, uncomfortable, feeling bad 4) sin, a moral offense against someone else
ekan var. of ekamʉ
eꞌkan n 1) (non-possessed) a variety of wasp, found hanging in rafters without a nest 2) a variety of stinging bee
eꞌkaꞌnɨpa vr scratch oneself Iyeꞌkaꞌnɨpaꞌpʉ. He
scratched himself.
ekaꞌnʉkʉ vt make fat; fatten
ekaꞌnʉꞌsaꞌ fat one
ekanwaka (der. of kanawaka) vr get out of the boat Iyekanwakaꞌpʉ. He got (himself) out of the boat. opp: ekanwaꞌtɨ.
ekanwaꞌtɨ (der. of kanawaꞌtɨ) vr get into a boat Toꞌ ekanwaꞌtɨꞌpʉ. They got into a boat. opp: ekanwaka.
ekapʉꞌ cf: eꞌwasuꞌ. var. of ekapʉtʉ
ekapʉtʉ (var: ekapʉꞌ) vi defecate Iyekapʉtʉꞌpʉ. He defecated. Ekapʉꞌpɨtʉꞌpʉ. I used to defecate (in the same spot). One week ikoꞌmamʉꞌpʉ tekapʉꞌse pʉra. He stayed one week without defecating. Ekapɨꞌta. Go and
defecate.
ekaraka (der. of karaka) vr be or become

© 2014 SIL International®

35

Akawaio-English Dictionary

ripped; be torn Newspaper ekarakaꞌpʉ. The
newspaper became ripped.
ekarapaima (der. of karapaima) 1) vr put oil on oneself Iyekarapaimaꞌpʉ. He put on hair oil. 2) vi be or become oily
ekare (poss: ɨyekareei) n news, information, a retelling of recent events
ekareꞌtɨ vt 1) blow on an instrument or horn, to make a noise 2) tell, announce Toꞌ utɨꞌpʉ pata pona ekareꞌtɨseꞌna. The went to the place to tell
(what happened).
usekareꞌtɨ (der.) vr blow
ekariꞌma (cf: aꞌkoka) vi open
ekasi var. of ekatʉ
ekaꞌtumʉ vi run Iyekaꞌtumʉꞌpʉ. He ran. ekaꞌtunpa (der.) vt chase
ekaꞌtunpa (der. of ekaꞌtumʉ) vt chase, run after someone Iyekaꞌtunpaꞌpʉ toꞌ uya. They
ran after him.
ekatʉ (var: ekasi) vi 1) be or become big, grow up 2) be or become fat Iyekaꞌsaꞌ. He got fat.
eꞌkawaiꞌtɨ vi smoke tobacco, cigarettes, etc. Iyeꞌkawaiꞌtɨꞌpʉ. He smoked (tobacco/a cigarette).
ekayu 1) n a place without bush, a clean place Mɨrɨpan yau ekayu rʉꞌkwɨ, tɨꞌ esiꞌpʉ. In that
place, it was clean (no plant growth), there were
rocks. 2) smooth opp: kɨrɨkɨrɨ1 . eke 1) nom something big Iyaꞌtaꞌpʉ mɨrɨ
awonsiꞌkɨ iyepetaꞌpʉ eke pe. It sprouted and bore plenty fruit. eke pata ton big places opp: aiko 1 . 2) nom plenty Mɨrɨpan si eꞌtane tuꞌke rɨ waiken amʉꞌ uyeeꞌpʉ mɨrɨ aiko ton nin si. Tuꞌke rɨ waiken amʉꞌ tʉkaꞌpʉ toꞌ uya, eke pe rɨ. And then, plenty reindeer came, lots of small ones. They killed plenty reindeer, plenty. eke

ton itepuru ton pataꞌseꞌ a place belonging to plenty leaders 3) important person eke ton pataꞌseꞌ big/important people's place
ekeꞌ 1) someone or something dead itekepu his corpse opp: nurɨne 1 . 2) in a deep manner, as in sleeping deeply Mɨrɨpan kon si eꞌnʉmʉꞌpʉ ekeꞌ pe. They slept deeply.
eke yapɨ n a variety of scorpion, non-stinging gen: mɨnɨꞌ .
ekeꞌnan nom 1) something soft Ekeꞌnan pe eki esi. The cassava bread is soft/fresh. opp: saꞌman 2 ; sclr prop: ekeꞌnan 1, akuse, pɨyɨ . 2) something fresh
ekeꞌpɨ dirty, filthy, something thrown away
ekepu (poss: ɨyekepu) n corpse Sises ekepu karapaimaiꞌ tʉ- utɨ -toꞌ -kon pe the ones going
to anoint Jesus' corpse with oil
eꞌkereuta vi be or become slimy, so as to be nonconsumable, spoiled Sikaru eku eꞌkereutasaꞌ. The sugar cane drink has become
slimy.
eꞌkerewe nom 1) something slimy Eꞌkerewe pe kuiwa esi. The snail is slimy. 2) something slippery
eketuꞌka vt wear out, exhaust Wʉi uya uyeketuꞌkaꞌpʉ. The sun exhausted me.
eki n 1) bitter cassava Manihot utilissima eki yeꞌ cassava stick or cassava plant 2) cassava bread Eki tekiinɨiꞌ! Bake cassava bread! cf: u .
Eki Sikʉ nprop Young Cassava Festival, celebrated by the Alleluia adherants
ekiinnɨ var. of ekiinno
ekiinno (var: ekiinnɨ) (cf: itekiinno) vt bake cassava bread Eki ekiino iya. She is baking
cassava bread
ekiririꞌka vt shave Utaꞌsiꞌpoꞌ ekiririꞌkaꞌpʉ

© 2014 SIL International®

36

Akawaio-English Dictionary

uya. I shaved my beard.
eꞌkitoꞌka n dimple
ekiyoꞌka (der. of kiyoꞌka) vi be or become dented Iyekiyoꞌkasaꞌ. It was dented.
eꞌkɨiꞌma vi be or become feverish Eꞌkɨiꞌmaꞌpʉ. I
got a fever./I became feverish.
eꞌkɨꞌpa (der. of kɨꞌpa) vi be or become dirty Mʉre eꞌkɨꞌpaꞌpʉ. The child became dirty.
eꞌkɨrɨka vi anoint Karapa ke iyeꞌkɨrɨkaꞌpʉ. He
anointed himself with oil.
ekɨrɨnka vi be or become cracked Yʉi ekɨrɨnkaꞌpʉ. The wood cracked.
eꞌkɨrɨnta vi tan, get darker by the sun Ipiꞌpɨ eꞌkɨrɨntaꞌpʉ. His skin tanned.
eꞌkɨtɨꞌka vt wiggle
eꞌkɨtɨꞌkɨtɨꞌma vr twitch syn: usetuma .
eꞌkɨtɨtɨiꞌka vi 1) be or become clean by rubbing dirt off one's skin Iyeꞌkɨtɨtɨikaꞌpʉ. He rubbed dirt off his own skin. 2) grind, especially grind one's teeth
eꞌkɨtɨtɨiꞌma (var tɨtɨtɨiꞌkwa) (der. of kɨtɨtɨiꞌma) vr grinding one's own teeth; gnashing
ekoneka (der. of koneka) vr be or become prepared Tanporon nɨ ekonekaꞌpʉ Kʉrɨrɨ ke.
Everything was made with/by Him (God).
eꞌkoroika vi be or become sprained in one's ankle Iyeꞌkoroikaꞌpʉ. He sprained his ankle.
ekotaꞌma (der. of kotaꞌma) vr 1) be or become suffering Iyekotaꞌma seꞌpo pʉra. He is suffering (to bathe) without soap. 2) be or become struggling, striving
eꞌkuꞌ var. of eꞌkupʉ
eꞌku n (non-possessed) sap eꞌkuka (der. of kuka) vi be or become wiped

eꞌkuꞌkuma (der. of kuꞌkuma) vr be or become cooked Oꞌ eꞌkuꞌkumaꞌpʉ. The meat became
cooked.
ekuma vi 1) have sex, make love Ɨꞌrɨ ta iya ekuman pɨꞌ? What does he say about sex? 2) fornicate, to have sex before marriage Pʉse rɨ ɨmu ayapuruui, ɨpʉrataai maꞌtanʉꞌnin nʉꞌpʉ ekuman pɨꞌ. This son of yours has wasted
your things, your money on fornication.
ekumanka (der.) vt fornicate
ekumanka (der. of ekuma) vt make someone fornicate; have illicit sex with someone Ɨtonpa kon winɨkʉiꞌ rɨ kamakooitatʉu inoꞌpʉ tekumankaiꞌ. You all must not sin against your
friend by fornicating with his wife.
ekun var. of ekunari
ekunari (var: ekun) n hip
eꞌkuꞌnɨsaꞌ var. of eꞌkupʉ
eꞌkupiꞌka vi smile Iyeꞌkupiꞌkaꞌpʉ. He smiled.
ekupiukwa vr make a smile
ekuꞌpɨ (der. of kuꞌpɨ) vr bathe oneself Ekuꞌpɨiꞌ ina utɨ mɨrɨ. We are going to bathe.
eꞌkupʉ (var eꞌkuꞌnɨsaꞌ; var eꞌkuꞌ) (der. of kupʉ) 1) vr be or become done Awanapairɨ Church self-help eꞌkuuꞌpʉ. The church self-help was done this morning. teꞌkuꞌpɨꞌsen a miracle; that which has not been done 2) vr pretend wakʉ pe teꞌkuꞌsen hypocrite - one who pretends to be good 3) vi act as something or someone 4) vi curse someone to become something else Apʉne usari pe eꞌkuꞌkɨ! You will become a deer! 5) vi happened or occurred
eꞌkurimʉ (der. of iꞌkʉrimʉ) vi be or become wet eꞌkurinsaꞌ something wet Keꞌkurintʉu.
Don't get wet (in the rain).
ekuruꞌka vi be or become planted

© 2014 SIL International®

37

Akawaio-English Dictionary

ekuꞌtɨ vt make cassava drink Kasiri ekuꞌtɨ iya.
She is making cassava drink.
ekutuma (var: ekuꞌtuma) vi be or become muddy Tuna enkutumasaꞌ. The river became
muddy.
ekuꞌtuma var. of ekutuma
eꞌkʉꞌka (der. of kʉꞌka) vi be or become stretched Ropa eꞌkʉꞌkasaꞌ. The rubber was
stretched.
ekʉtʉtʉka vi hold tightly Kʉrɨ rɨ ekʉtʉtʉkasaꞌ iꞌmʉ pɨꞌ. He held on tightly to his neck.
eꞌkʉtʉtʉꞌpɨtʉ vr be or become cramped
eꞌkʉuma vi experience pain, not physically, but in mind or spirit Mɨrɨ yau esiꞌpʉ eꞌkʉuman pɨꞌ. There, I was in pain/my feelings were hurt.
eꞌkwa4 n (non-possessed) time tikin iteꞌkwa one
time, once
eꞌkwa2 n 1) grove mekuru eꞌkwa banana grove 2) farm
eꞌkwa3 1) n kind aroꞌ eꞌkwa hat-like (referring to a crown) Iteꞌkwa nau pʉra, Papa aꞌkwarʉ uya toꞌ weiꞌtɨꞌpʉ. Suddenly, God's light shined on them. Kaikusi amʉꞌ eꞌkwa nau utɨn serɨ. This
place through which we are walking has plenty tigers.
2) nom similar in meaning Ɨꞌrɨ ta tʉuya eꞌkwa pe Papa eꞌtoꞌ esaꞌ wannɨ pe? What is similar to
God being our ruler?
eꞌkwa1 1) vt fall off Mɨrɨ aꞌtai itenu si eꞌkwaꞌpʉ itenu apai moroꞌ piꞌpɨ kasa ɨꞌrɨ rɨ naon utaꞌpokʉꞌpʉ. At that time, something like scales fell from his eyes. 2) vi shed skin
eꞌkwapiꞌ n (non-possessed) solid or cured trunk lying on the ground
eꞌkwata vi pass wind, fart Iyeꞌkwataꞌpʉ. He
passed wind.
eꞌkwaꞌtɨ vt echo Marari eꞌkwaꞌtɨsaꞌ. the rapids

echoed (off the cliffs).
useꞌkwaꞌtɨ (der.) vr echoed
eꞌkwatʉ vt 1) accept 2) take tɨwɨ ipʉroꞌpon pokon pe ɨpon eꞌkwatʉi. let him take the piece of clothing on top of it. 3) gather
eꞌkwipɨ vi boil Mɨrɨpan ikuꞌmɨ ewomʉ iyeꞌkwipɨtoꞌ en yaꞌ. Then, its juice enters a
boiling tank.
eꞌkwɨꞌnɨsaꞌ var. of eꞌkwɨtʉ2
eꞌkwɨrɨtʉ vi cross over, go across from where one is, especially crossing on water Ina eꞌkwɨrɨtʉ iratoi pona. We are going across to
the other side.
eꞌkwɨtʉ2 (var: eꞌkwɨꞌnɨsaꞌ) vt fracture, especially an arm or leg Uꞌsi eꞌkwɨtʉꞌpʉ uya. I
broke my leg.
eꞌkwɨtʉ1 (der. of iꞌkwɨtʉ2) vr be or become broken Wanamari eꞌkwɨꞌpɨꞌsaꞌ. The glass/mirror
broke (into many pieces). Possibly 'kept on breaking'
Wanamari eꞌkwɨꞌsaꞌ. the glass/mirror broke (into
just two or three pieces).
eꞌma2 (poss: ɨyeꞌma) (cf: asanta) n path, line Reuben eꞌma awɨrɨ ina utɨ mɨrɨ. We will go (by
way of) Reuben's path.
eꞌma1 vt pay for; buy; purchase Ɨꞌrɨ meꞌmai? What did you pay for?/What did you buy? kiyari eꞌmapɨꞌseꞌ buying food; a fund-raiser syn: anʉmʉ1 4, enna2 . useꞌma (der.) 1) vr revenge 2) vi sacrifice
emaika 1) vi place, put Tʉmʉre emaikaꞌpʉ iyaꞌ. Her baby was placed into it. eki emaikasaꞌ a backpack full of cassava tubers 2) vt put away, put up, put aside
emaimuꞌka var. of eꞌmaimuꞌka vr silent, unable to speak Apʉne pʉra umaimu apurɨ auya pʉra iyesi pɨꞌ, ɨyemaimuꞌka nin si mɨrɨ. Because you do not believe my word, you will

© 2014 SIL International®

38

Akawaio-English Dictionary

be silent.
eꞌmaimuꞌka (var emaimuꞌka) (der. of maimuꞌka) vr be or become dumb, unable to speak Umaimu apurɨ auya pʉra iyesi pɨꞌ, ɨyeꞌmaimuꞌka nin mɨrɨ. Because you did not
believe my word, you will become dumb.
emaimupa vi pray
eꞌmainanpa (der. of mainanpa) vr watch oneself, watch one's behaviour Tʉweꞌmainanpaiꞌ meꞌtʉiꞌ! You all must watch
your behaviour!
emaiꞌpa vi poison oneself Iyemaiꞌpaꞌpʉ. He
poisoned himself.
eꞌmaꞌkɨrɨ vi thrown down
eꞌmakoima vi sin Eꞌmakoimasaꞌ man Epʉn winɨkʉiꞌ mɨrɨ awonsiꞌkɨ ɨwinɨkʉiꞌ nɨrɨ. Upɨꞌ ɨsentuꞌmaꞌ. I have sinned against Heaven and
against you also. You must show me mercy.
emakʉ (var: emapʉ) 1) n (non-possessed) dawn Iyeꞌpɨtʉꞌpʉ pata emakʉ pe mɨrɨ awon siꞌkɨ pata ukoꞌmamʉ pe kanan. He kept on coming at dawn and at evening also. 2) vi after night has passed, through the night Pata emaꞌsaꞌ yau, toꞌ utɨkaaꞌpʉ. After night had passed, they went again.
emaꞌkwa vt 1) keeping watch, stay awake Ina uya pata emaꞌkwaꞌpʉ. We kept watch over the place. 2) stay awake through the night Pata emaꞌkwa toꞌ uya. They are staying awake
through the night.
eꞌmanenpa vi be or become troubled Mɨrɨpan eꞌmanenpaꞌpʉ pen. And then she was not
troubled.
emaꞌnɨ n life, living Emaꞌtoꞌ eseru ekamaꞌpʉ toꞌ uya. They gave me advice on the habit of living.
emaꞌnonta vr be or become a young woman Iyemaꞌnontasaꞌ man. She has become a young
woman.

emapuꞌtɨ 1) vi deserve, cause to start, cause to experience Ene rɨ, ɨꞌrɨ rɨ kuꞌsaꞌ iya pʉra iyesi tʉumaꞌta emapuꞌtɨnin pe. Look, he has done nothing deserving death. 2) vt make, cause Eseru eꞌkuꞌtoꞌ iyawɨrɨ emapuꞌtɨꞌpʉ Papa uya. God
made him to do great things.
emapʉ var. of emakʉ
eꞌmaꞌpʉ (poss: ɨyeꞌmaꞌpʉ) 1) n a path or track someone has travelled through; emphasis is on the past usage of the path Ɨyeꞌmaꞌpʉ tau ina eꞌtoꞌ pe. We will come after you (on the path). 2) nom something coming or being after or behind uyeꞌmaꞌpʉ pe meruntɨ kuru uyepʉ mɨrɨ uyentaino after me will come a very strong one
(who is) above me
eꞌmaꞌpʉka vt follow Paul eꞌmaꞌpʉkapɨtʉꞌpʉ uriꞌsan uya. The girl kept following Paul.
emaꞌsaꞌ n 1) the next day Mɨrɨ emaꞌsaꞌ yau toꞌ eriꞌpɨtʉꞌpʉ aꞌsaꞌtai. In the morning, they were both dead. 2) morning, the next morning pata emaꞌsaꞌ dawn
emaseꞌ n a woman's monthly period, menstruation Emaseꞌ uyeꞌsaꞌ, eꞌtane inɨmɨꞌpʉ iya. Her monthly period came, but she left it.
emaꞌseꞌ vi 1) stay, remain Papa Maimu uyeꞌsaꞌ kupiyaꞌnokon emaꞌseꞌ. God's Word has come to stay with us. 2) stay awake all night 3) stay overnight
Emaseꞌpɨ nprop the name given to a rock along the Upper Mazaruni River; on the left going down-river from Ipana'muru pai at Kʉsekamai
eꞌmata (var: iꞌsi; poss: ɨyeꞌmata) n 1) leg 2) lap 3) thigh, the upper part of the leg
eꞌmaꞌtɨ vt bring, fetch, drug Pata eꞌsanon ton, king amʉꞌ, rakʉiꞌ toꞌ uya ɨeꞌmaꞌtɨtoꞌ oton kon urɨ uriyaꞌ. They will bring you before rulers
and kings because of me.

© 2014 SIL International®

39

Akawaio-English Dictionary

emeꞌ (poss: ɨyeme) n arm
eꞌme 1) vt put into a bun or roll; especially with hair or twine or rope 2) vt spin Eꞌmepɨtʉ toꞌ uya eneꞌpʉ iya. He saw them spinning it. 3) vi wrap, as in put a towel around one's waist 4) vi warp, as in lumber 5) vi twisted useꞌme (der.) vi 1) warped 2) crippled
eme vt 1) eat as in a way to finish Tuma emeꞌpʉ iya. He finished (eating) the pepper pot. 2) eat pepperpot or pepper sauce
emekamʉꞌ n a variety of traditional necklace
eꞌmenka (der. of menka) vi be or become judged eꞌmenkan weyu aꞌtai at the judgment
day
emennaꞌ 1) something new Emennaꞌ pe toꞌ kanwa esi. Their boat is a new one. opp: pooiꞌpɨ . 2) something recent
emenu n paint Kaꞌpon amʉꞌ emenu people
paint (referring to the red dye from the annato plant, the application to bodies which was a traditional practice of the Akawaio Amerindians)
emenuꞌtɨ vt paint usemenuꞌtɨ (der.) vr paint
emenʉꞌpʉ nom a late time Emenʉꞌpʉ pe pata esi. It is late in the day. opp: penanne .
emepo (poss: emeporʉ) n wisdom
emepokeꞌ nom 1) wisdom emepokeꞌ pe ɨkonekanin that which makes you wise 2) a wise person
emiyaꞌneꞌ nom something or someone lazy Emiyaꞌneꞌ pe iyesi. He is lazy. opp: ariꞌkeꞌ .
emiyaꞌnʉmʉ vi 1) being or becoming lazy 2) be or become tired Papa uya urepanin nʉꞌpʉ kon tʉmeruntɨrʉ ke temiyaꞌnʉnsen pe pʉra eꞌnɨtoꞌ pe. God has given us strength so that we
are no longer lazy.

emiyaꞌnʉnpa vt discourage someone by one's talk opp: ariꞌnʉnpa .
emiyaꞌpokeꞌ (var: emiyaꞌporʉ) 1) someone wise 2) someone industrious syn: ariꞌkeꞌ . 3) someone talented Emiyaꞌpokeꞌ iyesi. He is talented. 4) a good worker
emiyapontɨ vt remind Serɨ pɨꞌ ɨtonpa ton emiyapontɨkaꞌkɨ Papa piyau esiꞌma. Remind
everyone of these things, for God's sake.
emiyaꞌporʉ var. of emiyaꞌpokeꞌ
eꞌmo vi split into parts
eꞌmoika vi lay eggs, as a hen does Kɨrɨtɨkɨ eꞌmoikaꞌpʉ. The chicken laid eggs.
emoikwa vi be or become eaten, especially by maggots Mɨrɨpan yaꞌ weruwe emoikwasaꞌ erikʉꞌpʉ. At that, he died, maggots eating his flesh.
eꞌmoita vt 1) lay, as in chickens laying eggs Iꞌmoi eꞌmoitaꞌpʉ kɨrɨtɨkɨ uya. The chicken laid an egg. 2) hatch
emoꞌka (der. of moꞌka) vi come out Sikɨ emoꞌkaꞌpʉ. The chigger came out (of his foot).
eꞌmonsiꞌka var. of eꞌmonsiriꞌka eꞌmonsiriꞌka (var eꞌmonsiꞌka) (der. of
monsiriꞌka) vr be or become hatched Toꞌ eꞌmonsiriꞌkaꞌpʉ. They (the eggs) hatched.
emontaꞌkwa vi chafe the inner thighs from much walking
eꞌmoꞌraiꞌka vi uproot Yʉi eꞌmoꞌraiꞌkasaꞌ. The
tree became uprooted.
eꞌmoronʉ someone sleepy Eꞌmoron pɨꞌ pe iyesi. He is feeling sleepy.
emoꞌsaꞌtɨ vi dress oneself Mɨrɨpan nin si emoꞌsaꞌtɨꞌpʉ mɨrɨ. Then I put on my underwear. (lit: to put on oneꞌs underwear)
emotaika (der. of umotaika) vr be or become

© 2014 SIL International®

40

Akawaio-English Dictionary

proud emu (poss: ɨyemu) n testicle itemu pʉra
iyentusaꞌ born without testicles
emuꞌka vt castrate
emuranpa (der. of muran) vi charm oneself Mɨrɨ ke si iyemuranpasaꞌ esiꞌpʉ. With that is
how he charmed himself (to be a good hunter).
eꞌmuruika vt stoop over Iyeꞌmuruikaꞌpʉ. He
stooped over
emʉꞌ (poss: ɨyemʉꞌ) n 1) face 2) resemblance Winston emʉꞌ ke Raymond esi. Raymond
resembles Winston.
eꞌmʉkʉntɨ vt hang, as in kill someone by hanging them from a rope Kaꞌpon eꞌmʉkʉntɨꞌpʉ toꞌ uya. They hung a person.
eꞌmʉꞌkʉrʉtʉ (var: eꞌmʉrʉkʉ) vi choke on food Iyeꞌmʉꞌkʉrʉtʉꞌpʉ. He choked. Eki ke eꞌmʉꞌkʉrʉꞌsaꞌ. I choked on (a piece of) cassava
bread.
Emʉnaru nprop the name given to the capitol, Georgetown
emʉꞌnʉkʉ 1) n flood Non emʉꞌnʉkʉꞌpʉ. The ground flooded. 2) vt swamp, have a canoe filled with water Ɨnʉꞌ uya kanau emʉꞌnʉkʉꞌpʉ?
Who swamped the canoe?
eꞌmʉrʉkʉ var. of eꞌmʉꞌkʉrʉtʉ vi choke on a small bone Moroꞌ ɨꞌpʉ ke eꞌmʉrʉꞌsaꞌ. I choked
on a fish bone.
eꞌmʉꞌsaꞌka (der. of iꞌmʉꞌsaꞌka) vi 1) stand Eꞌmʉꞌsaꞌkaꞌ. Stand up. 2) raise up from the dead Sises eꞌmʉꞌsaꞌka -ꞌpʉ! Jesus rose from the
dead!
en2 bright white, shiny syn: sirɨn . en3 var. of enu1 eye en1 var. of ene2 see, read en4 var. of yen container; hole

en iꞌmoi eye ball (lit: eye egg)
en kuꞌna vt close the eyes
en piꞌpɨ n eyelid (lit: eyeꞌs skin)
en ukaramʉ vr eyes crying, mostly from smoke
ena4 vi 1) drop, as in fruit ripening Iteperu enaꞌpʉ. Its fruit dropped (because it was ripe). 2) fall, as in rain Awanakʉiꞌ kuru tuna enaꞌpʉ.
Rain fell in the early morning.
ena3 vi consummate, to become as one, to be together as husband and wife "Enanpai," taꞌpʉ itaanꞌpʉ uya ipɨꞌ. "Let's consumate our
relationship," the husband said to her.
enaꞌ postp 1) for Se akɨ itenaꞌ. Carry this for him/her. 2) to 3) about
ena2 n (non-possessed) water fall ena1 vi 1) get Eke pe ɨyenasaꞌ. You have become
big. 2) become Poriꞌ pe iyenakaaꞌpʉ kanan.
He became happy again.
usena (der.) vr shop
eꞌnaika vr be or become vexed Ɨnoꞌ rɨ eꞌnaikatoꞌ oton. Your grandmother will be vexed.
eꞌnaiꞌka vt make someone cough Iseꞌnaiꞌka emapuꞌtɨꞌpʉ uya. I started him coughing. useꞌnaiꞌka (der.) (var useꞌneꞌka) 1) vr cough 2) vt cough
enaikʉ var. of ennaaikʉ
enaka (var: enakan) postp 1) to Menuka uya mɨrɨ, umʉre rʉꞌkwɨ Timothy enakan. I am writing to my little child, Timothy 2) for
enakaiꞌ n wanting to vomit
enakaiꞌken vr be or become nauseated enakan var. of enaka
Enaꞌku nprop the name given to a settlement along the Upper Mazaruni, near Kuyupenan

© 2014 SIL International®

41

Akawaio-English Dictionary

eꞌnaꞌkʉrʉtʉ 1) n constipation Iyeꞌnaꞌkʉrʉꞌnɨ pɨꞌ man. He was with constipation. 2) vr something stuck in a hole
enamʉ vt hold eꞌnanʉkʉ (der. of inanʉkʉ) vr make oneself
wet Eꞌnanʉꞌpɨtʉꞌpʉ. I got myself wet.
enaꞌpɨ n seed, the seed of any plant aꞌnaiꞌ enaꞌpɨ corn seed
enaꞌpɨkaꞌ vt remove seeds from cotton
enariꞌkeꞌ nom fright Eꞌtane enariꞌkeꞌ pe tesi kon ke toꞌ eꞌnʉmʉꞌpʉ pen. But because they
were afraid, they didn't sleep.
enariꞌkenaꞌ nom wild, not tame enariꞌkenaꞌ isaꞌkaꞌsi wild jackass
enariꞌmʉn (der. of enariꞌmʉra) nom someone brave or fearless
enariꞌmʉra n bravery, boldness Enariꞌmʉra rɨ, ɨtonpa pe esi wenai Kʉrai winɨ. I am brave as
your family member.
enariꞌmʉn (der.) nom brave one
enariꞌnʉmʉ (der. of nariꞌ1) vr be or become frightened Kʉrɨ rɨ ɨyenariꞌnʉntoꞌ kon ipɨꞌ.
You all should be afraid of this one.
enariꞌpa vt scare Enariꞌpaꞌpʉ iya. He scared
him.
usenariꞌpa (der.) vr scared
enarumʉ vi vomit Iyenarunpɨtʉꞌpʉ. He was
vomiting.
enau postp with sheep amʉꞌ tʉnɨnseꞌna tʉron nɨ enau he left his sheep behind with another
(shepherd)
ɨsenau (der.) 1) adv together 2) n twins
ene2 (var: en1) vt 1) see Eneꞌpʉ uya. I saw it. enton pe pʉra rɨ never to be seen (again) syn: eraꞌma . 2) read Betty uya kareta menu

eneꞌpʉ. Betty read a book. syn: ekama 4 . tenpuruꞌnan (der.) nom blurred vision
usene (der.) vr seen
eꞌneꞌ2 (var: eꞌneꞌpɨꞌnɨ) vi dream Iyeꞌneꞌpɨtʉꞌpʉ. He was dreaming.
eꞌneꞌ1 var. of eꞌnetʉ nom 1) one who is sick Eꞌneꞌ pe umʉre esi. My baby is sick. eꞌneꞌ pe eꞌnɨtoꞌ an illness opp: atuꞌ 1. 2) someone experiencing hurt or pain Eꞌneꞌ pe toꞌ uya uyariꞌpoꞌpɨꞌsaꞌ serɨ! I am hurt from their beating
me!
ene1 n 1) (non-possessed) evil 2) an evil spirit 3) someone possessed by an evil spirit 4) something or someone ugly 5) something or someone scary 6) an imaginary creature invoked to scare children 7) a variety of snake 8) foreigner 9) coastlander or civilized person
ene wariꞌsa (var: piyaiꞌma wariꞌsa) n a variety of mushroom, has a woven look and nasty smell (lit: monsterꞌs backpack)
eneiꞌma vt flavor; specifically, make salty Eneiꞌmaꞌpʉ uya. I made it salty.
eꞌneima vt mock, make fun of someone
enekuꞌtɨ (var: enkuꞌtɨ1) vt 1) fool, deceive Kɨsenekuꞌtɨtʉu. Don't be fooled. (or is it, "Don't fool others."?) 2) tempt Sises enkuꞌtɨꞌpʉ Makoi uya. The Devil tempted Jesus. 3) act in a false way mɨrɨ naꞌneꞌ kasa toꞌ wapiyaroꞌ kon enkuꞌtɨnin nan kuꞌpɨtʉꞌpʉ toꞌ uya. that is the
way they treated the false prophets.
enensi vt 1) drink, sip 2) help to drink
eꞌneꞌpɨꞌnɨ var. of eꞌneꞌ2
enerupɨ n a variety of savannah termite
eꞌnetʉ (var: eꞌneꞌ1; poss: ɨyeꞌnetʉ) n sickness, illness
enewokeꞌ n a shaman or traditional healer syn:

© 2014 SIL International®

42

Akawaio-English Dictionary

piyaiꞌsan 1 .
eꞌnɨ vi 1) gather, come together tʉmunkɨ pe eꞌnɨtoꞌ pe, kunkuuꞌpʉ kon wenai pen we
gather as his children, not because of anything we
did 2) be, exist Utonpa pe eꞌnɨpai. I want to be family with you. syn: esi, wannɨ2 . eꞌnɨmɨ (var eꞌnɨn) (der. of nɨmɨ) vr 1) be or become left behind Toꞌ eꞌnɨmɨꞌpʉ. They were left back. 2) stay behind, remain eꞌnɨn var. of eꞌnɨmɨ
eꞌnɨꞌpamʉ vi be or become calm or still
eꞌnɨꞌpanʉkʉ (der. of iꞌnɨꞌpanʉkʉ) vr be or become stopped, end
eꞌnɨpon n clothes
eꞌnɨpontɨ (der. of nɨpontɨ) vr be covered, cover oneself Iyeꞌnɨpontɨꞌpʉ. It was covered.
enkarai n a variety of black, biting fly
enkaranpiyu n the red part of the eye; when the white of the eye is red, then the person is healthy
enkarumʉ vi play, as in what children do together during their free time
enkasiꞌpa vr be or become blinded by a bright light or some other phenomenon
enkasiꞌpanʉkʉ vt make something or someone blind Enkasiꞌpanʉkʉꞌpʉ iya. It blinded him.
enkɨꞌsɨimu pale Enkɨꞌsɨimu pe iyesiꞌpʉ. He
was pale.
enkoꞌma (var: enkuꞌtɨ2) (cf: apɨ2) vt swallow something whole, without chewing, as in a tablet or other medicine Tepiꞌ enkoꞌmaꞌpʉ iya. He swallowed a tablet. Toron amʉꞌ uya enkoꞌpɨtʉꞌpʉ. The birds were swallowing it (the seeds). cf: ennoko2 .
enkuꞌ n 1) pink eye; sore or infected eyes 2) the infection that causes pink eye disease,

conjunctivitis tenkuꞌnan (der.) nom blind one
enkui nom 1) someone covetous of another's possessions Enkui pe iyesi. She is covetous. 2) beggar
enkurumʉ vi 1) be or become still, not moving Toꞌ enkurumʉꞌpʉ eꞌpana. They were still and quiet. 2) rest tikin nɨ iꞌsi tenkurunsen he can
rest/stand on one leg
enkurunpa vt keep something to oneself; have no trouble concerning Mɨrɨ enkurunpa toꞌ uya tewan kon yau. They kept that in their own souls.
enkuꞌtɨ2 var. of enkoꞌma enkuꞌtɨ1 var. of enekuꞌtɨ enkʉꞌnʉkʉ (var: enkʉꞌnʉpʉ) vt extinguish,
put out a fire Apoꞌ enkɨꞌnʉkʉꞌpʉ iya. He put
out the fire.
enkʉꞌnʉpʉ var. of enkʉꞌnʉkʉ
enmiꞌpo vt cause someone else to get into trouble Enmiꞌpoꞌpʉ iya. He caused him to get
into trouble.
enna4 vi shine Wʉi ennakaꞌnɨ pɨꞌ man. The sun
is shining.
enna1 (poss: ɨyenna) n nose enna2 (cf: enna3) vt buy, purchase Ɨꞌrɨ mennai?
What did you buy? syn: anʉmʉ1 4, eꞌma1 . enna3 (cf: enna2) vt ask, request syn:
ekamaꞌpo . usenna (der.) 1) vr ask 2) vi pray 3) vi beg
enna eꞌma nostril
enna ɨꞌpʉ the bridge of the nose (lit: noseꞌs bone)

© 2014 SIL International®

43

Akawaio-English Dictionary

ennaaikʉ (var: enaikʉ) vt 1) sniff 2) smell an odor usennaaikʉ (der.) (var usenaikʉ) vr sniff
ennaiꞌpɨꞌnɨ vt cause someone to undergo a ritual application of bina or herbal medicine Ennaiꞌpɨꞌnɨꞌpʉ toꞌ uya. They performed a ritual
on him (to apply a bina).
usennaiꞌpɨꞌnɨ (der.) vr ritual
ennaka vt 1) trick someone by talking to them Kasi pe rɨ ennaka uya. I tricked him with a lie. 2) deceive
ennaꞌmo vt make someone fall so as to injure his nose Iyennaꞌmoꞌpʉ toꞌ uya. They made him
fall and hit his nose.
usennaꞌmo (der.) vi fall
ennamorʉmʉ vi snore Iyennamorʉmʉꞌpʉ.
He snored.
ennaꞌpiꞌnʉmʉ vi breathe heavily Iyennaꞌpiꞌnʉmʉꞌpʉ. He breathed heavily.
ennaꞌpisin (poss: ɨennaꞌpisin) n breath from the nose
ennaꞌpo cf: inaꞌpo. (der. of naꞌpo) vr return, go to or come back from where one came Toꞌ ennaꞌpoꞌpʉ. They returned. syn: utunta.
ennaꞌpʉꞌkʉ n a variety of nut
ennaꞌsiꞌka (var: usennaiꞌsiꞌka) vt make someone sneeze Ennaꞌsiꞌkaꞌpʉ uya. I made him
sneeze.
ennasika vt throw someone or something into water Iyennasikaꞌpʉ iya. He threw him into the
water.
usennasika (der.) 1) vr fall 2) vi dive 3) vr submerge
ennasikʉ n septum ennoꞌ var. of ennoko1

ennoko1 (var: ennokʉ; var: ennoꞌ) vt 1) send, send forth Augustus uya main ennokoꞌpʉ. Augustus sent a message. Moro kaꞌpon esiꞌpʉ Papa nennokoꞌpʉ, Isan iteseꞌ. This person was God's messenger, his name was John. Mɨrɨpan nin si muran kan tʉnoꞌpʉ ennokoꞌpʉ iya. And then he sent his wife for a charm. 2) cut down a tree Yʉi ennoꞌsaꞌ toꞌ uya. They sent down a
tree.
ennoko2 (cf: enkoꞌma) vt swallow Eki ennokoꞌpʉ uya. I swallowed some cassava bread.
ennokʉ var. of ennoko1
eꞌnokʉ (der. of iꞌnokʉ) vr be or become mashed Eꞌnoꞌsaꞌ man! I am (cassava bread) being
mashed!
enoꞌma vt 1) throw away Toꞌ rɨ enoꞌmapɨtʉꞌpʉ toꞌ uya aꞌsisaꞌ kon iwʉꞌ taꞌ. They took them and threw them into prison. 2) imprison, put into prison 3) cause one to have an abortion; throw away one's pre-born baby 4) knock down
eꞌnonka cf: enu2. (der. of nonka) vr 1) be or become set aside Iyeꞌnonkaꞌpʉ. It was set aside. 2) finish Yʉi aꞌtɨꞌpʉ tʉpo iyeꞌnonkasaꞌ. He
finished cutting the tree.
enpaka (der. of upaka) vt waken, wake someone up Toꞌ enpakaꞌpʉ uya. I woke them
up.
enpaꞌka vt 1) take out Toꞌ uya enpaꞌkaꞌpʉ iyuꞌnaꞌtɨiꞌ. They carried (him) out to bury him. 2) carry out 3) make a goal enpaꞌkanʉkʉ (der.) vt place outside
enpaꞌkanʉkʉ (der. of enpaꞌka) vt place outside, put someone or something outside of a house
enparasaimuꞌna vr be or become pale Iyenparasaimuꞌnasaꞌ man. He is pale.
enpataꞌmo vt slap, hit on the face

© 2014 SIL International®

44

Akawaio-English Dictionary

Enpataꞌmoꞌpʉ iya. He slapped her.
enpatapita vr be or become flushed, get a red face Iyenpatapitaꞌpʉ. She became flushed.
enpataukwa vt 1) baptise Sises enpataukwaꞌpʉ Isan uya. John baptised Jesus. syn: euranka 1 . 2) wash a face, to splash with water Itemʉꞌ enpataukwaꞌpʉ iya. He washed
his face.
usenpataukwa2 (der.) 1) vr wash 2) vi baptised
enpiꞌpɨ1 var. of enu piꞌpɨ
enpiꞌpɨ2 n a variety of fruit tree, waiti
enpo vt float something, bring it to the surface Mɨrɨpan enpoiꞌ itɨꞌpʉ. He went to trap fish. usenpo (der.) vi 1) floated 2) out of the water
enpoika vt 1) translate Bible enpoikaꞌpʉ iya toꞌ pɨꞌ. He translated the Bible for them. 2) reveal usenpoika (der.) vi known
enpopo vt set a cassava bread cake on the roof to dry Eki enpoposaꞌ toꞌ uya ɨutɨ nakapu po.
They put up the cakes of cassava bread on the roof to dry.
enpu n top of a tree yʉi enpu the top of the tree
enpukuiꞌ (poss: ɨyenpukuui) n 1) (non-possessed) a stick used to hit someone or punish a child 2) something put on a stick and waved at someone to make them fall down dead
enpʉꞌpʉ (der. of yen) n 1) empty container, a container that used to hold something 2) a person no longer possessed by an evil spirit
ensi2 vt drink Kasiri ensikaaꞌpʉ uya. I already finished drinking kazak. tensisen something
drinkable
ensi1 (poss: ɨyensi) n daughter to a father; used for indirect reference takaiꞌka ensi the
kingfisher's daughter

ensima vt change usensima (der.) vr 1) change 2) change
enta vi 1) go Mɨrɨ awɨrɨ enta, se awɨrɨ utɨ tane. You go in that direction, and I will go in this direction. Entantɨꞌ. You all, go. cf: utɨ 1 . 2) go away 3) go ahead
entaꞌ postp from, with regard to time, as in, from then on
entai 1) postp over main entaino talking over
(one's head); someone who doesn't want to take your
advice; stubborn Eke saꞌne entaino rɨ. It is bigger than you. 2) nom bigger 3) nom a larger job than a person can handle Eke pe rɨ toꞌ uya ikupʉ entai. (The bananas) were bigger than they could
do/carry.
entaika var. of entaka1
entaiꞌkurɨ vi salivate
entaiꞌkwa vt eat, in particular, eating cassava bread and pepper pot Entaiꞌkwatanʉꞌkɨ. Come
and eat. (command to one person)
entaime vi cry Iyentaimepɨtʉꞌpʉ. She kept on crying. syn: ukaramʉ1 .
entaka1 (var: entaika) 1) vi pass, pass by tʉkoꞌmanton kon pe serɨ entakan yau those living here in the past Mɨrɨpan uya entakaꞌpʉ tepiꞌtɨiꞌ pʉra. And he passed without healing him. 2) vt put someone over someone else, as in having authority over him; give authority apʉne ɨyeyaton non entaka tane uya, toꞌ esaꞌ pe ɨwesi pa even though your enemies are over you,
you will be their ruler
usentaka (der.) vi pass
entaka2 vi lack appetite Mʉre entakaꞌpʉ. The
baby lacked an appetite.
entaka3 vi 1) pass a test 2) show one's competency in a subject 3) succeed

© 2014 SIL International®

45

Akawaio-English Dictionary

entakanoma vt pay back, return kʉsentakanomatʉu ɨri ke rɨ marɨ don't you all
pay back (evil) with evil
entakapima vi yawn
entakɨrɨka vi burp Iyentakɨrɨkaꞌpʉ. He burped.
entakonoma vr refuse to speak; remain silent
entaꞌna vi eat, in particular, eating foods other than the usual tuma and eki Tentaꞌna kon tʉpo, toꞌ epaꞌkaꞌpʉ. After eating, they went out. iyentakaꞌsaꞌ a person who has no appetite intaꞌnapa (der.) vt feed
entapima vi put on lipstick
entaꞌpisin (poss: antaꞌpisin) n breath from the mouth
entarumʉ var. of etarerumʉ
entau postp yonder; in front of; beyond
entɨ vt 1) enclose Ina apuruui ton entɨꞌpʉ ina uya. We put out things into a plastic bag. 2) fill a container 3) pour syn: anuku 2 . (lit: put into a hole)
entokaꞌnʉkʉ vt understand Entokaꞌnʉkʉꞌpʉ uya se. Now, I understand it.
entu (entunʉkʉ) vi 1) be born Toꞌ entukaaꞌpʉ kanan kaꞌpon entu kasa pen. They began to be born, not like people are normally born. ɨyentuꞌpʉ weyu rʉꞌpʉ your birthday 2) give birth Iyentuꞌpʉ. She gave birth to a baby.
entuꞌma (var: entuꞌpaꞌ) nom someone who is poor, someone deserving of pity Poriꞌ pe rɨ kamo esi mɨrɨ entuꞌma teꞌsan taꞌkwarʉ kon yau rʉꞌkwɨ. Happy are those who are poor in their
hearts.
usentuꞌma (der.) vi pity

esentuꞌkenaꞌ (der.) nom sympathizing one
entunʉkʉ entu vt give birth warawoꞌ pe entunʉkʉꞌpʉ iya. She gave birth to a boy.
entuꞌpaꞌ var. of entuꞌma
entusen n the one born Aiko pe entusen esi.
The one born/The baby is small.
enu1 (var: en3; poss: ɨyenu) n eye wʉi enu day's eye, sun tenu yau iyeꞌkaaꞌpʉ a vision (enu pɨkɨrɨ) enu enaꞌpɨ eyeball
enu iꞌnarʉ inner part of the eye
enu paru tears
enu piꞌpɨ (var enpiꞌpɨ1; poss ɨyenu piꞌpɨ) eyelid enu poꞌtɨ dilated
enu siꞌpoꞌ eyelash
enu weꞌ sleeper
enu weꞌseꞌma corners of the eye
enu yen 1) eye socket 2) glasses
enu2 (cf: eꞌnonka) vi be or become finished, completed Iyenukaꞌsaꞌ mɨrɨ yʉi aꞌtɨ tʉpo. He finished cutting down the tree. Iyenukaꞌsaꞌ rɨ. (It
is) the completion of it/him.
enu paru ( enu1) tears Sises pʉta amankaꞌpʉ iya tenu paru ke. She wet Jesus' feet with her
own tears.
enu piꞌpɨ (var enpiꞌpɨ1; poss ɨyenu piꞌpɨ) ( enu1) eyelid
enu pɨkɨrɨ vt 1) depend Pʉsamo mʉre amʉꞌ esi ɨyenu pɨkɨrɨꞌnokon. These children depend on you all. 2) look for, anticipate, hope for (lit: with eyes)
enu poꞌtɨ ( enu1) one's own eyes to be or become dilated Iyenupoꞌtɨꞌpʉ. He dilated his

© 2014 SIL International®

46

Akawaio-English Dictionary

own eyes. (lit. 'to burn the eye') enu yen ( enu1) 1) eye socket 2) a pair of
glasses (lit. 'eye hole; eyeꞌs hole') enukaꞌnʉkʉ vt complete
enuku vi 1) go up, move in an upward direction 2) go up-river Inpɨimʉtɨi pona ina enukuꞌpʉ. We went up-river to Imbaimadai. 3) to ascend, as Jesus did, into Heaven, from earth Sises enukuꞌpʉ. Jesus ascended.
enuminka vt 1) think Iyenuminkaꞌpʉ iya. He thought about it 2) puzzle over, try to figure out 3) study usenuminka (der.) vr think
enupa vt teach Toꞌ enupaꞌpʉ auya. You taught
them.
usenupa (der.) 1) vi taught 2) vr teach
enupanin n teacher cf: tiꞌsa ; low stat: tenupasen .
enupanʉ vi be or become accustomed to something Enariꞌkeꞌ rɨ esiꞌma utɨpɨtʉꞌpʉ uyapuruui warinpa pɨꞌ, eꞌtane rɨ enupankaaꞌpʉ. I was afraid as I went looking for
my things, but then I became accustomed (to living in town).
enurikʉ var. of enuripʉ
enuripʉ (var: enurikʉ) vi wait Mɨrɨ koroꞌtau, kaꞌpon amʉꞌ enurikʉꞌpʉ Sakaraya enupɨkɨrɨ. Meanwhile, people waited to see Zechariah. syn: apʉne .
enusima vi point in the direction of something using one's lips Iyenusimaꞌpʉ tʉputu ke. He
pointed with his lips.
enuꞌtɨ (der. of pon enu) vt button Ipon enuꞌtɨꞌpʉ iya. He buttoned his shirt.
eꞌnʉmʉ (var eꞌnʉn) (der. of nʉmʉ) vr sleep Toꞌ eꞌnʉmʉ. They are sleeping.

eꞌnʉn var. of eꞌnʉmʉ
enʉꞌtɨ vt pack tapuruui enʉꞌtɨnin tʉutɨkapʉ
packing her things to go
enwaraꞌ n a variety of small, green, lizard
enwoꞌneꞌ (var: enwoꞌnetʉ; poss: ɨyenwoꞌnetʉ) 1) n right-hand side Sisiu pe iyesiꞌpʉ enwoꞌneꞌ winɨ. He was sitting at the right side. opp: kaamiꞌ 1 ; opp: kamiꞌ . 2) nom someone perceptive
enwoꞌnetʉ var. of enwoꞌneꞌ
eꞌotoka (der. of otoka) vr hunt for oneself
eꞌpa vt 1) grind, as in provision for porridge Aꞌnaiꞌ eꞌpaꞌpʉ uya. I ground the corn. eꞌpatoꞌ millstone; anything that grinds 2) mash syn: wasaꞌ 1 . 3) beat Uyeꞌmata pona nin eꞌpapɨꞌnin urɨ. I will beat (the aya) on my leg. 4) digest
epaai n a variety of weapon - need description
epaꞌka (der. of paꞌka) vr 1) go out Toꞌ epaꞌkaꞌpʉ. They went outside (from the house, say). 2) go outside as through a door 3) escape
eꞌpaka vi 1) pause Iyeꞌpakaꞌsaꞌ esiꞌpʉ inke. He paused for a long time. 2) stop Iyeꞌpakaꞌpʉ. He
stopped.
eꞌpakaꞌnʉkʉ vt command Toꞌ eꞌpakaꞌnʉkʉꞌpʉ iya, apʉne pʉra Kʉrai pe iꞌtuꞌpʉ toꞌ uya. He
commanded them (to remain silent), because they knew him to be the Christ.
epamʉ (var: epan) vi 1) increase in number or strength Toꞌ epamʉꞌpʉ tuꞌke rɨ mɨrɨ pata yau. They increased (in number) in that place. syn: epiripʉ . 2) reproduce, procreate Iyepamʉꞌpʉ.
She reproduced./She gave birth.
epan var. of epamʉ
eꞌpana (cf: tʉtʉi) nom someone or something quiet Eꞌpana eꞌkɨ! Be quiet! eꞌpanaroꞌ (der.) n silence

© 2014 SIL International®

47

Akawaio-English Dictionary

eꞌpanaroꞌ (der. of eꞌpana) n silence Eꞌpanaroꞌ rɨ. It is quiet.
epantaka (der. of pantaka) 1) vr branch off Toꞌ epantakaꞌpʉ ɨnnɨ asanta piyapai. They branched off far from the trail. 2) vi deviate
epantaꞌma vi fight, physical contact fighting Mɨrɨpan kon epantaꞌmaꞌpʉ mɨrɨ wenai. So
they fought because of that.
eparan n poison Iteparan konekaꞌpʉ iya. She
got ready his poison.
eparanka vt 1) tattle, tell someone of another's bad actions or qualities Ɨmɨrɨ eparankasaꞌ uya pen mɨrɨ. I didn't tattle about you. 2) cause someone else to have trouble or an accident of some kind Iyeparankaꞌpʉ toꞌ uya. They gave him some trouble. 3) betray Judas Iscariot, Sises eparankanin pe teꞌton. Judas Iscariot, the one
who would betray Jesus.
eparantɨ (der.) vi accident
eparantɨ (der. of eparanka) vi to have an accident, to experience some trouble Iyeparantɨꞌpʉ. He had some trouble.
eparʉka (der. of parʉka) vi poured Iyeparʉkasaꞌ aꞌtai nin si. It was time to pour it.
epe nom 1) someone foolish or dumb Epe pe iyesi. She is foolish 2) someone dumb, a person who cannot speak or cannot hear
epeꞌ (poss: ɨepeꞌ) n 1) price epeꞌmɨn something cheap, or, low in price or cost 2) payment for work done, reward Ɨepeꞌpʉ moro man Epʉn po.
Your reward/payment is in Heaven.
epeima vi bow down before someone
epeisuꞌka ( peisuꞌka) vr kiss each other syn: utaꞌsuꞌka 2.
epeꞌpʉ n reward, payment Mɨrɨ aꞌtai, ɨyepeꞌpʉ eꞌtoꞌ oton eke pe. At that time, your reward will be
great.

eperu n general term for the fruit of any plant ɨmɨꞌnɨ eperu the fruit of the thorn plant
Eperʉ nprop Abel, the Alleluia prophet
eꞌpeta (poss: ɨyeꞌpeta) n cheek
epeta vi bear fruit Iyepetaꞌpʉ eke pe, pena iyesiꞌpʉ entai. It bore plenty more than before.
epetanʉkʉ vt cause a plant to bear fruit, fertilize
eꞌpi (poss: ɨyeꞌpi) n 1) lip, the lower lip high stat: putu1 3 ; high stat: putu piꞌpɨ . 2) edge, rim
epikaꞌtɨ (der. of pikaꞌtɨ) vr 1) help oneself Mepikaꞌtɨ yan peꞌ? Are you helping yourself? 2) help each other 3) help oneself to something
eꞌpiꞌkɨriꞌ n a variety of seed used to make beads
epikɨrɨꞌ nom someone who has wrinkles on his or her forehead Epikɨrɨꞌ pe iyesi. He has wrinkles
on his forehead.
epikɨrɨita vr wrinkle one's face, possibly to show pain or anger
epiꞌkoma vt undergo a ritual usually designed to give success in hunting Epiꞌkomaꞌpʉ iya. He
gave him a hunting ritual.
usepiꞌkoma (der.) vr ritual
eꞌpiꞌmo vi be or become chinked Ɨsuparaai eꞌpiꞌmosaꞌ. Your cutlass became chinked.
eꞌpiꞌnan (var: iꞌpiꞌnan) nom a thick liquid Eꞌpiꞌnan pe kata esi. The soup is thick. Iꞌpiꞌnan pe karapa esi. The oil is thick. opp: ataiwaꞌnan .
eꞌpiꞌne nom something thick in texture, like condensed kasiri, or cassava drink, before it is diluted with water
eꞌpiꞌpo vi 1) stub one's toe Iyeꞌpiꞌpoꞌpʉ. He stubbed his toe. 2) stumble; nearly falling by tripping on something 3) step on each other's

© 2014 SIL International®

48

Akawaio-English Dictionary

toes Mɨrɨpan kon eꞌpiꞌpopɨtʉꞌpʉ tʉtonpa kon pʉta pona. And they were stepping on their
partner's feet.
epirikoto (var: epirikotoimɨ) n (non-possessed) a variety of ant that build cascading nests on tree trunks
epirikotoimɨ var. of epirikoto
epirikʉ var. of epiripʉ
epiripʉ (var: epirikʉ) vi increase Mɨrɨpan Papa Maimu usekamaꞌpʉ miyarɨ rɨ tuꞌkan kon pɨꞌ rɨ tuꞌke rɨ Sises apurɨnin nan tuꞌkanoro epiripʉꞌpʉ Surusiran po. And
God's Word was heard in many places so that the many believers of Jesus increased in Jerusalem.
syn: epamʉ 1 .
epiro n a boil one can get under one's eye
eꞌpisiꞌka vi defecate uncontrollably Iyeꞌpisiꞌkapɨtʉꞌpʉ. He couldn't stop defecating.
eꞌpisinpisinma vi drizzle, as in a light rain falling Tuna eꞌpisinpisinmaꞌpʉ. The rain
drizzled.
eꞌpiꞌtɨ vt put an edge on something, used of making a backpack or of making cassava. Wariꞌsa eꞌpiꞌtɨꞌpʉ uya. I put an edge on the
warishi.
epiꞌtɨ (der. of piꞌtɨ) vi 1) be or become healed Mepiꞌtɨyan peꞌ? Are you applying/taking medicine? 2) be or become treated for an illness
epiꞌtɨnin (der. of epiꞌtɨ, see under piꞌtɨ) n 1) health care worker 2) healer, in the traditional sense
epiyaꞌ (var: epiyaꞌ ɨꞌpʉ) n 1) spine, backbone itepiyaꞌ ɨꞌpʉ his backbone 2) the lower part of the back
epiyaꞌ ɨꞌpʉ var. of epiyaꞌ
epiyapainoma 1) vi be the only one remaining Tikin nan nɨ iyepiyapainomasaꞌ uriꞌsan

mʉre warawoꞌ umaꞌtasaꞌ esiꞌpʉ. The dead man was the only one left to the woman. 2) vr be or become orphaned 3) vr be or become widowed epiyaꞌtɨ vi 1) late Iyepiyaꞌtɨ pe iyeꞌsaꞌ. He was coming late. 2) beginning epiyɨtʉ (der. of piyɨꞌnʉkʉ) vi be or become embarrassed Iyepiyɨtʉꞌpʉ. He was embarrassed. eꞌpɨmɨ (der. of pɨmɨ) vi plant Toꞌ eꞌpɨmɨꞌpʉ.
They planted.
eꞌpɨrinka (var: epɨrinka) vi 1) lie down Iyeꞌpɨrinkaꞌpʉ iyeꞌkweꞌ tau. He lay down in his hammock. 2) lie, be in a lying position Mʉre Sises eꞌnʉmʉ, iyepɨrinkasaꞌ rʉꞌkwɨ Baby
Jesus sleeping, lying
epɨrinka var. of eꞌpɨrinka
eꞌpɨrinpɨrinma vi roll
epo var. of eporo
eꞌpo var. of eporo
epoi postp above itepoi above it
epokonoma vr be or become cursed
eꞌpokwa vi float Iyeꞌpokwaꞌpʉ. It floated.
eponiꞌsima vi punish, suffer, do poorly without the aid of something
epontɨ (der. of pontɨ) vr dress oneself Epontɨpɨtʉꞌpʉ. I was dressing (myself).
eporiꞌma (der. of poriꞌma) vr make oneself happy; be or become happy Eꞌporiꞌmayaiꞌ serɨ awanakʉiꞌ. I am happy this morning.
eporo (var: epo; var: eꞌpo) vt 1) find Uyeporoꞌpʉ iya ꞌnokon. He found us. 2) discover 3) receive 4) realize 5) get, as in birthing children, becoming a mother Umunkɨ amʉꞌ man kamoro pona rʉꞌkwɨ uneporosan. My children, those I got/gave birth to. eꞌseporo (der.) (var eꞌsepo) 1) vr meet 2) vi

© 2014 SIL International®

49

Akawaio-English Dictionary

find 3) vi realize epoꞌtɨ (der. of poꞌtɨ) vr burning, something in the
process of burning epoto (poss: ɨyepotorʉ) n leader, champion
Israelites amʉꞌ esiꞌpʉ toꞌ epotorʉ pʉra rɨ.
The Israelites did not have their leader or champion
(to match Goliath among the Philistines). opp: aꞌmiꞌpɨ 1 .
epu n 1) handle eripoi epu pot's handle 2) fishing rod konoiꞌ epu fishing pole cf: konoiꞌ epu .
eꞌpu var. of eꞌpuru vr roast, dry moroꞌ amʉꞌ eꞌpupɨꞌsaꞌ aꞌtai when the fish were roasted
epuika vt make a point on an arrow or fishing hook Epuikaꞌpʉ uya. I made a point (on the
arrow).
epuꞌkenaꞌ n prophet Epuꞌkenaꞌ Pʉraikoman pe, Papa Elijah was a prophet, God.
eꞌpuꞌkiririma vi make bubbles in the water Tʉsemʉꞌse eꞌpuꞌkiririmaꞌpʉ. I dunk under
water and make bubbles.
epuꞌpɨ n 1) trunk of a tree Mɨrɨpan uya aya epuꞌpɨ aꞌtɨꞌpʉ. And then, he cut the aya trunk. 2) ear of corn aꞌnaiꞌ epuꞌpɨ an ear of corn
eꞌpuru (var eꞌpu) (der. of puru2) vr roasting epuru n 1) lord, master, ruler Epuru Sises Kʉrai
the Lord Jesus Christ 2) leader syn: esaꞌ 3 . epuru wannɨ lord
Epʉn (var: epʉnʉ) nprop heaven epʉnʉ var. of Epʉn epʉrasokoꞌme (der. of pʉrasokoꞌme) vr hurt
one's own ankle Iyepʉrasokoꞌmesaꞌ. She hurt
her ankle./Her ankle was hurt.
epʉrema var. of ɨpʉrema epʉremʉ (var epʉrenʉ) (der. of pʉremʉ) vr
having become into a line, lined up

epʉrenʉ var. of epʉremʉ
eꞌrakairakaima vr convulse
eraꞌma (var: ekaꞌma) vt see Ɨnʉꞌ uya uyeraꞌma, uyaponoꞌ tʉnuꞌtɨiꞌ. Who changes me? My throne is coming down. syn: ene2 1 .
eramuꞌta vi sweat, perspiration Iy- eramuꞌta -ꞌpʉ. He sweated. (after working hard in the sun)
eraꞌtɨ vi 1) change Iy- eraꞌtɨ -saꞌ. He has changed. 2) turn or turn back Mɨrɨpan eꞌtane toꞌ eraꞌtɨꞌpʉ pen rɨ ipɨꞌ. But then they didn't turn back toward him. 3) repent
eꞌrawoika vi capsize Ukanwa eꞌrawoikaꞌpʉ.
My canoe capsized.
ere (poss: ɨyere) n liver urana ere labba's liver
ereꞌ n 1) a skin disease or rash, the cause of which is unknown syn: werei 1 . 2) leprosy
ere ewa (poss: ɨyere ewa) n diaphragm
ereꞌku n gall bladder
eren (poss: ɨyeremu) n hymn, song
erenka vt sing Toꞌ uya erenkaꞌpʉ. They sang (a
song).
userenka (der.) vr sing
eꞌrepa 1) vr give of oneself Iyeꞌrepaꞌpʉ. He gave himself. 2) vi share Mɨrɨpan kon eꞌrepapɨtʉꞌpʉ tʉtonpa kon pokon pe. And they shared with
their own partners.
eꞌreukwa vr eye turning up; either from being sick or from flirting en eꞌreukwa eye turning up
ereuta vi 1) sit down Ereutanʉꞌtɨꞌ. You all sit down. 2) stop 3) be at peace, have peace 4) rest
ereutanʉkʉ (var: ereutanʉpʉ) vt 1) cause someone to sit down 2) cause someone to stay Mɨrɨpan toꞌ uya eposaꞌ aꞌtai, ereutanʉkʉiꞌ iꞌse toꞌ esiꞌpʉ, itɨ namaiꞌ. And so when they

© 2014 SIL International®

50

Akawaio-English Dictionary

found him, they were wanting to make him stay, lest
he go. 3) welcome, receive Toꞌ ereutanʉkʉꞌpʉ iya. He welcomed them. 4) stop someone, stop someone from doing something ereutanʉpʉ var. of ereutanʉkʉ
eriꞌ2 var. of erikʉ
eriꞌ1 (var: iriꞌ) n (non-possessed) a variety of tree similar to the mora; good for lumber, dugout canoes
erikʉ (var: eriꞌ2; var: eriꞌnɨ) vi die Toꞌ erikʉ -ꞌpʉ. They died. syn: maꞌta 1 .
eriꞌnɨ var. of erikʉ
eripoi (poss: ɨeripooi) n pot, a shallow clay pot for frying or parching
eriꞌsi n rice
eroi n 1) a variety of cashew tree 2) the variety of nut from the same tree
eruꞌ (poss: ɨyeruꞌ) n 1) cousin, the female cousin of a female, indirect address dir add: wɨrɨꞌmai 1 . 2) sister-in-law, indirect address dir add: wɨrɨꞌmai 2 .
eruma vt cause another person to fast Iyerumaꞌpʉ iya tentaꞌnaiꞌ pʉra. He made him
fast from eating.
useruma (der.) vr fast
eruparu n breath
erupatuꞌka vt strangle Terupatuꞌkaiꞌ iwɨsaꞌ oꞌ mɨrɨ tʉpo imʉnʉ pɨꞌ toꞌ entaꞌna namaiꞌ.
They should not eat meat or blood from animal that was strangled.
erupere var. of urupere
Eruwakɨ nprop 1) the Arawak tribe 2) a person of Arawak descent
erʉwo n a variety of ground dove Columbiagallina passerini
esaꞌ (var: esanon; var: esa; poss: ɨesaꞌ) n 1)

caretaker 2) owner panton amʉꞌ esaꞌ rɨ having plenty stories 3) leader syn: epuru 2 . 4) expert taren esaꞌ person who performs or is an expert in taren 5) lord; master; husband; provider esa var. of esaꞌ
eꞌsaꞌka (der. of saꞌka) 1) vr be or become disturbed 2) vi loose, as in a trap
eꞌsakoropa (der. of sakoropa) vi be or become mad or angry Mɨrɨpan kon eꞌsakoropaꞌpʉ tʉnoꞌpʉ kon wenai. So they
became angry because of their wives.
esakʉ vt 1) say 2) call Tʉron kon uya sapa esakʉ. Others call it saba. 3) name usesakʉ (der.) vi called
eꞌsakwa (der. of saukwa) vr break, be or become broken Kayaꞌraꞌpɨ yeꞌ panta eꞌsakwaꞌpʉ. The kaya'rappɨ tree branch broke.
eꞌsaꞌma (der. of saꞌma) 1) vr hang oneself in order to commit suicide Iyeꞌsaꞌmaꞌpʉ. He hung himself. 2) vi choked, as an animal in a noose trap Urana eꞌsaꞌmaꞌpʉ umareei yaꞌ. The labba
choked (to death) in my noose trap.
eꞌsamɨkɨꞌtɨ vi make tense the muscles of one's body Iyeꞌsamɨkɨꞌtɨꞌpʉ. He made the muscles of
his body tense.
eꞌsaꞌmorʉka (der. of aꞌmorʉka) vr feel bad; getting worse Uꞌpai eꞌsaꞌmorʉkasaꞌ. My head
ache is getting worse.
eꞌsamʉkʉꞌtɨ vt make a person bent over in pain
esanon var. of esaꞌ
eꞌsantɨ vi cough; choke when eating or drinking Iyeꞌsantɨpɨtʉꞌpʉ. He was coughing.
eꞌsanʉmʉ (der. of anʉmʉ2) vi jump onto Iꞌmʉ pona si iyeꞌsanʉmʉꞌpʉ mɨrɨ. He jumped onto his neck. Eꞌsanʉnpɨꞌkɨ! Jump up and down!
eꞌsapatoiꞌtɨ vi wear shoes, shod oneself

© 2014 SIL International®

51

Akawaio-English Dictionary

Mɨrɨpan iyeꞌnonkasaꞌ pe iyesi yau mɨrɨ yaꞌ iyeꞌsapatoiꞌtɨpɨtʉꞌpʉ. After that, in that time, she
was putting on shoes.
eꞌsapema (der. of sapema) vr disagree with each other, be against each other Toꞌ eꞌsapemaꞌpʉ. They disagreed.
eꞌsaponka (der. of aponka1) vr hunt for oneself; fish for oneself Piyaiꞌma amʉꞌ eꞌsaponkaꞌpʉ tʉnoꞌpʉ yaꞌ. A giant went hunting
with his wife.
eꞌsapontɨ vi sleep; get into a hammock or onto a bed, prepare for sleep
eꞌsaraika (der. of saraika) vi comb one's own hair Iyeꞌsaraikaꞌpʉ. She combed (her own hair).
eꞌsaraꞌtɨ (der. of saraꞌtɨ) vi start out; begin to go Awanakʉiꞌ ina eꞌsaraꞌtɨ mɨrɨ. We will start out in the morning. Toꞌ eꞌsaraꞌtɨꞌpʉ utɨn pɨꞌ. They
started to go.
eꞌse (poss: ɨyeꞌse) (cf: waraito; cf: yako) n 1) brother-in-law, indirect address dir add: seꞌse 1 ; dir add: akonpi 1 . 2) cousin, a male speaking about a male cousin, indirect address dir add: seꞌse 2 ; dir add: akonpi 2 .
eseꞌ (var: eꞌseꞌ; poss: ɨyeseꞌ) n 1) name Goliath iteseꞌ Goliath (was) his name 2) tribe, the name by which one belongs to a particular culture and language eseꞌtɨ (der.) vt name
useseꞌtɨ (der.) vr name
eꞌseꞌ var. of eseꞌ
eꞌseikʉ vi argue, answer back, usually with an argumentative tone Toꞌ eꞌseiꞌpɨtʉꞌpʉ. They argued with each other. eꞌseiꞌpɨꞌnɨ arguing
eꞌsekeukwa vr be or become bent
eꞌsekunka vi 1) pray Toꞌ eꞌsekunkaꞌpʉ soꞌsi

tau. They prayed in church. 2) kneel
eꞌseꞌkwa n rope
eꞌseꞌma var. of ansaꞌma
eseꞌmu1 (poss: ɨeseꞌmu) n knee eseꞌmu2 n chorus syn: yen 6 . esen (poss: ɨesen) n throat syn: wai3 1 .
esen korʉ flabby skin hanging down from below the jaw (lit: throatꞌs gold)
esen oꞌnon assistant Kusa esiꞌpʉ Eraꞌ esen oꞌnon pe. Chusa was Herod's assistant.
esen tikitiki epiglottis esentuꞌkenaꞌ (der. of usentuꞌma, see under
entuꞌma) nom someone showing sympathy Esentuꞌkenaꞌ pe iyesi. He is good at showing
sympathy.
esepanka vt tame Emennaꞌ pe ikʉn esepankaꞌpʉ iya. He tamed his new pet.
eꞌsepo var. of eꞌseporo eꞌseporo (var eꞌsepo) (der. of eporo) 1) vr
meet each other 2) vi find each other 3) vi be realized Ɨꞌrɨ kuru eꞌkuꞌtoꞌ oton iweyu eꞌseposaꞌ ikamanin pe? What will happen to
show the time is about to be realized?
eꞌsereka vi sneak, to be sneaky or act sneakily Iyeꞌserekaꞌpʉ. He sneaked.
eseremekʉ vt 1) rebuke Sises eraꞌtɨꞌpʉ toꞌ eseremeꞌseꞌna. Jesus turned to rebuke them. 2) say something in a serious manner Toꞌ kʉseremekʉi. Don't talk to them. Toꞌ eseremeꞌkɨ. Talk to them. 3) in a general way, speak
eseru (poss: ɨeseru) n 1) habit, way of doing things toꞌ eseru their habit 2) sense 3) wisdom 4) tradition 5) character 6) will eseruꞌtɨ (der.) vt wisdom

© 2014 SIL International®

52

Akawaio-English Dictionary

eseruꞌtɨ (der. of eseru) vt give someone wisdom ɨeseruꞌtɨtoꞌ uya I give you wisdom
eꞌsesenkuka vr clear one's throat
eseꞌtɨ (der. of eseꞌ) vt give a name to someone or something Eseꞌtɨ uya serɨ Moisiꞌ tukaiꞌ. I name
this one Moses.
eꞌseꞌtɨ vt 1) take care of something; keep something from falling or spilling Eꞌseꞌtɨtɨꞌ!
Take care of it! (a command given to more than one
person) 2) steer; using a paddle to turn one's canoe 3) control useꞌseꞌtɨ (der.) 1) vi steady 2) vr standing 3) vr control
esi (var: esɨi; var: eꞌ3; var: si) vi is, to be, are Kaatʉ piyau Main nɨ esiꞌpʉ. The Word was with God. Pʉsamo Israelite amʉꞌ uya Papa apurɨ esiꞌpʉ. These Israelites had God's faith/faith in God. syn: eꞌnɨ 2, wannɨ2 .
esikiri nom 1) something small 2) a small group of something
esimunuiꞌ var. of ɨsimunuiꞌ
eꞌsinka vr hanging Patawon amʉꞌ uya ɨkʉi eꞌsinkasaꞌ ene aꞌtai itemiya pɨꞌ, toꞌ uya taꞌpʉ tiwanoꞌ kon pe, When the residents saw
the snake hanging from his arm, they said to each other,. . ..
eꞌsinsinka var. of sinsinka
eꞌsinsinma var. of sinsinka
eꞌsiꞌpo (der. of usiꞌpo) vr sting oneself using ants, as a potion or charm for good luck in hunting, etc. Eꞌsiꞌpoꞌpʉ. I stung myself.
eꞌsiroꞌsiroꞌma vr moving, as a baby does
eꞌsiꞌsiꞌma vi itch Ikaꞌnɨ pe upiꞌpɨ eꞌsiꞌsiꞌma.
My skin itches terribly.
eꞌsitɨnka vr to be or become stiff, rigid
esɨi var. of esi

eꞌsɨkɨiꞌma var. of eꞌtɨkɨiꞌma
eꞌsɨꞌkʉrʉrʉma var. of sɨꞌkʉrʉrʉ vr be or become heated
eꞌsɨꞌma vi be or become angry Iyeꞌsɨꞌmaꞌpʉ. He was angry. syn: usakorota .
eꞌsonamʉ (var eꞌsoꞌnamʉ) (der. of onamʉ) vr be or become hidden eꞌsonantoꞌ a hiding place
eꞌsoꞌnamʉ var. of eꞌsonamʉ
eꞌsopɨtʉ vr shaking or shivering with cold Ikomiꞌ pe eꞌsopɨtʉ. I am shivering with cold.
eꞌsotoꞌka (der. of sotoꞌka) vi be in a standing position Mɨrɨpan eꞌsotoꞌkasaꞌ esiꞌpʉ. And he
was standing.
eꞌsousouma vi be beside water Tuna eꞌsousoumaꞌpʉ ?
esuken adv completely Tanporon kon umʉre amʉꞌ esi uriꞌsan esuken. All my children are all
daughters.
eꞌsuma vt mix
eꞌsuraika vi 1) lay prostrate or face down on the ground before somebody or something Iyeꞌsuraikaꞌpʉ. He laid prostrate. 2) lie down Iyeꞌsuraikasaꞌ esiꞌpʉ aꞌkwaꞌ tau. He lay down
in a hammock.
eꞌsuru vt 1) pick; pick the grain or kernel off of the head of a plant 2) hanging down, loose; so that you can do something with it
eꞌsʉnka vi sink Mɨrɨpan kon kanwa eꞌsʉnkaiwaꞌpʉ. And their canoe/boat almost sunk.
eta1 (poss: ɨetarii / ayare) n leaf apaꞌ are the
avocado tree leaf
eta2 vt 1) hear Ɨetaꞌpʉ uya. I heard you. 2) smell Oꞌ ukɨꞌnʉmʉ etaꞌpʉ uya. I smelled the scent of
meat.
etaamon n (non-possessed) a small, green variety of snake

© 2014 SIL International®

53

Akawaio-English Dictionary

etaꞌka vt 1) tire of doing something Kɨsetaꞌkatʉu wakʉ kupʉ pɨꞌ. Do not tire of doing good. 2) cause someone to be disgusted with something Etaꞌkaꞌpʉ toꞌ uya. They disgusted him (with their
behavior).
usetaꞌka (der.) (var usetakʉ) vi 1) tired 2) tired
etaka n width
etaꞌkererumʉ vi babble, as a baby who cannot yet talk does
etaꞌkɨrɨ vi drool
etaku (poss: ɨyetaku) n spit, saliva Itetaku aꞌmunaꞌpʉ. His spit dried up.
etaku amʉraꞌpʉ var. of mʉta paruta
etaku yen n salivary gland
eꞌtakʉꞌka vi stand still Itɨꞌpʉ iten aꞌpɨꞌseꞌna, mɨrɨpan annin nan eꞌtakʉꞌkaꞌpʉ. He went to
touch it, and those carrying it stood still.
eꞌtakʉꞌma (var: eꞌtakʉma) vr be or become sober, not drunk Eꞌtakʉꞌmanpaiꞌnokon. Let us
be sober.
eꞌtakʉma var. of eꞌtakʉꞌma etaꞌkwamʉ var. of etaꞌkwanʉmʉ
etaꞌkwanʉmʉ (var: etaꞌkwamʉ) vi 1) beg 2) cry to be fed, like a dog
eꞌtamiriꞌtɨ (var: eꞌtamʉriꞌtɨ) vi smoke cigarettes or some other form of tobacco Keꞌtamiriꞌtɨiꞌ. Don't smoke.
eꞌtamɨꞌneꞌ (var: eꞌtapʉꞌneꞌ) nom something heavy Eꞌtamɨꞌneꞌ pe iyesi. It is heavy. opp: asiꞌono .
eꞌtamʉriꞌtɨ var. of eꞌtamiriꞌtɨ
eꞌtanaꞌpɨ n a clean spot, something clean or having been cleaned
etannɨmɨ vi 1) talk 2) sing, as a bird Uramiꞌ

etannɨmɨꞌpʉ. the urami' bird sang.
etanʉkʉ vt cause someone to become ill by making them eat forbidden food Mʉre etanʉkʉꞌpʉ toꞌ uya. They made the child eat
forbidden food (so he would become ill).
usetanʉkʉ (der.) vr ill
eꞌtaꞌnʉkʉ (var: eꞌtaꞌnʉpʉ) vi 1) be or become spread, cover an increasingly larger area Mɨrɨpan eꞌtaꞌnʉkʉꞌpʉ toꞌ kaisa rɨ toꞌ iꞌpai aꞌpɨꞌpɨtʉꞌpʉ iya. It touched each of their heads as it spread. 2) be or become scattered ɨri eseru yaꞌ kʉrɨ rɨ kanan wɨnɨꞌpʉ, mɨrɨpan poitorʉ rʉꞌsan eꞌtaꞌnʉpʉꞌpʉ. this wicked one was also
killed, and his former followers were scattered.
eꞌtaꞌnʉpʉ var. of eꞌtaꞌnʉkʉ
etaꞌpɨꞌnʉmʉ var. of etaꞌtɨ
etapoꞌ n mustache
etapu n 1) partner syn: tonpa1 3 . 2) something to go with meat to make a more complete meal, potato, rice, provision, etc.
eꞌtapʉꞌneꞌ var. of eꞌtamɨꞌneꞌ
eꞌtaraika vi crawl, as a baby Iyeꞌtaraikaꞌpʉ. He
crawled.
etarenpa (der. of taren) vt practice the ritual art of blowing to determine cause of sickness in the person being blown, or some other metaphysical reality Toꞌ uya nɨrɨ uyetarenpaꞌpʉ. They also blew me.
etarerumʉ (var: entarumʉ) vi 1) whisper 2) complain, grumble Main pɨꞌ enupanin nan etarerumʉꞌpʉ. The teachers of the law
complained.
eꞌtari (eꞌtari yeꞌ) n someone drunk
eꞌtari yeꞌ eꞌtari n drunkard
eꞌtaripan n (non-possessed) a party for getting drunk Eꞌtaripan pe ipata esi. This place is for

© 2014 SIL International®

54

Akawaio-English Dictionary

getting drunk. opp: nurɨne 2 .
etaꞌsiꞌpoꞌ (poss: ɨyetaꞌsiꞌpoꞌ) n beard
eꞌtataukwa vi leap, jump Umʉre eꞌtatakwaꞌpʉ teporiꞌma ke. My child leaped
with joy.
etaꞌtɨ (var: etaꞌpɨꞌnʉmʉ) vi spit Iyetaꞌtaꞌpʉ non pona. He spit on the ground.
eꞌtaꞌtɨ vi grow legs, like a tadpole growing into a frog Ɨꞌrɨ pe ɨyeꞌsaꞌ? Ɨyeꞌtaꞌtɨsaꞌ! What has
happened to you? You have grown legs!
eꞌteꞌka1 var. of eꞌtɨnka eꞌteꞌka2 vr reach, for a boat to reach dry land;
land; arrive eꞌtinka vi a woman in labour, about to deliver a
baby Iyeꞌtinkasaꞌ kaꞌpon uyeꞌsaꞌ esiꞌpʉ. A
woman came who was about to deliver her baby.
etɨ vi 1) fall Yʉi etɨsaꞌ. The tree broke and fell. 2) break
eꞌtɨkɨiꞌma (var: eꞌsɨkɨiꞌma) vi hiccough Iyeꞌtɨkɨiꞌmaꞌpʉ. He hiccupped.
eꞌtɨꞌkwa vi 1) fail, be or become unlucky Iyeꞌtɨꞌkwasaꞌ. He is a failure. 2) fade
eꞌtɨmuika (der. of tɨmuika) vi be or become bent over
eꞌtɨnka (var: eꞌteꞌka1) vi lean against something Iyeꞌtɨnkaꞌpʉ. He leaned. Mɨrɨpan eꞌteꞌkasaꞌ yʉi pona. He leaned on the tree.
eꞌtɨrinka vi 1) roll 2) tip over
eꞌtɨrɨika vi settling, mostly under water; like starch settling out of the cassava water mʉn eꞌtɨrɨikasaꞌ the blood has settled out (to the bottom
of water).
eꞌtɨtɨtɨiꞌka var. of eꞌtɨtɨtɨma eꞌtɨtɨtɨma (var eꞌtɨtɨtɨiꞌka) (der. of tɨtɨtɨma) vr
shake, tremble Toꞌ eꞌtɨtɨtɨmaꞌpʉ. They shook

(with fear).
eto n (non-possessed) edoe
eꞌtoiꞌ var. of eꞌtoiꞌkwa
eꞌtoiꞌkwa (var: eꞌtoiꞌ) vi 1) explode Toꞌ rɨ nin si eꞌtoiꞌpɨtʉꞌpʉ. So it was they who exploded. Uyemiya eꞌtoiꞌkwasaꞌ. My hand has a blister (from using a cutlass or other hard work). 2) erupt Wʉꞌ eꞌtoiꞌkwaꞌpʉ. The mountain erupted.
eꞌtoꞌkaꞌnʉkʉ (der. of toꞌkaꞌnʉkʉ) vr know oneself; understand oneself Mɨrɨ pona teꞌtoꞌkaꞌnʉꞌsen pe eꞌnɨtoꞌ kon pe. When this
happens, we understand ourselves, and we come.
eꞌtokoiꞌma vi drip Tuna eꞌtokoiꞌmaꞌpʉ. The
water dripped.
etokʉ vt 1) argue 2) fight, scramble
eꞌtokʉ var. of iꞌtokʉ (der. of iꞌtokʉ) 1) vt boil Mekuru peꞌ neꞌtoꞌkayan? Is he boiling the bananas soft? (for making porridge) 2) vi be or become soft or mushy
eꞌtoꞌkwa vi lose to a winner in a game Eꞌtoꞌkwa mɨrɨ. I will lose.
eꞌtonpaꞌtɨ (der. of tonpaꞌtɨ, see under tonpa1) vr be or become joined Mɨrɨpan kon eꞌtonpaꞌtɨsaꞌ esi pɨꞌ 5,000 kaisa rɨ. And those
joined together were 5,000 in number.
eꞌtoretorema vi cough Iyeꞌtoretoremaꞌpʉ. He coughed. syn: useꞌnaiꞌka 1 .
eꞌtorupaꞌtɨ vi standing behind
eꞌtorʉpaꞌtɨ vi nurse Imʉre eꞌtorʉpaꞌtɨsaꞌ man.
Her baby is nursing.
eꞌtukuiꞌka vi 1) dive 2) swim 3) bathe
etupa vt love, show affection toward another, especially as a dog to his master
eꞌturuma vi 1) be or become tired Eꞌturumasaꞌ. I am tired. 2) be or become resting Iyeꞌturuꞌkaaꞌpʉ. He was resting again. 3) be or

© 2014 SIL International®

55

Akawaio-English Dictionary

become mashed 4) be or become broken eꞌtururuka vi tumble, fall down a steep incline
eꞌtuꞌtuꞌma vr heart beat
etʉi vi be or become frightened Mɨrɨpan noꞌsamiꞌsi etʉipɨtʉꞌpʉ. Then the old woman
became frightened.
eꞌtʉkʉiꞌtʉkʉiꞌma vi rippled, as in the surface of water after a stone is thrown into it
eꞌtʉꞌnɨ cf: eꞌtʉtʉika. (der. of tʉꞌnɨ) 1) vi be or become still Mɨrɨpan aꞌsetun eꞌtʉꞌnɨꞌpʉ. And then the wind was still. 2) vr be or become calmed Iyeꞌkɨiꞌma eꞌtʉꞌnɨsaꞌ man. His fever has gone
down.
eꞌtʉrawaso (der. of tʉrawaso) vr working for oneself
eꞌtʉrinka vi tired, sleepy
eꞌtʉrunka vi thunder, the action that results from lightning
eꞌtʉrʉ (der. of tʉrʉ1) vr given, given by oneself, given for oneself
eꞌtʉrʉꞌkwa vi 1) be or become scattered syn: aꞌnʉkʉ . 2) fall
eꞌtʉrʉmʉ vi rumble, the sound of thunder Korʉme eꞌsaraꞌtɨꞌpʉ eꞌtʉrʉnpɨꞌnɨ pɨꞌ. Thunder
started rumbling.
eꞌtʉtʉika cf: eꞌtʉꞌnɨ. (der. of tʉtʉika) vr 1) be or become stopped, end 2) be or become calm
eꞌtwarika vi 1) escape from home Iyeꞌtwarikaꞌpʉ. She escaped from home. 2) leave
eꞌtwariꞌma vi suffer Iyeꞌtwariꞌmaꞌpʉ. He
suffered.
eu n (non-possessed) a variety of small, silvercoloured fish, resembling a sardine

euku (poss: ɨuku) n drink Aninkɨ, ɨuku. Look,
your drink.
eukuꞌtɨ (der.) vt ferment
eukuꞌtɨ (der. of euku) vt set drink aside to allow it to ferment Kasiri eukuꞌtɨꞌpʉ iya. She
set the caziri aside to ferment.
eukwa vt 1) untie Maipuri eukwaꞌpʉ uya. I untied the cow. syn: aranka 2 . 2) loose syn: aranka 1 .
euranka vt 1) baptise Sises euranka -ꞌpʉ John uya. John baptised Jesus. syn: enpataukwa 1 . 2) wash
euta n hole tɨꞌ euta nau in a cave (a rock's hole) syn: yen 2 .
ewa (poss: ɨewa) n 1) fishing line 2) rope, string
ewaiꞌ (cf: aꞌtai) 1) adv yes; the affirmative response to a yes-no question 2) conj and
ewaiꞌ naꞌkɨ Yes, surely.
ewaiꞌ nawon I'm not sure; I don't know; the unsure response to a yes-no question
eꞌwaipaꞌma vi have a burning sensation on the skin Upiꞌpɨ eꞌwaipaꞌmaꞌpʉ. My skin burned
(after being scratched by a grass).
ewakayu nom someone or something young Ewakayu pe iyesi. He is young.
ewakiri (var: ewakʉri) nom like, preference Ewakiri pe kasiri esi. My like is kaziri. Tewakiri pe tʉsapatooi ɨnkonekapai iyesiꞌpʉ. He was wanting to make this own sandals
that he likes.
ewako n a variety of mushroom
ewakʉ vt 1) scrape Naire ewakʉꞌpʉ uya. I scraped the paddle. 2) carve Yʉi ewakʉꞌpʉ iya.
She scraped the stick.
ewakʉma n (non-possessed) happiness

© 2014 SIL International®

56

Akawaio-English Dictionary

ewakʉri var. of ewakiri
eꞌwaꞌkʉtʉ (der. of waꞌkʉtʉ) vr shield oneself, defend oneself
ewan (poss: ɨyewan) n 1) belly 2) spirit, the center of one's emotions or spirit 3) stomach 4) body cavity
ewan enaꞌpɨ n heart
ewan tɨpu (var: ewantɨpu) heart (lit: bellyꞌs rock)
ewanaꞌtɨ 1) vt begin 2) vi begin to Toꞌ koꞌmamʉ aꞌtai ewanaꞌtɨ iyai, esiꞌpʉ si ya rɨ, . . .. When they began to live together, . . ..
ewanayuru n a long, straight section of river tuna ewanayuru the straight stretch of river
ewankama vt cause someone to worry or to suffer Toꞌ ewankamaꞌpʉ iya. He made them
suffer.
ewaꞌnoma 1) vt fight Israelite amʉꞌ piyau toꞌ si esiꞌpʉ Philistine amʉꞌ ewaꞌnoma pɨꞌ. The Israelites were waging war with the Philistines. 2) vi wage war usewaꞌnomantoꞌ a war 3) vi hate 4) vi be or become against another person
eꞌwanpa vt cherish Uneꞌwanpanʉ uwanamarii iꞌkwɨꞌsaꞌ iya. He broke the mirror I
cherish.
ewantɨꞌmo vi hit someone in the abdomen or belly Iyewantɨꞌmoꞌpʉ. He hit someone in the
belly.
ewantɨpu (poss ɨewantɨpu) var. of ewan tɨpu n heart; the organ for pumping blood (lit. 'bellyꞌs stone')
eꞌwapiyaꞌka vi being or becoming first
eꞌwapuꞌtɨ (der. of wapuꞌtɨ, see under wapu) 1) vr make an excuse for oneself 2) vi be or becoming surrounded or shielded
eꞌwaraiꞌka (der. of waraiꞌka) vr scratch oneself Iyeꞌwaraiꞌkaꞌpʉ. He scratched himself.

eꞌwarauka (der. of warauka) vi be or become opened Epʉn eꞌwaraukwasaꞌ aꞌtai when
Heaven opened
ewaron n darkness, especially in a spiritual sense
ewaruma n hate ewarumaꞌtɨ (der.) 1) vt hate 2) vi refuse
ewarumamʉ vi 1) be or become late in the day Pata nin si ewarumankaaꞌpʉ mɨrɨ piyaiꞌsan pɨꞌ rɨ iyeꞌsaraꞌtɨkaaꞌpʉ. When night came to the place, the piaichang started his sorcery. syn: ukoꞌmamʉ 3 . 2) be or become dark Tuna si ewarumamʉꞌpʉ. It became dark (to rain).
ewarumaꞌtɨ (der. of ewaruma) 1) vt hate Tanporon kon uya rɨ ɨyewarumaꞌtɨtoꞌ oton kon. Everyone will hate you. 2) vi refuse Iyewarumaꞌtɨꞌpʉ. He refused.
ewarupɨ n 1) (non-possessed) night Aꞌkwa eꞌweiꞌtɨsaꞌ ewarupɨ yau. The light was shining in the darkness. 2) darkness
eꞌwasaꞌ var. of eꞌwasuꞌ
eꞌwasuꞌ (var: eꞌwasaꞌ) (cf: ekapʉꞌ) vi 1) defecate Iyeꞌwasuꞌpɨtʉꞌpʉ. He defecated. 2) to pass diarrhea
ewaꞌta (poss: ɨewaꞌta) n armpit
ewaꞌtɨ vt 1) string 2) tie up Uwariꞌsarɨ ewaꞌtɨsaꞌ uya. I tied up my warishi. usewaꞌtɨ (der.) vi 1) tied up 2) build
eꞌweiꞌtɨ (der. of weiꞌtɨ) vi shine Aꞌkwa eꞌweiꞌtɨsaꞌ ewarupɨ yau. The light was shining in
the darkness.
ewekʉ (var: ewetʉ) vt feed someone else Irepapɨtʉ iya, ewekʉ iya saꞌne si. He gave it,
he really fed him.
eꞌweꞌpɨꞌma vi itch Uꞌpai eꞌweꞌpɨꞌmaꞌpʉ. I

© 2014 SIL International®

57

Akawaio-English Dictionary

itched my head
eꞌweꞌsenaukwa vi wipe oneself after defecating Iyeꞌweꞌsenakwaꞌpʉ. He wiped
himself.
eꞌwetumʉ (der. of wetumʉ) vr stay awake, keep oneself awake Kʉrɨ rɨ si annin nʉꞌpʉ pen eꞌwetunkaaꞌpʉ. The one who didn't eat was
staying awake.
ewetʉ var. of ewekʉ
eꞌweukwa vi disappear, disappear suddenly Mɨrɨ aꞌtai enariꞌkeꞌ pe toꞌ eꞌtoꞌ eꞌwekwaꞌpʉ.
And so, their fear disappeared.
eꞌweuweuma vi flash, as in lightning Kamiriꞌ eꞌweuweumaꞌpʉ nɨrɨ. Ligthning flashed, too. syn: urenpamʉ .
ewɨ vi 1) marry Ewɨsaꞌ iyesi -ꞌpʉ. He was married. 2) living at home
eꞌwɨnɨ (der. of wɨnɨ) 1) vr hit oneself Ɨeꞌwɨsaꞌ. You hit yourself (when you fell). 2) vi be or become hit 3) vi fight each other
eꞌwɨrʉka vi very angry, indignant

eꞌwoiwoima (der. of woiwoima) vi spin
eꞌwokʉnka vi part, as in clouds parting in the sky to let the sun shine through
ewomʉ vi go in, especially into a building Ewonkɨ. Come in. Elizabeth yaꞌ nin si Papa Aꞌkwarʉ ewomʉꞌpʉ mɨrɨ. God's Spirit entered
into Elizabeth.
wonka (der.) vt open
ewonʉkʉ vt catch fish using a maswa or dam and trap Moroꞌ amʉꞌ ewonʉkʉꞌpʉ iya. He
caught plenty fish using a dam and trap.
ewoꞌpʉ (poss: ɨyewoꞌpʉ) n mother-in-law, indirect address dir add: waꞌnʉ 2 .
eꞌwʉrʉukwa (der. of wʉrʉuka) vr move oneself, especially when going to live in another place Toꞌ eꞌwʉrʉukwaꞌpʉ tʉron nɨ airɨ. They
slid over to another part.
eyaton (var: eyaton non; poss: ɨeyaton) n 1) rival 2) enemy
eyaton non var. of eyaton

Ii

i- (phon. var: iy-; phon. var: it-) (cf: kʉrɨ rɨ) 1) he/she/it, third person verb prefix Iy- aꞌta -ꞌpʉ. It sprouted. 2) him/her/it, third person verb prefix I- wɨnɨpʉ iya. He hit him. 3) his/her/its, third person noun prefix it- ekare -ei his news/words
-i2 (var: -rɨ; var: -ʉi; var: -nʉ; var: -mʉ; var: -rʉ; var: -oi; var: -ai; var: -o; var: -ui) possession; used to show that the stem is possessed u- saꞌki -i my sack
-iꞌ2 certainty Uyeꞌ -a -iꞌ. I am coming. Utakama pɨꞌ eꞌ -a -iꞌ. I am not being satisfied.

-i1 near in time Nʉ- ukoꞌman -pɨtʉ -i inke rɨ. He was staying a long time. Kɨ- utɨ -i! Don't you go!
-iꞌ1 (var: -se1) purpose, intention menuka -iꞌ (in
order) to write
iꞌka vt 1) bite Waamori uya iꞌkaꞌpʉ. The turtle bit him. 2) sting Arai iꞌkasaꞌ uya. A spider bit me. 3) scratch; make itch Uyiꞌkapɨtʉꞌpʉ iya. It
scratched me
usiꞌka (der.) vr itchy
ikaꞌnɨ nom terribly Ikaꞌnɨ pe upiꞌpɨ eꞌsiꞌsiꞌma.
My skin itches terribly.

© 2014 SIL International®

58

Akawaio-English Dictionary

ikaꞌnɨpa var. of kaꞌnɨma1
ikapisin n smoke from a fire
ikaramenu n a variety of fish with stripes; edible
ikaꞌsaꞌ n idol, image (lit: the made thing)
iꞌki n a variety of worm, found on mora tree leaves during rainy season
iꞌkiꞌma vt shake tʉrʉꞌpʉnʉ amʉꞌ uya toꞌ iꞌkiꞌmaꞌpʉ. many earthquakes shook them. usiꞌkiꞌma (der.) vr shaken
iꞌkɨ n 1) mosquito larva Dermatobia hominis 2) a variety of larva that grows in wounds on the skin
iꞌkɨrɨ vt 1) chop, as in cutting wood for firewood Muran nin si iꞌkɨrɨpɨtʉꞌpʉ toꞌ uya mɨrɨ. They chopped up the bina there. 2) break apart, break open Toꞌ uya rɨ temiya, tʉꞌta rɨ auronpɨꞌsaꞌ, eꞌtane waꞌkapun ke tʉpaꞌsimanin ke rɨ teꞌtane, iꞌkɨrɨpɨtʉꞌpʉ iya rɨ. They bound his
hands and feet, but even with metal (chains) to hold him, he broke them apart.
iꞌkoro n 1) a small, swampy area particularly along a path Iꞌkoro pe pata esi. The place is muddy. 2) clay, especially along a path, during rainy season Iꞌkoro pe eꞌma esi. The path is covered with wet clay. syn: tawa 2 .
iꞌkororimɨꞌta n a large swampy area
ikuꞌ nom a muddy place Ikuꞌ pe peyaꞌ esi. The landing is muddy. opp: awaiꞌnan .
iꞌkuiꞌpʉ n flood syn: iꞌmʉnpʉ 1 .
iꞌkuka vt wash, referring to clothes or the body Uꞌpai siꞌkuka uya. I am washing my head. syn: tuꞌkuna .
iꞌkumɨrɨ slippery, like clay soil at river's edge Iꞌkumɨrɨ pe iyesi. It is slippery.

ikumuru n pus
ikuꞌnɨ rancid, the smell of fish meat gone bad Ikuꞌnɨ moroꞌ esi. The fish is rancid.
ikuntɨ vt wound; make something unable to move Pero kuntɨsaꞌ toꞌ uya ekaꞌtumʉꞌpʉ. The dog
they wounded ran away.
ikuꞌpa n a variety of plant
ikuꞌpɨ (poss: ɨkuꞌpɨri) n pond, lake
iꞌkura vt paddle a canoe Ina uyeeꞌkaaꞌpʉ tʉsiꞌkʉraiꞌ, naire ke, ɨnnɨ rɨ. We came
paddling, with paddles, a long way.
usiꞌkura (der.) vr paddle
iꞌkurinsaꞌ 1) nom something or someone wet Iꞌkurinsaꞌ pe moroꞌ esi. The fish (I am drying) is wet. syn: amanka . 2) vt soak, as in dried meat, to make it soft again opp: kanpʉ .
ikʉn (poss: ɨyikʉn) n pet tikʉn his own pet
iꞌkʉra vt stir, particularly stir cassava drink Kasiri iꞌkʉra uya. I am stirring cassava drink.
iꞌkʉrakɨ nom bitter taste; used to describe the taste of kada before it is cooked to make it edible. Iꞌkʉrakɨ pe kata esi. The kada is bitter. syn: maiꞌ1 3 .
iꞌkʉrimʉ vt soak something eꞌkurimʉ (der.) vi wet
iꞌkʉrʉ n hill, an area with small hills
iꞌkʉrʉn 1) n purple potato 2) nom something black in colour Iꞌkʉrʉn pe iyesi. It is a black one. opp: aimuꞌne .
iꞌkʉrʉntanʉkʉ vt make dark Wʉi uya upiꞌpɨ iꞌkʉrʉntanʉꞌsaꞌ. The sun has made my skin dark.
iꞌkwa vt 1) peel, as in a fruit or vegetable Iꞌkwaꞌpʉ uya. I peeled it. 2) skin, as in removing

© 2014 SIL International®

59

Akawaio-English Dictionary

the skin of an animal 3) scrape Mɨrɨpan iꞌkwaꞌpʉ ina uya. And then we scraped the
cassava roots.
iꞌkwamʉ (var: iꞌkwan) vt 1) bail water from a boat Iꞌkwanpɨtʉ uya. I am bailing (the boat). I am throwing out (the water from the boat). syn: paruka . 2) throw out a fluid 3) pour fluid from a container
iꞌkwan var. of iꞌkwamʉ
iꞌkwarʉmɨ var. of iꞌkwarʉmo
iꞌkwarʉmo (var: iꞌkwarʉmɨ) vi make porridge iꞌkwarʉmosaꞌ porridge
iꞌkwɨ vt harvest, gather, pick Upikaꞌtɨpai peꞌ meꞌyan aꞌnaiꞌ iꞌkwɨpɨtʉ pɨꞌ? Do you want to
help me harvest the corn?
iꞌkwɨtʉ1 vt make an edge on a cake of cassava bread Eki eꞌpi iꞌkwɨtʉꞌpʉ uya. I put an edge on
the cake of cassava bread.
iꞌkwɨtʉ2 vt break something; to cause something to become broken Urari iꞌkwɨꞌpɨtʉꞌpʉ iya. He broke the urari on (the dart). Iyekaꞌtumʉꞌpʉ mɨrɨ si tʉniꞌkwɨꞌpɨtʉꞌpʉ teꞌma awɨrɨ. She ran along
breaking off branches along the path.
eꞌkwɨtʉ1 (der.) vr broken
iꞌkwɨtʉi aꞌmutɨꞌpʉ a type of cassava bread (?)
-iꞌma while, as Mɨrɨ aꞌtai asanta awɨrɨ tʉtɨiꞌma ꞌnokon, . . . At that time, as we were going along
the path, . . .
iꞌmaꞌka vt finish Mɨrɨ tʉpo tanporo iꞌmaꞌkaꞌpʉ tʉuya ꞌnokon aꞌtai, . .. After they had finished
everything, . . .
aꞌkwarʉ iꞌmaꞌka (id.) vr grieve
imamin (poss: ɨimamin) n 1) possessions toꞌ imamin their toys 2) goods 3) a child's toys
imaꞌnapa vi commit adultery, to have sex with

someone other than one's spouse Papa uya kuru imaꞌnapanin nʉꞌsan menkatoꞌ oton.
God will judge those who commit adultery.
imanka vt fetch, bring Mɨrɨ apoꞌ imankakɨ.
Fetch that firewood.
imawari n 1) an indigenous style of singing and dancing 2) possibly a term for the Holy Spirit of God
imeꞌya n eave of a house or building
iꞌmo2 vt 1) break up or burst Mɨrɨ nin si iꞌmosaꞌ auya aꞌtai iyeꞌnaika mɨrɨ. When you bust this (calabash), she will be vexed about it. 2) burst shingles 3) make a roof from shingles 4) crack
iꞌmo1 var. of utaꞌmorʉka
iꞌmoi (poss: ɨꞌmoi) n egg kɨrɨtɨkɨ iꞌmoi chicken
egg
Iꞌmoi nprop the name given to a creek along the Kukui River between Jawalla and Philipai
imoronʉꞌpʉ n an illness caused by excessive mining or burning of the bush
imun (poss: ɨimun) n 1) root cf: miꞌ . 2) ground provision, general term for potato, yam, cassava, etc.
Imuraai nprop the name given to a creek back dam from Jawalla village
iꞌmʉime vt bend a young sapling tree in an arch Mɨrɨpan uya yʉi mʉreꞌpʉ iꞌmʉimeꞌpʉ asanta taꞌ. So they bent young saplings across the
path.
iꞌmʉkamʉ vt yoke, connect a pair of animals by a yoke around their necks
iꞌmʉꞌkʉ vt divide, partition Toꞌ yoꞌ iꞌmʉꞌkʉꞌpʉ uya. I divided their meat.
iꞌmʉnpʉ 1) flood Iꞌmʉnpʉ pe tuna esiꞌpʉ. The river flooded. syn: iꞌkuiꞌpʉ . 2) n the season from June to August; usually rainy syn: Tʉmon 2 .

© 2014 SIL International®

60

Akawaio-English Dictionary

iꞌmʉrʉkʉtʉ vt decapitate, cut off the head Aku iꞌmʉrʉkʉtʉꞌpʉ uya. I decapitated the agouti.
iꞌmʉꞌsaꞌka vt 1) stand, set in an upright position Yʉi iꞌmʉꞌsaꞌkaꞌpʉ ina uya. We made the tree stand up (after it fell over). 2) raise; specifically, cause someone to rise from the dead, cause to be alive again Papa, ina tamokori ton eꞌtoꞌ iteseꞌ pɨꞌ, Sises pʉmʉꞌsaꞌkanin nʉꞌpʉ iyeriꞌsaꞌ apai ɨnwɨnɨꞌpʉ kon tʉpokapɨꞌse yʉi pona. God, on whom our ancestors called, has
raised Jesus from death, whom you killed by stabbing him to a tree.
eꞌmʉꞌsaꞌka (der.) vi 1) stand 2) raise up
ina1 pron 1) we (exclusive) Ina utɨꞌpʉ. We went. 2) us (exclusive) Ina pokaꞌpʉ iya. He shot us. 3) our ina mariyarʉ our knife
ina2 vt weed, particularly pulling up unwanted plants by the roots upʉrorooi inaꞌpʉ uya. I weeded my yard. syn: kuruꞌka .
iꞌnaꞌ n 1) its depth Four feet iꞌnaꞌ rʉꞌkwɨ iyesiꞌpʉ. Its depth was four feet. 2) a pit 3) Hell
iꞌnai (var: iꞌnapai) nom 1) something true or real Mɨrɨ esiꞌpʉ iꞌnai -ron aꞌkwa pe tanporon non pon kon weiꞌtɨ nin pe. And this was the true light that was shining in all the world. 2) sincere 3) honest
inakaꞌpɨ n (non-possessed) a hollowed out stump
iꞌnansiꞌka vt 1) fear 2) bother
inanʉkʉ vt make wet Paꞌtiya yeꞌ inanʉkʉꞌpʉ uya. I wet the watermelon plant. eꞌnanʉkʉ (der.) vr wet
iꞌnapai var. of iꞌnai
inaꞌpo (cf: ennaꞌpo) vt 1) return something Inaꞌpo uya serɨ ɨpiyaꞌ. I am returning this to you. Papa uya si kunaꞌpo kon, wakʉ nin si pata

yaꞌ. God will return us to the good place. 2) repeat, as in saying something a second time Mɨrɨ inaꞌpokaꞌkɨ kanan. Say that again.
iꞌnau (cf: oꞌno, oꞌkoroꞌno) adv 1) under water, deep Iꞌnawon nɨ moꞌkaꞌpʉ toꞌ uya. They took him out from a deep hole. Mɨrɨ aꞌtai, toꞌ uya eporoꞌpʉ 100 feet iꞌnau iyesi tukaiꞌ. Then,
they found (the water) was 100 feet deep. 2)
underground, under the surface of the ground, say, in a hole; deep Sunwa iꞌnau tɨꞌ euta nau iyesiꞌpʉ. He was in a cave, deep underground.
iꞌneꞌ nom something bitter to the taste Iꞌneꞌ pe eki esi. The cassava is bitter. opp: aꞌseꞌku ; syn: maiꞌ1 2 .
ineꞌ 1) n a variety of hot pepper 2) n a variety of hot pepper bush 3) nom something spicy; something having a strong pepper flavour Ineꞌ pe tuma esi. The tuma is spicy. opp: koꞌtʉmʉn .
ineꞌneꞌ (cf: waiyo) 1) nom something salty Ineꞌneꞌ pe oꞌ esi. The meat is salty. opp: koꞌtʉmʉn . 2) n salt
iꞌninpayan vt cause pain
iꞌnɨꞌkenan (var: iꞌnʉꞌkenan) cool; a temperature or feeling between hot and cold sclr prop: aꞌneꞌ, iꞌnɨꞌkenan, komiꞌ .
inɨꞌkwɨrɨꞌnʉkʉ vt go across, traverse Itʉi inɨꞌkwɨrɨꞌnʉkʉꞌpʉ toꞌ utɨꞌpʉ. They went across
the savannah.
iꞌnɨꞌpanʉkʉ vt 1) cool down something that is hot 2) make peace iꞌnɨꞌpanʉkʉ pɨꞌ teꞌsan kamoro they are being peacemakers 3) relieve Medicine uya uꞌpai iꞌnɨꞌpanʉkʉꞌpʉ. The medicine relieved my head (ache). 4) stop eꞌnɨꞌpanʉkʉ (der.) vr stopped
iꞌnɨꞌtɨ vt cook fish by wrapping it in leaves and roasting it

© 2014 SIL International®

61

Akawaio-English Dictionary

inkarʉ n jungle; bush
inke adv 1) in a steady fashion, continuously Inke rɨ toꞌ uyepʉ. They are taking a long time to come. 2) consistently, regularly 3) forever, eternal inke roꞌ rɨ eternal syn: pena 2, tɨwɨrɨ 1 .
-iꞌno subjunctive suffix Upon ton tuꞌkunapɨꞌsaꞌ auya yau, ɨyepeꞌpʉ ke kɨnrepaiꞌno. If you had
washed my clothes, I would have given you your payment.
iꞌnokʉ vt mash, usually cassava bread, to make porridge Eki iꞌnokʉꞌpʉ uya. I mashed cassava bread. mekuru iꞌnoꞌsaꞌ mashed banana drink eꞌnokʉ (der.) vr mash
inonka vt leave something
inonkʉiran n world, earth syn: orʉ 1, urayanta .
inpɨ 1) nom used to describe the shape of a traditional Akawayo structure or building with two center posts; used to describe the shape of a sour nut (poss. parepu) cf: waipa . 2) n a variety of nut with an oval shape Caryocar muciferum
Inpɨimʉtɨi nprop Imbaimadai, the name given to a settlement along the Upper Mazaruni River, near the Patan branch, mostly a coastlander settlement with an airstrip and police post, shops, etc.
inseꞌ (cf: insewairen) n long hair, appropriate for girls and women inseꞌpʉn a girl with short hair tʉnsewairen a girl with long hair tʉnseꞌkenan a girl with hair shorter than tʉnsewairen gen: puꞌpɨ 2 .
inserʉ (poss: ɨinserʉʉi) n angel
insewairen (cf: inseꞌ) long hair, but not as long as inse'
intaka n a high-water short-cut or bypass

Mapiꞌsa intaka the high-water bypass named
Mabicha
intaꞌnapa (der. of entaꞌna) vt serve someone food, in particular, cassava bread, pepperpot and cassava drink Toꞌ intaꞌnapakɨ. Serve them
food.
intatoi (var: intotoi) n jaw
intomai var. of inton
inton (var: intomai) n 1) uncle; in particular, one's father's brother, direct address indir add: kʉipʉnʉ1 2 . 2) old man 3) mother's male cousin, direct address
intotoi var. of intatoi
iꞌnʉꞌkenan var. of iꞌnɨꞌkenan nom cold, as in drinking water
iꞌnʉma vt keep something to oneself Kuyiꞌnʉma tʉuyaꞌnokon pe. We will keep it to
ourselves.
iꞌnʉmʉ2 vt cause pain Uyɨ ɨkʉrʉwa pe teꞌsen iꞌnʉmʉ. My tooth aches.
iꞌnʉmʉ1 vr valuable iꞌnʉ mʉn worthless iꞌnʉn keꞌ something valuable
iꞌnʉn nom someone loved by another Iyiꞌnʉn pe iyesi. She is well-liked.
iꞌnʉnka vt love, show affection Kaatʉ uya ɨiꞌnʉnka. God loves you. iniꞌnʉnkanʉ the one
he loves
usiꞌnʉnka (der.) 1) vi loved 2) vr love each other 3) vr love oneself
ipa (poss: ɨipa) 1) n fruit Ɨꞌrɨ uyipa kon pʉra rɨ? What not our fruit? (What fruit will be left for us?) spec: uꞌma1 . 2) nom anything sweet
ipaꞌkwa n a variety of snake
Ipanaꞌmuru pai nprop the name given to a stretch along Upper Mazaruni River between Imbaimadai and Jawalla where the Hunter

© 2014 SIL International®

62

Akawaio-English Dictionary

family settlement is ipiꞌkwa vt pelt, hit, as with an arrow Mɨrɨpan
ipiꞌkwa iꞌse, ipokaꞌpʉ uya. And trying to pelt it, I
shot it.
iꞌpiꞌnan var. of eꞌpiꞌnan
ipiꞌpɨ rʉꞌpʉ n hide of a dead animal
ipɨkɨroꞌ (cf: ) nom second-born child Ipɨkɨroꞌ pe iyesi. He is the second-born child.
iꞌpoꞌ (poss: ɨiꞌpoꞌ / ɨꞌpoꞌ) (cf: apiri) n 1) feather 2) hair tʉꞌpoꞌkenan a hairy person 3) the quill of the porcupine aru iꞌpoꞌ porcupine's quill 4) fur of an animal paka iꞌpoꞌ cow's fur
iꞌpo vt 1) strip Mɨrɨpan kon poirɨ kenʉꞌ si kaꞌpon utɨꞌpʉ mɨrɨ manare iꞌpopɨꞌseꞌna. And
nearby them, a person mistakenly came there to strip
manare. 2) peel iꞌpoka vt pluck the feathers from a bird or fowl
syn: apiriꞌka . iꞌpokʉ var. of ariꞌpokʉ
ipoꞌsoꞌ n a variety of monkey
ipʉrʉ (poss: ɨipʉrʉ) n wild flowers araꞌya ipʉrʉ the guava flower syn: ariꞌku .
ipʉrʉꞌtɨ vt decorate Ɨiwʉꞌ ipʉrʉꞌtɨkɨ. Decorate
your house.
usipʉtʉꞌtɨ (der.) vr adorned
iraꞌ n a variety of large, black ant; munuri ant iraꞌrunpa var. of aꞌrunpa
iraꞌtɨ vt twist Waya amʉꞌ iraꞌtɨkɨ. Twist the wires. syn: iseꞌme 2 .
Iremukoꞌ nprop a person or people from around the Iren River
iren1 n a variety of tree, white silver-balli Octoca sp.
iren2 something bright red, like a hot coal Iren

kenaꞌ apoꞌ keme esiꞌpʉ. The fire wood was
glowing bright red.
iriꞌ var. of eriꞌ1
irikwa vi irritate, especially a sore or wound
Irɨtɨ pai nprop the name given to a place on the Kukui River between Aruwe pai and Jawalla.
iruwa n 1) a variety of tree 2) blowpipe, especially that from the iruwa tree
Iruwa ken nprop the name given to a creek mouth along the Upper Mazaruni River, above Imbaimadai
irʉꞌpan n scraps, mostly food Irʉꞌpan pɨꞌ toꞌ uya amʉranʉkʉꞌpʉ. They gathered together
some scrapings.
iꞌsa n something people use to make life better iꞌsa roꞌ kon some things people look for to make
their lives better
iꞌsaꞌka var. of iꞌtaꞌka
isakari (cf: sikɨniꞌ) n (non-possessed) a variety of fruit, ping-pong ball-sized round fruits
isaꞌkaꞌsi n 1) donkey 2) burlap material
isakon (poss: ɨisakon) n partner Itisakon esiꞌpʉ eight years old. Her partner was eight years old. cf: watakon .
isan n a variety of plantain
Iꞌsano nprop the name given to a company compound along the Middle Mazaruni, near Ta'saren village
isarakɨ nom the odour of underarm perspiration, body odour Isarakɨ pe iyesi. He has body odour.
isaraꞌkwa vt cut into two parts
isaramenu nom partially ripe Isaramenu pe kapaya esi. The paw-paw is partially ripe. dev: aꞌkʉra 1, akʉꞌpʉ, isaramenu, isuweyu, ukɨta .

© 2014 SIL International®

63

Akawaio-English Dictionary

isaraꞌmo vt bisect, cut into two equal parts Kapaya isaraꞌmokɨ. Cut the paw-paw fruit into
two equal pieces.
iꞌse nom something wanted Ɨꞌrɨ ɨiꞌse meꞌan? What do you want? iꞌse meꞌaiꞌneꞌ whatever you want Mɨrɨpan eposaꞌ tʉuyaꞌnokon aꞌtai, ereutanʉkʉ iꞌse toꞌ esiꞌpʉ, itɨ namaiꞌ. And
when they found him, they were wanting him to stay, and not go.
iseꞌka vt sweep Pata iseꞌkakɨ. Sweep the place. syn: akoroka 1 .
iseꞌme vi 1) spin; turn around 2) twist iseꞌmesaꞌ a crippled person syn: iraꞌtɨ . 3) lie down, as a dog does Pero useꞌmesaꞌ. The dog lied down.
isememuꞌtɨ n face paint
isenan (cf: aꞌkʉra) nom 1) something green; the colour of leaves Isenan pe yʉi esi. The tree is fresh and green. opp: kanpʉ ; opp: aipʉ . 2) something fresh 3) raw, something not fully cooked
isenuminka vt think
iꞌsi var. of eꞌmata
iꞌsin nom thick, as in solid material Iꞌsin pe paranka esi. The board is thick. opp: apiꞌtɨmɨn 1 ; opp: karawaꞌ 1 .
iꞌsiꞌnaꞌ postp against, as speaking to someone about himself/herself but not in the second person
Iꞌsineru nprop the name given to a village along the Middle Mazaruni, near Kʉrʉ'pʉn River mouth
isiꞌponin (der. of usiꞌpo) n the stinger of a bee or wasp
Iꞌsiwon var. of Piꞌsiwon
isu n stew, the soup that contains the meat making it a more complete meal

isuweta vi 1) be or become brown 2) be or become ripe, even overripe Isuwetasaꞌ iyesiꞌpʉ. It became overripe.
isuweyu nom something brown, reddish brown, orange, red; ripe Isuweyu pe ipokʉrʉʉi esi. His belt is brown. dev: aꞌkʉra 1, akʉꞌpʉ, isaramenu, isuweyu, ukɨta ; opp: aꞌkʉra 1 .
it- phon. var. of i-
iꞌta piꞌpɨ n claw, for birds and jaguar
iꞌtaꞌka (var: iꞌsaꞌka) vt cut, as in grass or second bush Wanaꞌ iꞌtaꞌkaꞌpʉ uya. I cut grass. syn: akʉtʉ 1 .
iꞌtapa (cf: ainʉnpa) vt 1) chase Toꞌ iꞌtapapɨꞌkɨ! Chase them! 2) hunt Usari iꞌtapaꞌpʉ uya. I
hunted/chased after deer.
itaperʉꞌka nom being together or in close proximity to one another syn: amʉtʉ .
itayaupasaꞌ lunatic itekeinno var. of itekiinno
itekiinno (var: itekeinno) (cf: ekiinno) n a cake of cassava bread Tikin nɨ tekino eki one cake of cassava bread Tikin nɨ itekino eki iꞌse eꞌaiꞌ. I want one cake of eki.
iteseꞌ n pretense
itesen tikitiki n the one hanging; uvula
iꞌtɨꞌkwa (cf: iꞌtʉꞌkwa) vt chip Eꞌkwapiꞌ iꞌtɨꞌkwaꞌpʉ uya. I chipped off pieces of the fallen
tree.
itɨꞌmooi n die, one of a pair of dice iꞌtoko var. of iꞌtokʉ
iꞌtokʉ (var: iꞌtoko) vt boil, especially a thick substance like kata or kasiri or porridge Kasiri iꞌtokʉꞌpʉ uya. I boiled the cassava drink. iꞌtoꞌtoꞌ

© 2014 SIL International®

64

Akawaio-English Dictionary

yai something to cook in; a pot (var eꞌtokʉ) eꞌtokʉ (der.) 1) vt boil 2) vi soften
itoto (var: itoto eꞌ) n kanaima, evil spirit syn: kanaimɨ .
itoto eꞌ var. of itoto
itoto pana n a variety of mushroom
iꞌtu vt 1) know Mɨrɨ eꞌtane non uya iꞌtu pʉra iyesiꞌpʉ. But (those in the) world did not know (it). Apʉne ken isiꞌtuiꞌ. I will prove that it is correct/true. 2) try 3) test; try 4) experience Mɨrɨ ina niꞌtuꞌpʉ upinimʉ koroꞌtau uneporoꞌpʉ.
And we experienced it while walking around, I found
it. 5) tempt, test Main pɨꞌ enupanin eꞌmɨꞌsaꞌkaꞌpʉ Sises iꞌtupɨꞌse. A teacher of the law rose to test Jesus. 6) count usiꞌtu (der.) 1) vr know 2) vi try
iꞌtʉꞌkwa (cf: iꞌtɨꞌkwa) vi axed, cut or squared off with an axe Iꞌtʉꞌkwasaꞌ. It was squared off
with an axe.
iwa2 adv more or less, approximately 5,000 kaisa rɨ iwa rɨ kaꞌpon amʉꞌ esiꞌpʉ mɨrɨ yau.
There were more or less than 5,000 people there.
iwa1 var. of warinpa
-iwa 1) comparative, more or better wakʉiwa the better (thing) 2) superlative, most or best 3) begin Mɨrɨpan kon kanwa eꞌsɨnkaiwaꞌpʉ. And their boat began to sink. 4) half of something, half the quality mentioned Irui esiꞌpʉ panaꞌ pe pʉra

ɨꞌsɨꞌmʉra kaꞌpon pe iwa iyesi wenai. His brother became a weak half-human. 5) nearly iwan (poss: ɨiwan) n 1) hunger Iwan pe esi. I am hungry. 2) famine Iwan pe pata esiꞌpʉ.
There was a famine in that place.
iwankan n 1) the season from December to February; usually dry cal: iwankan 1, toron kan, Tʉmon 2, wʉipiya 2 ; syn: kurun pan . 2) drought, and the subsequent famine Iwankan utaꞌmoꞌkaꞌpʉ mɨrɨ mɨrɨ pata yau. A
drought fell on that place.
iwannɨkoꞌ poor person opp: tapiyara1 .
iwanoꞌ n belonging It- iwanoꞌ his own (thing)
iwaruwana n 1) a variety of monkey that eats cane cf: araiꞌkwaꞌ . 2) a variety of weasel, tayra Tayra barbara
iwarʉka n 1) monkey, the general term Pithecia leucocephala 2) a variety of biting spider similar in colour to the monkey of the same name
Iwarʉkarimɨ pai nprop the name given to a bay along the Upper Mazaruni River, above Imbaimadai
iwʉꞌtɨ vi floating down, going down-river Pata tʉrʉꞌpʉ ina uya Aratɨi po ɨnnɨ tʉiwʉꞌtɨiꞌ. We
travelled to Aratɨi, going far down-river.
iy- phon. var. of i-
iya ( uya) he, she, it, as subject of a transitive sentence
iyoꞌneꞌ (cf: pero) n a good hunting dog

Ɨɨ

ɨꞌ vt spin cotton Ɨꞌpɨtʉꞌpʉ uya. I was spinning
cotton.
ɨ (poss: ɨyɨ) n tooth
© 2014 SIL International®

ɨ- (phon. var: e-; phon. var: ɨy-; phon. var: ɨw-) (cf: ɨmɨrɨ, a-; cf: mʉ-) 1) you, second person verb prefix Takuruꞌ ke ɨwesi. You are sick. 2) your, second person noun prefix ɨsuparaai your
65

Akawaio-English Dictionary

machete
ɨ apon the upper jaw
ɨ epotorʉ molar
Ɨeka nprop the name given to a creek near Sinau yen village
Ɨeporoꞌpʉ Tʉpʉ nprop the name given to the mountain to the west of Kako village
ɨinɨ (poss: ɨirin / ɨinɨri) n a large cooking pot ɨinɨ pun clay used to make pots; lit., pot's flesh
Ɨinɨ kapʉ nprop the name given to a mountain near Amoko kupai
ɨisirɨ interj Let's go. Ɨisiꞌkɨ. Come. (as a command
to one person)
ɨkenaꞌ nom 1) a smart person, a sharp wit 2) something sharp
ɨkɨɨimɨ (cf: meremeꞌ) n 1) (non-possessed) rainbow 2) a variety of snake known as camoudi
ɨkɨn n (non-possessed) a variety of long, small snake-like fish
ɨkɨneꞌ nom 1) someone serious or someone being serious in their presentation Tuꞌkan kon rɨ tuna kau ɨkɨneꞌ pe teꞌsan panama pɨꞌ ipinimʉꞌpʉ siya rɨ tuna kaisarɨ. All those in
the water were very serious as he travelled all around
the rivers. 2) someone cross or vexed 3) fierce 4) jealous 5) proud ɨkɨnta vi 1) be or become jealous Kaꞌpon amʉꞌ ɨkɨntaꞌpʉ toꞌ pɨꞌ. The people were jealous of them. 2) be or become angry Kʉrɨ rɨ nin ɨkɨntasaꞌ utɨ mɨrɨ, Camel. The camel went, being angry with him. 3) argue Five kaisaron kon kaꞌpon amʉꞌ eꞌtoꞌ oton tʉkoroꞌtauꞌnokon ɨkɨntan pɨꞌ. There will be five people among you all
who will argue.
ɨkɨnʉnpa vt 1) arouse temper in someone by one's talk 2) make someone growl 3) make someone grumble

Ɨkɨrɨ pai nprop the name given to a bay along the Upper Mazaruni River, above Imbaimadai
ɨꞌkɨrɨma n a variety of tree a part of which is used to treat kuwasu'
ɨꞌkɨrɨpa vt make someone laugh Toꞌ ɨꞌkɨrɨpaꞌpʉ uya. I made them laugh.
ɨkɨrʉwa n (non-possessed) toothache
ɨku vt eat brittle foods, such as cassava bread, nuts, etc. Eki ɨkuꞌpʉ uya. I ate cassava bread.
ɨkʉi n (non-possessed) snake, the general term
ɨkʉi paꞌse centipede (lit: snakeꞌs sister-in-law)
ɨmɨꞌnɨ n 1) (non-possessed) thorn 2) a thorny plant
ɨmɨrɨ (cf: a-, ɨ-) pron 1) you 2) your
ɨmʉrewatoꞌ firstborn Iyɨmʉrewatoꞌ warawoꞌ pe iyentuꞌpʉ. She gave birth to her firstborn, a
boy.
ɨn- a polite way of commanding a peer Bible ɨntʉkɨ. Please give us the Bible.
ɨnɨ vt share kiyari ke tʉtonpa kon iyepiyapainomasaꞌ kon ɨnɨ toꞌ uya pɨꞌ. They
were sharing food with orphans and widows.
ɨnɨkɨiran n (non-possessed) a variety of ant with black and brown coloring
ɨnka vt 1) show someone something that one has Kuwata uya tʉmʉre ɨnkaꞌpʉ mɨrɨ tʉnoꞌpʉ uya entoꞌ pe. The gorilla showed his child to his wife for her to see. 2) lengthen Waꞌka pun ɨnkasaꞌ uya. I lengthened the metal object. 3) delay, put off one's plan ɨnkaꞌmaꞌsan a visitor for a long time 4) stretch, extend Ɨyemiya ɨnkaꞌ!
Stretch out your arm!
usɨnka (der.) vi stretched
ɨnnɨ nom far place Ɨnnɨ pe pata esi. The place is
far.

© 2014 SIL International®

66

Akawaio-English Dictionary

ɨntʉ nom soft, referring to the quality of grass with dew on it; the condition which makes it easy to cut; soft, as with the skin of ripe fruit Ɨntʉ pe wanaꞌ esi. The grass/weeds are soft. opp: saꞌman 2 .
ɨntʉnʉkʉ vt soften, make soft, usually by making it wet Iyɨntʉnʉꞌkɨ. Soften it.
ɨnʉꞌ pron who Ɨnʉꞌ pata iyesi? Whose land is
this?
ɨpiyɨꞌkeꞌ nom 1) someone shy opp: ɨpiyɨꞌmʉn 2 . 2) someone shamed
ɨpiyɨꞌmʉn nom 1) a shameless person Ɨpiyɨꞌmʉn pe iyesi. He is shameless. 2) someone brave opp: ɨpiyɨꞌkeꞌ 1 .
Ɨpɨiꞌkwɨ pai nprop the name given to a bay along the Upper Mazaruni River, above Imbaimadai
ɨpɨrinka vr lie in a prone position
ɨꞌpʉ (poss: ɨyɨꞌpʉ) n bone moroꞌ ɨꞌpʉ amʉꞌ many fish bones cf: wɨꞌsɨꞌpɨ 1 .
ɨpʉrema (var: wɨpʉrema; var: epʉrema) vi pray Ɨw- ɨpʉrema -ꞌpʉ. You prayed.
ɨri nom 1) someone or something dirty Ɨri pe mʉre esi. The baby is dirty. opp: wakʉ 5 . 2) someone or something bad Ɨri pe pʉserɨ warawoꞌ. This boy behaves badly. opp: wakʉ 1 . 3) someone or something evil 4) someone or something dark 5) something or someone unholy ɨri aꞌkwarʉ an evil/unholy spirit
ɨꞌrɨ pron what Ɨꞌrɨ kupʉ auya? What are you
doing?
ɨrɨi n a variety of tree where wantoto does appear
ɨrɨmokʉ vi tired from exertion, weak Toꞌ aꞌkɨrɨ ekaꞌtumʉ iꞌse ina ɨrɨmokʉꞌpʉ mɨrɨ. We
wanted to run with them, (but) we got tired (from trying).

ɨrʉka vi be or become destroyed Ayapuruui ɨrʉkanin pʉra rɨ. There is nothing to destroy your
things.
ɨrʉkɨ n 1) (non-possessed) caterpillar, a general term 2) worm, the general term
ɨsenau (der. of enau) 1) adv together, with each other Asaꞌron kon kaꞌpon amʉꞌ esi ɨsenau eꞌnʉn nɨ pɨꞌ iyeꞌtoꞌ pe. Two people will be sleeping together/with each other. 2) n twins syn: ɨsimunuiꞌ 1.
ɨꞌseꞌneꞌ (var: ɨꞌsɨꞌneꞌ) nom serious, with far-reaching consequences Sises uya taꞌpʉ ɨꞌseꞌneꞌ pe makoi aꞌkwarʉ pɨꞌ. Jesus spoke
strongly to the evil spirit.
ɨꞌseyaton n conflict Ɨꞌseaton pe toꞌ eꞌpɨtʉꞌpʉ, piyaiꞌsan pe rɨ, toꞌ eꞌpɨtʉꞌpʉ. They had many
conflicts and they were doing piyaichang.
ɨsi- each other Mɨrɨpan ina eꞌwɨnɨꞌpʉ ɨsipona.
Then we knocked each other's heads (while bending
down to pick up something). ɨsikaisa rɨ together Asaꞌron kon yaꞌ kamoro, ɨsipiyawon kon nʉꞌkwɨ rɨ, aiko ton nʉꞌkwɨ. They are two plants, together with others, little ones. ɨsipiyatau
side-by-side
ɨsimunuiꞌ (var: esimunuiꞌ) n 1) (non-possessed) twins syn: ɨsenau 2 ; cf: ratoi
1 . 2) bananas that grow together under the same peel ɨsipʉ vi come Ɨsiꞌkɨ! Come! Mɨsipʉiꞌ. You must come. cf: uyepʉ 1 .
ɨsɨ nom 1) someone or something bad or dangerous Ɨsɨ pe tapiukwa esi. The wasp is dangerous. Ɨsɨ yau meꞌaiꞌ tʉutaꞌreꞌtɨsan, apʉne pʉra iwan pe ɨweꞌtoꞌ oton. Woe to you
well-fed people, because you will become hungry. 2)
fierce 3) violent ɨsɨ yeꞌ (id.) serious one

© 2014 SIL International®

67

Akawaio-English Dictionary

ɨsɨ yeꞌ (id. of ɨsɨ) someone serious
ɨsɨꞌkwɨ interj an exclamation of surprise or accident
ɨꞌsɨꞌmʉn nom someone or something weak opp: meruntɨ 1 ; syn: aꞌtuꞌmʉn .
ɨꞌsɨꞌmʉra n weakness Papa uya ɨꞌsɨꞌmʉra teꞌsen pata enu yau anʉmʉꞌpʉ mɨrɨ, God 's
weakness . . ..
ɨꞌsɨꞌneꞌ var. of ɨꞌseꞌneꞌ
ɨꞌtɨ vt sharpen, give teeth Usuparaai ɨꞌtɨkɨ.
Sharpen my cutlass.
ɨurɨ2 vi bark, as a dog does Pero ɨurɨꞌpʉ. The dog

barked.
ɨurɨ1 vt welcome Epuru wannɨ uyepʉ, ɨurɨtɨꞌ kon, ɨurɨtɨꞌ kon. A leader is coming, welcome him,
welcome him.
ɨutɨ (poss: ɨiwʉꞌ) n 1) house 2) cookhouse ɨw- phon. var. of ɨ-
ɨwɨ vi betroth, choose a spouse Ɨwɨkɨ. Take
someone to be your spouse.
ɨy- phon. var. of ɨɨyeruꞌ poss. of eruꞌ
ɨyɨmaiꞌ n disease of the teeth and gums that causes bleeding

Kk

k- phon. var. of kʉskaꞌ3 var. of ka kaꞌ2 n 1) (non-possessed) sky 2) the heavens,
Heaven ka (var: kaꞌ3) vt say kaꞌ1 postp in Tuna kaꞌ toꞌ usenasikaꞌpʉ. They
dove in the water. sclr prop: kaꞌ1, kau, kapai . -kaꞌ var. of -kapʉ
-ka put on (whatever noun is attached to it) nonka leave something back;; lit., leave on the ground Inonkaꞌpʉ toꞌ uya. They left him
back/alone.
kaaiꞌma vt fight, wrestle Wrenton kaaiꞌmaꞌpʉ Winston uya. Winston wrestled Wrenton. eꞌkaaiꞌma (der.) vr fight
kaamiꞌ 1) the left hand opp: enwoꞌneꞌ 1 . 2) the left direction
Kaatʉ nprop God syn: Papa 1 .

kaiꞌkamaimɨ n a variety of snake
Kaiꞌkamaꞌpɨ (var: Kaiꞌkan Aꞌmotoꞌpʉ) nprop the name given to a place along the Kukui River, between I'moi ken and Jawalla, where the Hunter and Egbert farms are
kaikamaꞌsa n dung beetle
kaiꞌkan (cf: mɨuraimɨ) n (non-possessed) a variety of medium-sized armadillo Tatusia peba
Kaiꞌkan nprop 1) the name given to a village far up the Kamʉran River, very close to the Venezuela border, mostly Arekuna people 2) the name given to a village area near Paruima, often confused with the separate village much further away
Kaiꞌkan Aꞌmotoꞌpʉ var. of Kaiꞌkamaꞌpɨ
kaikara1 n guitar Tikin nan uya kaikara turunpa. One person is playing the guitar.
kaikara2 n a variety of tree, a lot like bamboo
kaikawaꞌsa (poss: akaikawaꞌsaai) n 1) rhinoceros beetle 2) a variety of large, black beetle

© 2014 SIL International®

68

Akawaio-English Dictionary

kaikusi n 1) (non-possessed) ocelot 2) tiger; any other wild feline species
kaima vt clean Ɨpʉrorooi kanan kaima auya ekayu pe, wanaꞌ pʉra. You also clean your yard
clear of grass.
kainaku n 1) a childhood sickness kainaku kwinɨ hot compress to treat kainagu 2) the fungus associated with the childhood sickness
kaiꞌparaꞌ n (non-possessed) a variety of red-headed woodpecker
Kaiꞌparaꞌ nprop the name given to a mountain peak in front of Kayama mountain range, near Jawalla village.
Kaiꞌparaꞌ pai nprop the name given to a bay along the Upper Mazaruni River, above Imbaimadai
Kaiparuꞌpai nprop the place with the same name (where is it?)
kairan n 1) a variety of locust 2) a variety of fish
kairau1 n a variety of fish
kairau2 n a variety of locust Aularches militaris
kairewaimɨ n a variety of large locust
kaisa postp every wʉi kaisa rɨ every day
kaisarako (var: ausarako) n a variety of fruit with a hard, yellow skin with bumps
kaiwan n the fat of an animal maipuri kaiwan
bush cow's fat
kaiwaraꞌ (poss: akaiwarakʉʉi) n pineapple Ananas comosus
kaiwaꞌtɨ vt nail ɨnwɨnɨꞌpʉ kon tʉkaiwaꞌtɨse yʉi pona. the one whom you all killed by nailing
him to a tree.
kaka var. of aka2
kakɨ n a race game Akawaio used to play, running through the jungle
kaꞌkɨrɨ vt squeeze Remuna amʉꞌ kaꞌkɨrɨ uya. I

am squeezing lemons.
kako (poss: akakooi) n flint stone syn: watoꞌ .
Kako nprop the name given to a river tributary of the Upper Mazaruni River, also the name of the village at the mouth of same
Kakokenʉꞌ pai nprop the name given to a part of the Kako District, between Wari'kwaima and Aro' Awon
Kakorʉkoꞌ nprop the name given to Akawayo Amerindians living along the Kako river
kakʉiꞌ 1) n upstairs Ina enukuꞌpʉ kakʉiꞌ ɨutɨ taꞌ. We went into the upstairs of the house. 2) adv in an upward direction Tenu tʉrʉꞌpʉ iya kakʉiꞌ. He looked up.
kaꞌkʉran (poss: akaꞌkʉramu) n 1) visitor Kaꞌkʉran amʉꞌ uyepʉ. Strangers are coming. 2) stranger
kaꞌkʉranpa vt visit Utonpaton kaꞌkʉranpaꞌpʉ uya. I visited my family.
kama vt put, place Toꞌ pʉtaꞌpʉ kamaꞌpʉ iya eripoi yaꞌ. He put their footprints into the pot. eꞌkama (der.) 1) vr prepare 2) vi plan 3) vi box 4) vi ready
kamain n (non-possessed) a variety of plant similar to bamboo
kamakusa n a type of traditional medicine
Kamaꞌkuꞌsa nprop the name given to a settlement along the Middle Mazaruni, near Orana pai
kaman nom someone or something bad, evil, dirty, etc.; a word from the Alleluia tradition
kamariya n 1) (non-possessed) a variety of small sky swallow Deroptyus accipitrinus 2) a pattern or design representing the swallow bird, used in paintings or designs on pots, etc.
kamarʉkaꞌ n charcoal
kamata n (non-possessed) a variety of small

© 2014 SIL International®

69

Akawaio-English Dictionary

toucan kamaꞌtu (cf: apoꞌ) n light, bright tʉꞌkamaꞌtu
kon paru light oil maruꞌ kamaꞌtu a fungus
making a bright light in the bush
kamiꞌ (poss: akamisii) n left-hand side Kamiꞌ winɨ iyesiꞌpʉ. He was on the left-hand side. opp: enwoꞌneꞌ 1 .
kami (poss: akamiri) (cf: nipi) n a rope used in tying down a thatched roof, taken from a vine gen: nipi 2 .
kamiriꞌ n (non-possessed) lightning
kamiꞌsa (poss: akamiꞌsaai) (cf: kareku) n loin cloth, a long, narrow strip of red cloth worn long ago by men around the waist and hanging down in front syn: waiku, saro2, kareku .
kamo pron 1) they (farther) 2) them (farther) 3) those (farther)
kamoꞌ n bowl made from calabash
kamoro pron 1) they (nearer) 2) them (nearer) 3) those (nearer)
kamoroniꞌ (var: kɨrɨmomi) n a variety of edible fish
kamota (cf: otori) vt 1) shoot an animal for meat Eporiꞌma saꞌne si ukamotasaꞌ pɨꞌ. I was happy having shot something. 2) get Makamotayan peꞌ? Did you get anything? Ukwamota pʉn. I didn't get anything.
kamowa n a variety of vine that grows on the savannah
kamuꞌtɨ vi 1) not able to hunt well Kamuꞌtɨꞌpan iyesi. He is not a good hunter or fisherman. 2) not able to fish well
kamʉraiwa1 n a variety of bird
kamʉraiwa2 n a variety of greens, similar to auro'sa
Kamʉran nprop 1) Kamarang, the name given to a village along the Upper Mazaruni River at the

mouth of the Kamʉran River 2) the name given to a river that empties into the Upper Mazaruni River Kamʉranikoꞌ nprop the name given to Akawayo Amerindians living along the Kamʉran River Kamʉranimɨ nprop the name given to a creek above Imbaimadai kan postp for, designating purpose Ɨꞌrɨ kan? What
is it for?
kanaꞌai var. of anaikaꞌ
kanaimɨ n (non-possessed) kanaima; an evil spirit; syn: itoto .
kanaimɨꞌtɨ vt ambush Uriꞌsan kanaimɨꞌtɨꞌpʉ iya. He ambushed the girl.
kanaiꞌporoꞌ n a variety of ant syn: kanami 2 .
kanami (poss: akanamii) n 1) grass louse 2) a variety of ant that doesn't bite, but will crawl on you in the bush syn: kanaiꞌporoꞌ .
kanan adv 1) again Ekamakaꞌkɨ kanan. Say it again. 2) also
kanaꞌna (poss: akanaꞌnaai) n ground meat or fish
kanarau n a variety of bird, grey and white in colour with a swallow's tail
kaꞌnari (poss: akaꞌnarii) n a general term for all sweet cassava varieties Manihot palmata
kanaꞌsakaꞌwa var. of saꞌsaꞌ
kanau (poss: akanwa) (cf: akoto) n 1) dugout canoe 2) general term for any boat
kanau yeꞌ var. of mɨꞌ
Kanawa pai nprop the name given to a small creek famous for fish; bottom-side of Jawalla on the Upper Mazaruni River
kanawaka vt take something out of a boat Eki kanwakaꞌpʉ toꞌ uya. They took egi cakes out of
the canoe.

© 2014 SIL International®

70

Akawaio-English Dictionary

ekanwaka (der.) vr disembark
kanawaꞌtɨ vt put into a boat Eki kanwaꞌtɨtɨꞌ!
You all put egi cakes into the boat!
ekanwaꞌtɨ (der.) vr get into a boat
kane adv no, the negative answer to a yes/no question Kane ukai. I said no.
kaꞌneꞌtai (cf: tʉrʉꞌpʉnʉ1) n earthquake
kaniꞌ 1) n the woof, or width-wise strands of weave in a hammock 2) something that supports or holds up something else ikaniꞌpʉn tuna
water that doesn't support anything; a mythical sea where everything sinks
kaniꞌtɨ vt weave; as in making a hammock Iyeꞌkweꞌ kaniꞌtɨpɨtʉ uya. I am weaving his
hammock.
kaꞌnɨ nom 1) delicious food 2) something sweet 3) someone healthy Ikaꞌnɨ pe pʉra iyesi. He's
not feeling well.
kaꞌnɨma2 vt season food Tuma kaꞌnɨmaꞌpʉ uya. I seasoned the pepperpot.
kaꞌnɨma1 (var: ikaꞌnɨpa) vt scratch Uyaꞌpoi kaꞌnɨmakɨ. Scratch my back.
kanka vt 1) pluck Toꞌ enu kankapɨtʉꞌpʉ waiken uya. The reindeer plucked out their eyes. 2) take off, take away from Toꞌ uya ipon kankaꞌpʉ. They took his clothes. 3) take forcefully
kankara n 1) a variety of fly 2) a variety of bee
Kankarumɨ 1) nprop the name given to a village on the Middle Mazaruni, near Apato'ka settlement 2) n a variety of small, black ant that bites Camponotus sp.
Kankarumɨ pai nprop the name given to a farming settlement along the NE coast of the Upper Mazaruni River on the Urapa pai stretch.
kankasa n 1) (non-possessed) a variety of wall lizard 2) gecko

kankɨꞌ n 1) (non-possessed) a variety of fly 2) a variety of fruitfly Drosophilidae
kankɨꞌpan n a variety of bee-like bug, small, black with blue stripes
kanpaiꞌ n (non-possessed) a variety of fern found in sandy areas
kanpaiꞌsiꞌkoroi var. of kanpaꞌsiꞌkororo
kanpara n a variety of bee with a loud, high buzz; likes to block up holes with its nests/eggs/etc.
Kanparu nprop Kambaru, the name given to a settlement upriver from Imbaimatai, along the Mazaruni River, on the right side going upriver
kanpaꞌsiꞌkororo (var: kanpaiꞌsiꞌkoroi) n a variety of house wren Troglodytes aedon
kanpiyuꞌpiyuꞌ n (non-possessed) a variety of large firefly, candlefly
kanpoꞌta n a variety of ant
kanpʉ (poss: akanpʉ) n (non-possessed) smoked meat; smoked fish opp: iꞌkurinsaꞌ 2 ; opp: isenan 1 .
kanpʉꞌtɨ vt roast meat over a fire to dry it
kansiꞌ n 1) (non-possessed) a variety of fly 2) a variety of weed or grass that produces seeds that stick to skin or clothes
kansuꞌ (poss: akansukuui) n traditional tattoo made on the face or forearms, to signify the wearer makes a specific kind of cassava drink syn: maꞌkʉi 3 .
kansuꞌpaiꞌ n a variety of small bee that eats fish from a fisherman
kaꞌnʉ nom well Ikaꞌnʉ pe esi. I am well.
kanwaaiꞌ n 1) a variety of tree with shallow roots 2) a variety of fruit tree
kapai postp from in Iyennaꞌpoꞌpʉ Isotan tuna kapai. He returned from in the Jordan water/river. sclr prop: kaꞌ1, kau, kapai .

© 2014 SIL International®

71

Akawaio-English Dictionary

kapaisan n 1) (non-possessed) a wide-leafed palm thatching material used as the top layer in a roof 2) palm 3) a temporary camp
kapawi n a variety of nut, also with some edible fruit on it
kapaya (poss: akapayaai) n papaya, the fruit or the plant Carcia papaya
kapi n a light-coloured blotch on the skin Kapi amʉꞌ enasaꞌ. He got many blotches.
kapiriꞌ (cf: tɨꞌ, muꞌpɨꞌ) n (non-possessed) stone, rock, a stone one can break up
kapirita n goat
kapiyaꞌkwa n (non-possessed) a variety of edible mushroom
kapiyawaiꞌ nom having a dizzy feeling Kapiyawaiꞌ pe itɨꞌpʉ. He went having a dizzy
feeling.
kapɨꞌkɨ n wart
kaꞌpon n 1) (non-possessed) human, person, male or female 2) an Amerindian person 3) an Akawayo person 4) the Akawayo tribe
kaꞌpon maꞌpari n a variety of waiti fruit, poro
kaꞌponokoꞌ n person, especially as addressed by a giant or other mythical character "Ɨꞌrɨ pe nai, kaꞌponokoꞌ?" taꞌpʉ piyaiꞌma uya. "How
are you, person?" said the giant.
kaꞌpoꞌti n yarn
kaꞌpu n heap, pile wɨꞌsɨꞌ kaꞌpu a heap of sand
kapuruꞌ n 1) (non-possessed) mist, fog 2) cloud
kaꞌpurukoꞌ n (non-possessed) a variety of biting ant
kapuya n a variety of thick bush rope
kapʉ vt 1) plait, braid Eta kapʉꞌpʉ uya. I plaited leaves (for building a house). Iꞌpai kapʉꞌpʉ uya. I plaited her hair. 2) weave, as in a basket or waricha Wariꞌsa kapʉ uya. I am weaving a

backpack. 3) build, as in a wasp building his nest Ten kapʉ iya. He is building his own nest.
-kapʉ (var: -kaꞌ) to do something as is one's daily or regular habit Ina utɨkapʉ. We are going, as is our habit Tok uyeꞌkaꞌnɨ pɨꞌ man. They are
coming again, as is their habit.
kapʉi (poss: akapuui) n 1) moon 2) month
kapʉi enkumaꞌpʉ n (non-possessed) a variety of vine, also called bush rope, monkey ladder vine, etc. Bauhinia sp.
kapʉimʉntʉkʉ n mole
kapʉiya n a variety of pattern used in weaving
kaꞌpʉrakon n (non-possessed) horizon
kapʉreꞌtɨ vt steam-dry, as in holding one's clothes over a fire Apoꞌ uya upon kapʉreꞌtɨtanʉꞌsaꞌ. The fire steam-dried my
clothes.
kara2 1) vt rip, tear Mɨrɨpan kon uya Paul pon karapɨtʉꞌpʉ. And then they tore Paul's clothes. 2) nom sour; strong, as in the flavour of kaziri after a longer period of waiting Kara pe kasiri esi.
The kaziri is strong.
kara1 (poss: akara) n 1) vein 2) muscle 3) a tree root yʉi kara tree root syn: miꞌ .
karaꞌ n a variety of small fish
Kara urin nprop the name given to a creek off the Upper Mazaruni River, up-river from Inbaimadai, leading to Maipuri Falls, Tʉramen
karaiꞌ vi give a warning, like the karai grasshopper
karai n a variety of grasshopper
karaikarai n (non-possessed) a variety of parrot
karaiꞌman n a variety of biting bee; ole
karaipɨ n cracked skin, particularly on the heels
karaitaꞌ n bake made from corn meal

© 2014 SIL International®

72

Akawaio-English Dictionary

Karaiwa nprop the name given to people from Brazil, those people who speak Portuguese
karaka vt tear, rip ekaraka (der.) vr ripped
karakara n a variety of white mushroom
karakwa vt break off Mɨrɨpan yau yʉi karakwasaꞌ ke iꞌpai takiꞌkaꞌpʉ iya. And then
he mashed his head with a broken off stick.
karaꞌkwa (poss: akaraꞌkwaai) 1) n bile; a yellow substance from the stomach 2) nom pale Karaꞌkwaꞌ pe iyenasaꞌ. He became pale.
karaꞌkwaꞌpan nom something yellow, the colour of bile
karana n 1) (non-possessed) a variety of palm tree common to the savannah areas, the leaves of which are used as a roofing material 2) thatch
karanai n the long, length-wise strands of weave in a hammock
karanakaiꞌ n a variety of frog
karankaran n a variety of bedbug Cimex lectularia
karanpa vt make someone cry Toꞌ karanpaꞌpʉ iya. He made them cry.
karanpisaku n a variety of potato
karapa (poss: akarapaai) n 1) oil, usually referring to oil for hair 2) crab oil tree; known for its oil used on hair and skin Carapa guianensis karapa yeꞌ the crab oil tree 3) crab oil
karapa iꞌneꞌ n a variety of medicine made from crab oil to treat kuwasu'
karapaima vt oil, put on hair oil Toꞌ mʉre karapaimaꞌpʉ iya. He put oil on the baby. ekarapaima (der.) 1) vr oil 2) vi oily
karapiꞌpɨ (var: karapiyaꞌpɨ2; var: karapiꞌpʉ) n 1) (non-possessed) a variety of tree Sterculia

excelsum karapiꞌpʉ a variety of tree from which
people can strip the inside bark to make shoulder and
head straps for their warishis. 2) rope made from the skin of same karapiꞌpʉ var. of karapiꞌpɨ
karapisa n (non-possessed) a variety of large, green grasshopper Meoconocephalus maxillosus
karapiyaꞌpɨ1 n a variety of tree, annato, the fruit of which produces a red paint which the Akawayo used to use on their bodies Bixa orellana syn: anontɨ, sapa1 1 .
karapiyaꞌpɨ2 var. of karapiꞌpɨ
karara n a type of intestinal disease; diarrhea with cramps; could be cholera Karara esi. I
have cholera
kararapɨ n (non-possessed) a variety of vine that puts out white, fragrant flowers
karauta something toasted, as a piece of cassava bread over an open fire eki karautasaꞌ toasted
egi
karautanʉkʉ vt toast, blacken the surface of food on a griddle Eki karautanʉꞌkɨ. Toast the
cassava bread.
karawaꞌ nom 1) something or someone thin or skinny Karawaꞌ pan iyesi. He is thin. opp: iꞌsin . 2) lean, without much fat opp: kasiꞌ 3 .
karawarimɨ n dry malnutrition, or Marasmus, when one doesn't get enough of every kind of food; usually associated with tareng or cursing
karawata vi become fine, thin Ikarawatasaꞌ man. He got fine.
karaꞌweru n (non-possessed) a variety of flowering bush
Karawʉkoꞌ nprop a group of people living in a place called Karawʉ'ta
Karawʉꞌta nprop the name given to a mountain southwest of Jawalla village

© 2014 SIL International®

73

Akawaio-English Dictionary

kareku (poss: akarekuui) (cf: kamiꞌsa) n cloth, material syn: kamiꞌsa, waiku, saro2 .
kareta (poss: akaretaai) n 1) news 2) mail 3) book 4) paper 5) words
Kareta nprop the name given to a prophet in the Alleluia church; teacher of Tarikiran
kariꞌ vt spread
kari n (non-possessed) squirrel Sciurus carolinensis
kariꞌma vt 1) unfold Porin kariꞌmaꞌpʉ uya. I unfolded the taurpolin. 2) open, specifically a farm that a person cuts bigger and bigger over time Tʉmainarʉ kariꞌmapɨtʉꞌpʉ iya. He kept
opening his own farm.
karimeru n (non-possessed) sheep
karimura n a variety of electric eel, more common along the Lower Mazaruni River Electrophorus electricus
Kariꞌna nprop 1) (non-possessed) the Carib tribe 2) a person of Carib heritage
Kariꞌnaꞌta nprop the name given to a place along the Lower Mazaruni River
Karinta nprop the name given to the Hunter settlement, nine miles from Ipana'muru pai
karipon (cf: siꞌnaꞌ) n (non-possessed) a variety of tree from which the outer skin is stripped to make shoulder and head straps for warishis, grows purple flowers
Karipunu pai nprop the name given to a bay along the Upper Mazaruni River, above Imbaimadai
kariꞌsimura n moss
kariyakwʉ n (non-possessed) a variety of small, grey deer Mazama nemorivaga
kariyeꞌse n a variety of stinging ant
karoiꞌ1 n a variety of fish Eigennannia virescens
karoiꞌ2 n a variety of hot pepper, shaped like the

fish of the same name Karoiꞌ Paru nprop the name given to a creek
along the Upper Mazaruni river, just above Waruwa'ta on the left karota vr sweat, especially at night, especially children Ikarotasaꞌ. He was sweating at night.
karuꞌ n a variety of bush, the fruit of which can be squeezed and used to make surface tattoo marks; also used as a bina to relieve pain
karu n a variety of tree with fruit that gives a sticky substance for use in a bird trap
karukuri n brass
karutu (poss: akarutuui) n birthmark syn: maꞌkʉi 2 .
Karutupiya pai nprop the name given to a bay in the Upper Mazaruni River, top-side from Jawalla village.
karuwaꞌmi n (non-possessed) a variety of small frog
karuwaꞌsa n a variety of orchid with striped leaves
kasa postp like, as inserʉ uya ekamaꞌpʉ kasa as the angel said serɨ naꞌneꞌ kasa exactly like that Mɨrɨ kasa si iyeꞌtoꞌ pe. Let it be like that. syn: warai .
kasaꞌkʉra (poss: akasaꞌkʉraai) n 1) a variety of gourd, calabash 2) a variety of gourd plant 3) the same, dried and carved to be used as a utensil; a spoon, cup or bowl
kaꞌsanawon n mediator
kasi 1) something false 2) n lie Kasi eꞌ iyesi. He
is a liar.
kasiꞌ (poss: akasikʉ) 1) n fat moroꞌ amʉꞌ kasiꞌ fish oil 2) n oil 3) nom someone or something thick or fat Ikasiꞌ pe iyesi. He is fat. opp: karawaꞌ 2 .
kasima1 (poss: akasimaai) n a variety of fruit,

© 2014 SIL International®

74

Akawaio-English Dictionary

star apple; artichoke-looking, soursop-tasting fruit kasima2 vt disbelieve, to believe something is a lie kasiri (poss: akasirii) n cassava drink
kasiri wɨrɨi (poss: ɨwɨrɨi) (cf: sokoisokoi, wɨrɨiwɨrɨi) n a stick or paddle-like instrument used to stir cassava drink
kasiriꞌpɨ n a variety of casreep, mostly in use today, sweeter than the more sour kumasi
kasiyeꞌ n (non-possessed) liar Ɨmɨrɨ kasiyeꞌ pe.
You (are) as a liar.
kasiyoꞌ (poss: akasiyokʉʉi) n a variety of small gourd
kasuꞌka vt squeeze, usually a kind of fruit, to make juice Sikaru kasuꞌkaꞌpʉ uya. I crushed
sugar cane.
kasuru (poss: akasuruui) n traditional trading beads, used in weaving aprons
kata1 (poss: akatari / akatarii) n 1) a variety of soup made from the juice taken from the squeezed, grated cassava, boiled down to eliminate the poisonous qualities 2) cassava water
kaꞌta n 1) (non-possessed) width Two feet wide eke pe saꞌne ikaꞌta. Its width was two feet wide. 2) edge, as in the river's edge tuna kaꞌta the river's edge 3) corner
kata2 n (non-possessed) a variety of poisonous caterpillar, hairy and green in colour
kataꞌ vt push a wheelbarrow or drive one Wheelbarrow kataꞌpɨtʉꞌpʉ uya. I was pushing
a wheelbarrow.
Kata urin nprop the name given to a creek along the Upper Mazaruni River, above Imbaimadai
kaꞌtaipa n bush cow syn: kuꞌyunkuꞌyun, maipuri, waira .
kaꞌtakʉiꞌ (cf: kawinɨkʉiꞌ) adv 1) up, in a

skyward direction Autanʉmʉ pe peꞌ nai kaꞌtakʉiꞌ? Kane! Will you be gathered up (to the sky)? No! 2) inland, away from the water, usually up-hill kataꞌpan1 sour taste, as in the flavour of cassava drink after it has been left to sit for a few days, becoming more alcoholic in content Kataꞌpan kata esi. The soup has a sour flavour. opp: aꞌseꞌku .
kataꞌpan2 n a variety of banana
kaꞌtaporo postp near the edge
kaꞌtarara n (non-possessed) a variety of locust
katata someone cheeky, precocious Katata pe iyesi. She is cheeky.
kaꞌtawaiꞌ n 1) (non-possessed) a variety of rough vine from which one can collect water to drink; possibly ka'tawa ye' 2) a variety of weed that scratches and burns the skin
katin n thread, used in sewing
katɨ conj or Wakʉ kupʉ mɨrɨ pe pʉra ɨri kupʉ katɨ? Kaꞌpon pikaꞌtɨ, maꞌtanʉkʉ katɨ? Do
good or do evil? Save people or destroy (them)?
katʉimɨ n wet malnutrition, or Kwashiorkor, due to not enough protein in one's diet; usually associated with taren or a curse
Katʉimɨ nprop the name given to a deserted settlement near present-day Jawalla
kau postp into Tuna kau toꞌ usenasikaꞌpʉ. They jumped into the water. sclr prop: kaꞌ1, kau, kapai .
kauyama (poss: akauyamaai) n pumpkin Cucurbita maxima
kawaꞌ n (non-possessed) a variety of green parrot
kawai (poss: akawaai) n tobacco, the leaves and the product, of which the local product is used most often in ceremonies to discover the cause of someone's illness

© 2014 SIL International®

75

Akawaio-English Dictionary

Kawai paru nprop the name given to a creek off of Kara Urin creek, Upper Mazaruni River
kawaiꞌtɨ vt smoke tobacco
kawanaru n (non-possessed) a variety of bird, cock of the rock bird Rupicola rupicola
kaware n horse
kawata vt reduce in size; make smaller Ikawatasaꞌ. She is reduced.
kawi n a variety of tree, the leaf of which is used in thatching
kawinɨ adv backdam Kawinɨ toꞌ esiꞌpʉ. They
were backdam.
kawinɨkʉiꞌ (cf: kaꞌtakʉiꞌ) adv 1) in the direction of topside Kawinɨkʉiꞌ toꞌ utɨꞌpʉ. They went topside. 2) upriver, in the direction of a higher elevation following the river 3) inland from the river, in the direction of a higher elevation going away from the river
kayakaya n a variety of parrot
Kayama nprop the name given to a mountain range visible southwest of Jawalla village
kayaꞌraꞌpɨ n 1) the fruit of the kaya'ra'pɨ tree, used to make face paint 2) a plant from which fruit is taken to make face paint
kayaukayau n (non-possessed) a variety of large, black bird
kayonoꞌ n 1) (non-possessed) the morning star (the north star?) 2) any bright star
ke2 interj sound made when experiencing extreme pain
ke1 postp with toron kan (season) with birds Ekuꞌpɨiꞌ seꞌpo ke. I am bathing with soap. kenan (der.) postp 1) with 2) possessed of 3) characterised by
ken1 n (non-possessed) river mouth Kukui ken
the mouth of the Kukui River
ken2 n way, manner Ɨꞌrɨ pe ken si . . .. In what way

. . ..
kenan (der. of ke1) postp 1) with a person Kaꞌpon esiꞌpʉ tʉnoꞌpʉ kenan. There was an Amerindian with his wife. 2) possessed of, having Moro iyesiꞌpʉ kiyawoꞌ tapiri kenan. There was a kushi ant possessed of his own wings. 3) characterised by
kenʉꞌ adv by chance, unplanned, mistakenly Mɨrɨpan kon poi rɨ kenʉꞌ si kaꞌpon utɨꞌpʉ mɨrɨ manare iꞌpopɨꞌseꞌna. And nearby them, a person by chance went to strip manare. Aqaba poi kenʉꞌ iyeꞌsaꞌ esiꞌpʉ. He happened to come from
Aqaba.
kewei n the instrument made from pakira i'ta pi'pɨ, or bush hog toe nails tied to strings and hung from a stick and shaken to make noise
kiꞌ var. of kipʉ vt soak,make wet Eki kiꞌpʉ uya.
I soaked the cassava.
kiꞌma vt knead
kin n king, ruler
kiꞌnɨ nom something sticky
kinotori n a variety of bird that rotates around its perch as it makes a warbling call; the bow bird
Kipisiꞌ nprop the name given to a place below Kamarang, on the Upper Mazaruni River
kipʉ (var: kiꞌ) vt soak, to make wet Tuna kaꞌ eki mun kiꞌkɨ! Soak the eki tubers in water. Irasaras ennoꞌkɨ temiyatʉ tʉkiꞌse uyesen amankaiꞌ iyeꞌtoꞌ pe. Send Lazarus to get his
hand wet so he can wet my throat.
kiraraukwa vt make stuck
kiri (poss: ɨkirii) n buttocks, the bottom
kiriꞌka vi a pain in one's cheek that signals future fever Eꞌpeta kiriꞌkaiꞌ. My cheek hurts (and so I
will get a fever).
kirikiri n a variety of small parrot, found in the

© 2014 SIL International®

76

Akawaio-English Dictionary

lower Mazaruni regions kirinto var. of kirintu
kirintu (var: kirinto) n a variety of flying ant, coming out in rainy times
kiririꞌpan n a variety of rope
kiriꞌsa n insect
kiriꞌsaraꞌ n cricket
kiriꞌsoroꞌ (cf: korori) n (non-possessed) a variety of termite
kisiꞌ n (non-possessed) a wink
kisiꞌka vt 1) wink; to consciously move one eye closed and open again 2) give one's hair a permanent
kisiꞌkisiꞌ var. of siꞌsiꞌ
kisiꞌkisiꞌma vt twist or roll something Ikisiꞌkisiꞌmaꞌ! Twist it! / Roll it!
kisiꞌkisiꞌpan nom something twisted opp: saraipan 1 .
kisiꞌpan nom something curly, usually referring to hair
kisisikwa vt 1) mash, usually between one's thumb and forefinger Bug kisisikwaꞌpʉ uya. I
mashed a bug (between my thumb and forefinger). 2)
mash grated cassava with one's hands to make cassava bread or paiwari kitaꞌ sticky Kitaꞌpan honey esi. Honey is sticky.
kitaꞌka vt mash together Mɨrɨpan rʉꞌkwɨ kitaꞌkaꞌpʉ iya ipun pe. And so, he mashed it
together to be as a piece of meat.
kitata n (non-possessed) a variety of small, green grasshopper Chlorophylla amplifolia
kiti n container used to store small quantities of gold; a kitty
kiyapoꞌ var. of kuyapoꞌ
kiyari (poss: ɨiꞌkiyari; poss: ɨyeꞌkiyari) n food

kiyawɨiꞌ n a variety of water bird
kiyawʉꞌ (var: kuyawɨiꞌ; var: kuyawɨꞌ; poss: ɨkuyawɨkuui) n acushi ants Atta cephalote dev: kokon, kiyawʉꞌ .
kiyoꞌka vt dent ekiyoꞌka (der.) vi dent
kɨ (cf: kɨtun) n the smell of a thing, its odour Ɨri pe rɨ ikɨ. It's smell is bad. opp: aꞌpoꞌnan 1 . ukɨta (der.) vi stink
-kɨ command suffix for a single hearer (reduced to apostrophe in fast speech) Se aꞌnaiꞌ akɨ. Carry this corn. Eꞌmɨꞌsaꞌkakɨ. Stand up. Eꞌmɨꞌsaꞌkaꞌ.
Stand up.
kɨisiꞌ n (non-possessed) a variety of large swallow
Kɨiꞌtʉwʉꞌ nprop the indigenous name given to Kaiteur Falls
kɨɨiꞌ (poss: ɨkɨɨisi) (cf: ) n 1) an old man 2) old age ɨkɨɨisi yaꞌ in your old age 3) of an age; having a particular age Esuwerʉ amʉꞌ eseru yau ukɨɨisi kaisaron kon entai rɨ utɨsaꞌ esiꞌpʉ utamokori ton eseru kuru awɨrɨ eꞌnɨ pɨꞌ In the Jewish way, I was going beyond many of
those my same age following my ancestors' ways.
kɨꞌka vt pull Tikʉn kɨꞌkaꞌpʉ iya ewa ke. He
pulled his pet with a rope.
kɨꞌma vt call for, summon Mɨrɨpan uya nin si tʉtaanꞌpʉ kɨꞌmakaaꞌpʉ. And next, she kept on
calling for her husband.
kɨmutu n a variety of black bee
kɨmʉrʉꞌse n a variety of orange-coloured mushroom Clavulinopsis spiralis
kɨntu n (non-possessed) the nest of a grounddwelling ant
kɨꞌnʉmʉ vr smell, sniff the air

© 2014 SIL International®

77

Akawaio-English Dictionary

kɨꞌnʉnpa (der.) vt smell
kɨꞌnʉnpa cf: kɨtunpa. (der. of kɨꞌnʉmʉ) vt smell Oꞌ kɨꞌnʉnpaꞌpʉ uya. I smelled the meat.
kɨpa vt pollute
kɨꞌpa vt make dirty Tʉpon kɨꞌpaꞌpʉ iya. She
made her dress dirty.
eꞌkɨꞌpa (der.) vi dirty
kɨꞌpɨꞌnʉmʉ vi scream "Yɨ!!" ikɨꞌpɨꞌnʉmʉꞌpʉ. "Yikes!!" he screamed. syn: yaipita . kɨꞌpɨꞌnʉnpa (der.) vt scream
kɨꞌpɨꞌnʉnpa (der. of kɨꞌpɨꞌnʉmʉ) vt make or cause to scream Ikɨꞌpɨꞌnʉnpaꞌpʉ iya. He made
him scream.
kɨpoꞌ n 1) an open place amaꞌai naꞌneꞌ serɨ pe usenpoikatoꞌ oton kɨpoꞌ pona. secret things here will be revealed in the open. 2) the outside surface of an object Wakʉ pe teꞌkuꞌsan kɨpoꞌ po kaꞌpon amʉꞌ uya rɨken tentoꞌ kon pe.
(They) make the outside clean, the only part people see.
kɨrɨꞌ (var: kɨrɨpɨiꞌ2) (cf: kɨrɨpɨiꞌ1) n a type of skin disease; chicken pox, measles
kɨrɨiꞌnʉmʉ vi smoke Ikɨrɨiꞌnʉmʉ aimʉne, iꞌkʉrʉn pe, isuꞌkupiyu pe. It smoked, white,
black and brown smoke.
kɨrɨiꞌnʉnpa (der.) vt 1) smoke 2) burn incense kɨrɨiꞌnʉnpa (der. of kɨrɨiꞌnʉmʉ) vt 1) make smoke, burn something so that it gives off smoke 2) burn incense Mɨrɨpan eꞌsotoꞌkasaꞌ esiꞌpʉ aꞌpoꞌnan kɨrɨiꞌnʉnpatoꞌ apon enwoꞌnetʉ winɨ. And he was standing on the right
side of the incense burning table.
kɨrɨkɨrɨ2 var. of kʉrʉkʉrʉ
kɨrɨkɨrɨ1 something rough opp: ekayu 2 ; cf: kʉrʉkʉrʉ .

kɨrɨmomi var. of kamoroniꞌ
kɨrɨꞌnʉkʉ vt burn to ash, burn up Apoꞌ keme kɨrɨꞌnʉꞌkɨ. Burn the firewood to ash.
kɨrɨpai adv from now on Kenariꞌnʉmʉi, serɨ si kɨrɨpai kaꞌpon amʉꞌ neꞌnin pe ɨwesi upiyaꞌ.
Don't be afraid, from now on, you will catch men for me.
kɨrɨpɨiꞌ1 n scabies cf: kɨrɨꞌ . kɨrɨpɨiꞌ2 var. of kɨrɨꞌ kɨrɨrukʉ var. of kɨtɨrukɨ n a variety of bird
with a metal-sounding call kɨrɨsin n smoke apoꞌ kɨrɨsin fire's smoke
kɨrɨtɨkɨ n (non-possessed) chicken
kɨrɨtʉ vi 1) burned, as in food that cooks too long ikɨrɨtʉ namaiꞌ nɨrɨ kanan. It is also burned/stuck to the pan. 2) sticking to the pot that it is boiling in
kɨꞌtɨ vt cut bush while walking Usarɨ wanaꞌ kɨꞌtɨi. I was cutting grass while walking.
kɨtɨkɨtɨ nom staggering Kɨtɨkɨtɨ pe ipinimʉ. He
walks with a stagger.
kɨtɨꞌkwaꞌ (poss: ɨkɨtɨꞌkwarʉ / ɨkɨtɨꞌkwarʉʉi) n 1) cotton; cotton tree Gossypium barbadense; Gossypium hirsutum 2) yarn made from cotton
kɨtɨrukɨ (var: kɨturʉkɨ; var: kɨrɨrukʉ) n a variety of bird, white chest and black back, flies in flocks; cotton bird
kɨtɨtɨiꞌma vt 1) grind 2) gnash one's teeth Mɨrɨ aꞌtai, toꞌ uya tʉyɨ kon kʉtɨtɨiꞌmaꞌpʉ ipan pe toꞌ eꞌsakoropaꞌpʉ ipɨꞌ. At that time, they gnashed
their teeth in their anger at them.
eꞌkɨtɨtɨiꞌma (der.) (var tɨtɨtɨiꞌkwa) vr grinding
kɨtɨtɨꞌka var. of kʉtʉtʉꞌka
kɨtun (poss: ɨkɨtun) (cf: kɨ; cf: kwɨꞌnʉmʉ) n scent Toꞌ kɨtun etaꞌpʉ iya. He smelled their

© 2014 SIL International®

78

Akawaio-English Dictionary

scent. (der.: kɨtunpa)
kɨtunpa (cf: kɨꞌnʉnpa) vt smell Oꞌ kanpʉ kɨtunpaꞌpʉ uya. I smelled dried meat.
kɨturʉkɨ var. of kɨtɨrukɨ
kɨukuma var. of kʉukʉuma
kɨwɨꞌ (poss: ɨkɨwɨkʉʉi) n 1) a variety of fruit grown on a vine similar to the sumutu vine 2) a toy top made from same 3) a variety of fruit from the si'na' tree
kɨwɨnka vt bend Wire kɨwɨnkaꞌpʉ uya. I bent
the wire.
kɨwɨu nom something curved Kɨwɨu pe paranka esi. The board is curved.
kɨyɨi n a variety of parrot
koꞌ2 (poss: ɨkokʉʉi) n cup
koꞌ1 n people, tribe, the people indigenous to a partiicular area Kukui koꞌ the people who live
along the Kukui River and at its mouth
ko postp from Aꞌmuruꞌta moro ko (fine) fish from the river's head Itɨkaaꞌpʉ kasa neꞌ ko. It seems he already left. Tuna uyepʉ kasa neꞌ usetan pɨꞌ ko. It sounds like it's raining.
Koꞌko pai nprop the name given to a landing along the Kukui River between Jawalla and Pipiri pai where a coastlander used to mine
koꞌkoi (cf: amai, aꞌai, noꞌnoꞌ, waꞌwa) n grandmother; direct address syn: amai 1 ; indir add: noꞌ .
kokon (var: koꞌroroꞌ) n (non-possessed) the variety of acushi ant (kuyawɨ') that flies during a certain time of year; caught and eaten by the Akawayo dev: kokon, kiyawʉꞌ .
koꞌkonoꞌta (poss: ɨkoꞌkonoꞌtaai) n 1) the coconut tree 2) the nut of the coconut tree
koꞌma nom something or someone late Koꞌma pe iyesi. He is late (in coming).

koꞌmamiyau adv yesterday Koꞌmamiyau toꞌ utɨꞌpʉ soꞌsi taꞌ. Yesterday, they went to church. cal: mʉꞌkuꞌ koꞌmamiyau, koꞌmamiyau, serɨ, awanapairɨ, awanapairɨ eꞌmaꞌpʉ .
koꞌmanʉkʉ vt owe Asaꞌron kon kaꞌpon amʉꞌ uya pʉratatʉnin yeꞌ uyakoꞌmanʉꞌpɨtʉ esiꞌpʉ teꞌmaiꞌ pʉra. There were two men who
owed a moneylender and couldn't pay him back.
komiꞌ nom coldness Ikomiꞌ pe tuna esi. The water is cold. opp: aꞌneꞌ ; sclr prop: aꞌneꞌ, iꞌnɨꞌkenan, komiꞌ .
kon (var: non3) (cf: ton) quant plural Mɨrɨpan kon uya tʉmunkɨ kon nɨmɨꞌpʉ asaꞌron kon rʉꞌkwɨ esiꞌpʉ. And they left behind their children, who were two little ones. tanporon kon everybody Mɨrɨpan kon emiyatʉ piꞌpɨ yaꞌ urari iꞌkwɨpɨtʉꞌpʉ iya. And then he broke poison
into/under their fingernails.
koneka vt 1) prepare 2) settle Toꞌ konekaꞌpʉ uya. I helped them settle (the matter). 3) order 4) fix 5) save, rescue Sises uya tʉnkonekaꞌsan tonpaꞌtɨꞌpʉ. Those Jesus saved were added. syn: pikaꞌtɨ 3, moꞌka 3 . ekoneka (der.) vr prepared
koneꞌo n a general term for rabbit
koniya n a variety of small, flat, silver fish Leporinus sp.
Konoꞌ paru nprop the name given to a creek along the path between Pipiri pai and Amoko kupai
konoiꞌ (poss: ɨkonsi) n fish hook konoiꞌ epu
fishing rod
konoiꞌ epu fishing rod cf: epu 2 .
konoiꞌ ewa fishing line
konopiya n a variety of plant with large, red berries and banana-leaf-like leaves

© 2014 SIL International®

79

Akawaio-English Dictionary

kopaiꞌkopaiꞌ n a variety of frog
kopaꞌpa n 1) (non-possessed) a variety of grasshopper known for its swimming ability 2) a variety of cricket that makes tracks in the wet sand
kopari1 n (non-possessed) a variety of tick Ixodes ricinus
kopari3 n a variety of tree with a red colour under the skin, good for building material
kopari2 n a variety of creeping vine Peperomia spp.
kopawa n a variety of bird, similar in habit to the kinotori, only smaller
kopere n a variety of tree, cedar tree Cedrela odoratte
koꞌpikɨ n a variety of flying ant, bigger than sirimɨ; same size as kwa'kwa'
kopiriꞌnɨ nom something chalky in taste, tawny
koreꞌwa (poss: ɨkoreꞌwaai) n 1) scoop made from calabash 2) spoon
koroiꞌma vi be or become moody koroiꞌmakʉꞌpan a moody person
koroiꞌtoꞌka vt sip Ɨuku koroiꞌtoꞌkakɨ. Sip your
drink.
koroꞌkoroꞌ n (non-possessed) a variety of bird that eats worms, similar to the pereikɨ, but living in the trees; parikari bird
koropakaiꞌ n a variety of long, yellow hot pepper
koroꞌpisaꞌ n (non-possessed) a variety of bird with a short, whistle-like call
korori (cf: kiriꞌsoroꞌ) n (non-possessed) cockroach, the general term;
kororoꞌ n 1) a variety of big, black ant that doesn't bite or sting 2) a queen ant or bee or other insect syn: arin 1 .
koꞌroroꞌ var. of kokon

kororou nom something fragile, easily broken
koroꞌtaꞌ postp to, in the direction of Eke puꞌkenaꞌ usenpoikasaꞌ man ukoroꞌtaꞌnokon! A big prophet has been made
known to us!
koroꞌtapai postp from among Ɨmɨrɨ kuru rɨ si kʉrɨrɨ wakʉ rɨ uriꞌsan tuꞌkan kon koroꞌtapai anʉnsaꞌ. You are truly a blessed
woman to be chosen from among many.
koroꞌtau postp 1) while, as, at the same time Mɨrɨpan koroꞌtau, itɨꞌpʉ mɨrɨ. While this (was happening), he went there. 2) before, in front of Mɨrɨ aꞌtai, makoi aꞌkwarʉ uya warawoꞌ enoꞌmaꞌpʉ tuꞌkan kon koroꞌtau. At that time,
the evil spirit threw him down, in front of plenty
people. 3) among
korʉ n gold
korʉka vt 1) wash, as in clothes Parapi ton korʉkapɨtʉ uya. I am washing the dishes. Uyemʉꞌ korʉka uya. I am washing my (own) face. syn: kumisi 1 . 2) cleaning, as in wounds 3) baptise, as in the Alleluia tradition
Korʉka Paru nprop 1) Cleaning Creek; the name give to a creek 2) Cleaning Creek; the name given to a village along the creek of same name
korʉkopiꞌso n a variety of mushroom Marasmieluus purpureus
korʉme n (non-possessed) thunder Korʉme eꞌtoiꞌpɨtʉꞌpʉ. Thunder exploded.
Korʉme nprop 1) the name given to the first set of rapids on the way to Maipuri Falls, Upper Mazaruni River (perhaps because of the noise they make?) 2) the name given to a creek
Korʉme pai nprop a name given to a small creek and a big rock located at the mouth of same; bottom-side of Jawalla village along the Upper Mazaruni River

© 2014 SIL International®

80

Akawaio-English Dictionary

korʉwaꞌ n 1) (non-possessed) a variety of fish, commonly known as patwa Nanachara bimaculata gen: tʉpiꞌpɨkenan . 2) a variety of fish, grey patwa Geophagus surinamensis
Korʉwaꞌ Paru nprop the name given to a creek known for its fish; top-side of Kako Ken along the Upper Mazaruni River, and below A'piu pai settlement
koꞌsara n a variety of bird
kosoꞌkosoꞌma vt crumple Ukaretaai kosoꞌkosoꞌmaꞌpʉ uya. I crumpled my paper.
kosopʉre n 1) (non-possessed) a variety of tall grass with fuzzy white top 2) arrow made from same, mostly for play by young children
kosorikɨ n a variety of black bird that flies high in the sky Agelaias icterocephalus
kotaꞌma vt punish; make someone suffer ekotaꞌma (der.) vr 1) suffer 2) struggle
kotoi n a variety of tree kotoi yeꞌ the kotoi tree
kotoko n a type of sweet-sour honey sclr prop: tɨusan 2, kotoko .
kotomori (var: kumururi) n a variety of large, black ant
kotonpimaꞌ n (non-possessed) a variety of cassava, mostly used for making kasiri, sometimes used for making cassava bread
kotorinsai n (non-possessed) a variety of locust
kotota vt grimace Eꞌpi kotokaꞌpʉ iya. He made
a grimace on his face.
kototoꞌka vt fold Ukaretaai kototoꞌkaꞌpʉ uya.
I folded my paper.
koꞌtʉmʉn (var: koꞌtʉmʉra) nom tasteless opp: ineꞌneꞌ 1 ; opp: ineꞌ 3 ; opp: aꞌseꞌku .
koꞌtʉmʉra var. of koꞌtʉmʉn
kowekowe n drill
kuꞌ var. of kupʉ

kuꞌ- phon. var. of kʉs-
kuikui n (non-possessed) a variety of long, black beetle
kuima1 n a stone used to smooth clay pots before firing them
kuima2 (poss: ɨkuimaai) n kidney; the kidney of smaller animals syn: apa2 .
kuita (poss: ɨkuitari) n a piece of turtle shell attached at the bottom of a stick used to spin cotton
kuiwa2 (poss: ɨkuiwa) n buttocks
kuiwa1 n a variety of snail Mollusca sp.
kuka vt erase Mɨrɨ ikuꞌkɨ. Erase that. eꞌkuka (der.) vi wiped
kuꞌka vt 1) suck something through something like a straw Ikuꞌkakɨ mɨrɨ yai. Suck it (water) through it (the straw). 2) inhale
kuꞌkuꞌ n a variety of bird, great horned hawk Buteogallus urubiting
kukui n (non-possessed) a variety of bird
Kukui nprop the name given to a tributary of the Upper Mazaruni River, the mouth of which is the location of Jawalla village.
Kukuikoꞌ nprop the name given to the Akawayo Amerindians who live along the Kukui River
kuꞌkuma vt cook Oꞌ peꞌ kuꞌkuma kaꞌyan? Is
s/he cooking meat?
eꞌkuꞌkuma (der.) vr cook
kumaꞌ n a variety of cotton tree, silk cotton tree Ceiba sp. syn: aꞌsaꞌreꞌ .
kumaꞌpakarai n a variety of frog
Kumaꞌpɨꞌkɨrɨiꞌ nprop the name given to a creek along the path between Pipiri pai and Amoko kupai
kumaraꞌ n a variety of large bird-of-prey, grey

© 2014 SIL International®

81

Akawaio-English Dictionary

and white in colour with swallow's tail
kumasi (poss: ɨkumasii) n 1) soup flavouring, made from kata, the drippings from the grated, squeezed cassava, boiled down to eliminate the poisonous qualities and to preserve it 2) an old-time variety of casreep, more sour than kasiri'pɨ
kumaꞌtaran (poss: ɨkumaꞌtaranʉʉi) n (non-possessed) a variety of bean
kumei n a variety of tree with unusual seed pods, monkey pod tree
kumeiwarai n 1) (non-possessed) a variety of tree similar to the kumei tree, hence its name; monkey-pot tree the variety of tree from which benab posts are cut; the seed pods of this tree look like small clay pots with edible nuts inside Lecythis zabucajo 2) a variety of nut from the same tree, edible, an unusual seed pod from the same tree
kumi n 1) a charm used by hunters to be successful in hunting wild cow, deer 2) a variety of plant from which is taken the charm
kumikʉ var. of kumisi
kumisi (var: kumikʉ) vt 1) wash clothes or wares Ikumiꞌpɨtʉ uya. I am washing many clothes. Ikumisi uya. I am washing one piece of clothing. Ikumiꞌkɨ. Wash it. Ikumiꞌpɨꞌkɨ. Wash them. syn: korʉka 1 . 2) wash dirt in order to look for gold or diamonds
kuꞌmɨ n juice Ikuꞌmɨ utɨ tʉron nɨ awɨrɨ. Its
juice went in another direction.
kumɨta vi be or become tired from physical exertion Ikumɨtasaꞌ. He was tired.
kumururi var. of kotomori
Kuꞌmʉrasi nprop the name given to an area where Amerindian mining is done; also a farming area for the Henry, William and other families
kun n (non-possessed) a variety of palm tree (moriche) the leaves of which are used in making a thatched roof

kuna var. of kuꞌna
kuꞌna (var: kuna; poss: ɨkuꞌnaai, ɨkunaai) n marrow
kunami (poss: ɨkunamii) n plant with broad leaf and black seeds; the poison from same, mashed and used to poison fish
kunawa n a variety of frog
kunwa (poss: ɨkunwari) (cf: ; cf: patawa) n 1) a type of palm tree 2) a dart made from the plant of same name
kunwaiꞌ n 1) (non-possessed) a variety of wood weevil that attacks dugout canoes 2) a variety of termite Masutituermes costalis
kupaiꞌ n a large river
kupai (poss: ɨkupai) n bay syn: awen .
kupaꞌkarakaiꞌ n (non-possessed) a variety of brown ant that bites hard; similar to the acushi ant; poisonous to small animals when eaten
kupaꞌkupaꞌ (cf: paꞌkupa) n (non-possessed) a variety of banana having a purple hue, fat and stubby in shape, buck banana Musa sp.
kupi n a container for holding drink or other liquid
kuꞌpɨ vt bathe Mʉre kuꞌpɨkɨ. Bathe the baby. ekuꞌpɨ (der.) vr bathe
kuꞌpɨri n lake; smaller than ocean (parau), larger than bay (kupai)
kupʉ (var: kuꞌ) vt 1) do Ɨꞌrɨ kupʉ auya? What are you doing? Ikupʉ pen nɨ. I am doing nothing. Tʉkuꞌsen nɨ mɨrɨ. That's a normal thing for people to do. tʉkuꞌsen an obligation 2) work 3) think, especially in relation to getting ready to do something, prepare to do 4) make something eꞌkupʉ (der.) (var eꞌkuꞌnɨsaꞌ; var eꞌkuꞌ) 1) vr done 2) vr pretend 3) vi act 4) vi become 5) vi happened
kuraꞌ n (non-possessed) a small variety of fish

© 2014 SIL International®

82

Akawaio-English Dictionary

spec: akaruwa ; spec: tennankɨꞌ ; spec: kurupasaꞌkwa ; gen: moroꞌ .
kuraiꞌ (poss: ɨkurasii) n 1) a bamboo-like tree 2) pipe Osorʉwaon ikurasii esiꞌpʉ eke ton ikɨrɨiꞌ nʉntoꞌ yai. there were three pipes with smoke coming out of them. 3) a long blowpipe made from the tree of same name
Kuraimaru nprop the name given to a village above Pipiri pai on the Kukui River
kurakaiꞌ (var: turakaiꞌ) n (non-possessed) a variety of small, red wood ant that stings Fornica micrergates
Kurakai (var: Kurakaiꞌ) nprop the name given to a settlement along the Upper Mazaruni River, down-river from Kako Ken
Kurakaiꞌ var. of Kurakai
kuran (cf: maipa; cf: poro1; cf: wairawoꞌ; cf: akarasa) n a variety of fruit tree, waiti
kuranau n 1) wind storm 2) hurricane
kuratana n (non-possessed) a variety of small plantain
kuratu n a variety of large, black caiman Caiman niger
kurawa var. of kurayaꞌ
kurayaꞌ (var: kurawa; poss: ɨkurayakɨ) n 1) a variety of plant similar to the pine, from which a medicine is made to cure cervical cancer 2) twine made from pine leaves 3) bowstring, often made from a plant of the same name
kureꞌkʉ n 1) a variety of tree, dukali Parahancornia amapa 2) sap from same tree, which can be used to seal cracks in boats
kurepiri (cf: ) n (non-possessed) a variety of biting ant
kurewakʉi n a variety of parrot
kuriꞌwai n (non-possessed) a variety of blue-headed parrot Pionus menstrues
kuriyara (poss: ɨkuriyaraai) n 1) dugout canoe

2) drinking trough kuruꞌ (poss: ɨkurukuui) n 1) conch shell,
sometimes used for calling a meeting or other gathering 2) jombie, bogeyman 3) a large variety of snail found in the same shell kuru adv very Iyeꞌtoꞌ pe kuru si mɨrɨ. Exactly
that.
kuruiꞌ n (non-possessed) a variety of bird; turukwaro bird
kuruꞌka vt pull up a plant by the roots syn: ina2 .
kurukuru vr stomach grumbling
kurukwa n swamp, an area that fills with water during rainy season
kurumaꞌ n tin syn: tinin 1 .
kurun n (non-possessed) a variety of vulture, Johnny Crow Catharthes aurs
kurun kanawa (var: pʉren) (non-possessed) airplane (lit: crowꞌs mode of transport)
kurun pan n a time of year, from December to February; usually dry syn: iwankan 1 .
kurunpiyupiyu n a variety of tree
kurupara n 1) gunpowder 2) dust
kurupasaꞌkwa n (non-possessed) a variety of larger silver fish Curimatus issororoensis gen: kuraꞌ .
kurupoꞌpoma var. of kʉrʉpoꞌpoma sell
kururuꞌ nom muddy, soft mud after a rain kururuꞌpan a muddy place
kurusuꞌ (var: purusuꞌ; poss: ɨkurusukuui) n cross
Kuruꞌtʉwʉꞌ nprop the name given to a set of falls upriver from Kaiteur Falls on the Upper Ireng River
kuruwe n a variety of plant that produces a fruit
kusan nom 1) someone or something tall Kusan

© 2014 SIL International®

83

Akawaio-English Dictionary

pe uriꞌsan esi. The girl is tall. 2) someone or something long kusanokopɨ n (non-possessed) a variety of cassava, used mainly for making eki; with a thin leaf, purple in colour kusera n 1) food, any food 2) banquet, a large amount of food for a large group of people kuꞌta n an evil spirit
kuꞌtiꞌma vt kiss, suck on Ikuꞌtiꞌmasaꞌ iya. He
kissed her.
kuwapa n a variety of fruit tree, the guava tree
kuwariꞌ n 1) (non-possessed) a variety of tree, the inner bark of which is used to make a sap to fill cracks in boats and other applications which require a glue. 2) a variety of waiti fruit tree, poro
kuwasi n cheek
kuwasuꞌ (poss: ɨkuwasukuui) n diarrhea
Kuwaꞌtimukoꞌ nprop a person or people from the area around the Kuwa'ti River, near Brazil
kuwayau n 1) (non-possessed) soldier 2) army, a collection of soldiers
kuwe n a variety of snail
kuwi n (non-possessed) a variety of small frog
kuwiꞌkiriꞌ n a variety of snail, often found climbing cassava plants
kuwinaꞌ (poss: ɨkuwinakʉ) n a variety of tree that gives a rubber substance when tapped kuwinaꞌ yeꞌ eeꞌkwa the kwina tree's sap (also
e'kuka)
kuwinɨ 1) vt sterilize, boil in water to clean from germs Ikwinɨpɨtʉ tʉpo ennaꞌpokaaꞌpʉ nin si. After sterilizing, I returned. 2) vi soak in hot water to relieve pain 3) vt remove hair or feathers using hot water 4) vt cook food by warming it in nearly boiling water
kuwire (poss: ɨkuwireei) n a small paddle

kuyapoꞌ (var: kiyapoꞌ) n (non-possessed) a variety of toucan Ramphastos tucanus syn: wakaꞌta .
kuyaramenu n (non-possessed) a variety of fish
kuyawɨꞌ var. of kiyawʉꞌ
kuyawɨiꞌ var. of kiyawʉꞌ
kuyuꞌ n a variety of black ant Fornica sp.
kuyunkuꞌyun var. of kuꞌyunkuꞌyun
kuꞌyunkuꞌyun (var: kuyunkuꞌyun) n bush cow syn: kaꞌtaipa, maipuri, waira .
Kuyupenan nprop the name given to a settlement and bay about four miles down-river from Jawalla along the Upper Mazaruni River, along the left side
kʉ (poss: ɨkʉ) n 1) quill of a porcupine aru kʉ the quill of the porcupine 2) the thorn of some plants kwina kʉ a thorn from the kwina tree
kʉꞌ- phon. var. of kʉs-
kʉiꞌ n a variety of flower; big, red in colour, blooming near Christmastime; similar to lilly; the plant of same
kʉipʉnʉ1 (poss: ɨkʉipʉnʉ) n 1) father, indirect address tʉkʉipʉnʉ uya tasaꞌ awɨrɨ just as his father said cf: aita 2 ; dir add: papai 1 . 2) father's brother; one's uncle, indirect address; any avuncular relative whose children are not of marriagable status to the speaker dir add: inton 1 ; dir add: papai 3 . 3) uncle; more specifically, one's mother's sister's husband dir add: papai 4 .
kʉipʉnʉ2 n the biggest of the fingers (thumb) or toes uyemiyaꞌ kʉipʉnʉ my thumb iꞌta kʉipʉnʉ her big toe
kʉꞌka vt stretch
eꞌkʉꞌka (der.) vi stretched

© 2014 SIL International®

84

Akawaio-English Dictionary

kʉka vt clear, make clean Itesen kʉkaꞌpʉ iya.
He cleared his throat.
kʉnʉ vt grate cassava
kʉꞌpan n slingshot Kɨrɨtɨkɨ wɨnɨꞌpʉ iya kʉꞌpan ke. He shot a chicken with a slingshot.
kʉraꞌ (poss: ɨkʉrakʉ) n clock
Kʉrai nprop Christ, the title for Jesus
kʉrakʉra n a variety of otter, water dog
kʉrɨ rɨ (cf: i-) pron 1) he, she or it kʉrɨ rɨ nekamanʉ the thing he said 2) him, her or it 3) his, her or its 4) that, referring to a person or living thing nearby Kʉrɨ rɨ warawoꞌ that boy
kʉrore (var: kʉrorewa) n 1) glory, supernatural brightness 2) supernatural power Main yapon kʉrore wa nuꞌtɨi, Papa. The word's throne is
coming down, God.
kʉrorewa var. of kʉrore
kʉrʉꞌkʉ n 1) edoe 2) dasheen
kʉrʉkʉrʉ (var: kɨrɨkɨrɨ2; poss: ɨkɨrɨkɨrɨɨi) (cf: kɨrɨkɨrɨ1) n file, used to sharpen a cutlass, tools kɨrɨkɨrɨpan jagged edged, file-like
kʉrʉma var. of kʉrʉmaya
kʉrʉmaya (var: kʉrʉma) n (non-possessed) a variety of medium-sized toucan Ramphastos vitellinus
kʉrʉpoꞌpoma (var: purukoꞌpoma; var: purukuꞌpoma; var: kurupoꞌpoma) vt sell Kamoro uya tʉnono kon kʉrʉpoꞌpomaꞌpʉ. They sold their own lands. Ayapuruui kon ikurupoꞌpomatɨꞌ. Sell your (pl.) things.
Kʉrʉꞌpʉn nprop 1) the name given to a creek along the Middle Mazaruni River, near Issineru village 2) the name given to an Akawayo village in the Middle Mazaruni River
kʉs- (phon. var: k-; phon. var: kʉꞌ-; phon. var:

kuꞌ-) do not Kʉꞌ- kupʉ -i. Don't do it.
Kʉsekamai nprop the name given to a rock along the Upper Mazaruni River, on the left (going down-river) from Ipana'muru pai and past the rock Sai
kʉtʉtʉꞌ nom something tight, unable to be loosed easily Kʉtʉtʉꞌ pe ewaꞌtɨkɨ. Tie it tight. kʉtʉtʉꞌka (der.) (var kɨtɨtɨꞌka) vt 1) squeeze 2) tighten
kʉtʉtʉꞌka (var kɨtɨtɨꞌka) (der. of kʉtʉtʉꞌ) vt 1) squeeze a person, with the intent to kill or scare children Ɨkʉtʉtʉꞌka uya mɨrɨ. I will squeeze you. 2) tighten Se ewa kɨtɨtɨꞌkakɨ. Tighten this knot.
kʉukʉuma (var: kɨukuma) vt wiggle, especially a dog wiggling his ears Tʉpana kʉukʉumaꞌpʉ iya. He wiggled his ears. Ikɨukumapɨtʉꞌpʉ iya. He was wiggling it.
kwai2 n (non-possessed) a variety of palm nut, found mostly on savannah areas
kwai1 n a variety of palm tree
Kwaipiya nprop the name given to a small creek on the Upper Mazauni River; bottom-side from Kukui Ken
kwaiso n (non-possessed) a type of orange potato, used in preparing cassava drink
kwaꞌkwaꞌ n a variety of flying ant; bigger than sirimɨ; similar to ko'pikɨ
kwama n (non-possessed) a variety of bamboo Bambusa vulgaris
kwanore n Harpy eagle Harpia harpyja
kwaran n (non-possessed) a variety of two-toed sloth
kwaran pana a variety of dark brown mushroom, "sloth ear" (because of the shape? colour?)
kwariꞌ n a variety of tree bearing pod-shaped fruit, similar to poro

© 2014 SIL International®

85

Akawaio-English Dictionary

kwaroꞌna (poss: ɨkwaroꞌnaai) n ginger
kwasekoiꞌ n (non-possessed) the variety of snake the wa'tautɨ bird prefers to eat
kwasi n (non-possessed) a variety of small mammal with a long snout, similar in marking to a raccoon Nasu rufus
kwata n 1) (non-possessed) a variety of large monkey 2) gorilla 3) chimpanzee
Kwaꞌtin nprop 1) the name given to a river bordering Brazil and Guyana 2) a person or people of mixed Akawayo/Brazilian heritage
kwatʉrʉꞌ n a variety of tree with small seed pods that look like fairy hats, the seeds of which are not edible
kwekwepan kwekweꞌpan nom something soft
kwekweꞌpan (kwekwepan) nom softness,

especially of something to sit on Kwekweꞌpan ayaponoꞌ esi. Your bench is soft.
kwentai nom something lost Inonka uya mɨrɨ kwentai pe namaiꞌ. I will set it aside so it doesn't
become lost
Kwin Mʉre (var: Wʉi Mʉre) nprop the name given to a prophet in the Alleluia church
kwinɨ n a hot compress, used to treat common illnesses kainaku kwinɨ the compress used to
treat kainagu
kwipari n a variety of tree that causes bad skin rashes for some people, even just from passing by it kwipari yeꞌ the kwipari tree
kwipitiꞌ n a variety of bird, kiskadee Pitangus sulphuratus
kwɨꞌnʉmʉ (cf: kɨtun) n scent oꞌ kwɨꞌnʉmʉ etaꞌpʉ uya. I smelled the scent of meat.

Mm

m- var. of mʉ-
maꞌ (poss: amapu) (cf: maꞌswa; cf: moroiꞌ) n a structure built across a creek to block and catch the fish in the creek as they try to swim back into the river; the fish trap used in same (sometimes called maswa)
ma1 var. of maka
ma2 vt pour, especially of a liquid Ɨnʉꞌ uya rɨ emenaꞌ wine ma pʉra esi penaroꞌ itenpʉꞌpʉ yaꞌ. No one pours new wine into old wineskins.
-ma to make (a noun a particular state); to become (as a noun) eꞌkɨiꞌma to get a fever; or, lit., to become as an old man Iyeꞌkɨiꞌmaꞌpʉ. He got a
fever.
Maꞌeru pai nprop the name given to a savannah place along the Kako River

maiꞌ1 nom 1) headache, something giving one a headache Ɨri pe, maiꞌ pe iyesi. It is bad, it gives you a headache. 2) something bitter in smell or taste Maiꞌ pe kasiri esi. The kaziri is bitter smelling/tasting. syn: iꞌneꞌ . 3) something poisonous syn: iꞌkʉrakɨ . 4) something alcoholic and/or sweet in flavour, especially strong to make one drunk
maiꞌ2 n a variety of tree, kunter tree, agouti eat the seeds
maikan n a variety of fox
Maikanaimɨ nprop the name given to a creek in the savannah near the James' shop, near Sinau yen
maikanmoꞌ n a variety of rope
maikoꞌ n an evil spirit of the forest

© 2014 SIL International®

86

Akawaio-English Dictionary

maiꞌkwaꞌ n (non-possessed) a variety of water fowl
maimu var. of main
maimuꞌka vt make one hoarse, cause one to lose one's voice, make one not able to talk eꞌmaimuꞌka (der.) (var emaimuꞌka) vr dumb
maimukʉ vt 1) answer Toꞌ maimukʉꞌpʉ John uya. John answered them. syn: eikʉ 2 . 2) refute ɨyeyaton non uya amaimukʉ namaiꞌ your enemies refute you 3) imitate, answer with a similar call Kʉꞌmaimuꞌpɨtʉi! Don't imitate (the
bird's call)!
maimupa (var: wemaimupa) vt 1) encourage someone to repent, pray to change someone Pasiko, maimupa toꞌ uya, inuꞌtɨkɨ, Papa. Woman, they repent, bring it down, God. 2) pray for someone
maimuꞌtɨ (der. of main) vt tell someone what to say amaimuꞌtɨ uya I give you words (to say)
main (var: maimu; poss: amaimu) n 1) word or words 2) speech 3) recorded or reported speech maimuꞌtɨ (der.) vt tell
main aworon someone who is obedient
main entaino someone who is disobedient
mainakeꞌ n farmer
mainanpa vt 1) watch karimeru amʉꞌ mainanpa pɨꞌ teꞌsan shepherds (those who watch over many sheep) 2) mind eꞌmainanpa (der.) vr watch
mainarʉ (poss: amainarʉ) (cf: umɨ) n someone's farm umainarʉ yaꞌ into my farm
mainta vr make a frown
maipa (cf: wairawoꞌ; cf: kuran; cf: akarasa; cf: poro1) n (non-possessed) a variety of waiti

tree with long seed pods maipuri n (non-possessed) bush cow, tapir
Tapirus americanus syn: kuꞌyunkuꞌyun, kaꞌtaipa, waira .
maiꞌpʉremu (poss: amaiꞌpʉremu) n friend
mairɨ pron there, not too far away Ɨꞌrɨ pe mairɨ toꞌ eꞌsaꞌ tukaiꞌ? How did this happen to them?
maitaken n 1) a tar-like substance from a tree used for making grater boards and rubbing onto arrow points and fishing rods Sumari akuꞌnɨꞌpʉ uya maitakin ke. I spread tar on the grater board. 2) wax, used for same
maiꞌwɨ n sister-in-law, direct address
maka (var: ma1) vt fish, catch fish Mɨrɨ aꞌtai moroꞌ amʉꞌ makaꞌpʉ ina uya. At that time, we
caught many fish.
makara n a variety of tree, walaba, a hardwood tree with edible, walnut-sized fruit Eperua sp. makara yeꞌ the walaba tree
makarin n 1) (non-possessed) a variety of grape-like fruit, green turning to purple when ripe syn: akorʉka . 2) a variety of tree producing same fruit, matchwood tree Tapirieru sp. makarin yeꞌ the matchwood tree
makaꞌsira n (non-possessed) a variety of sweet cassava
maꞌkɨrɨ vt 1) drop Umoꞌsa maꞌkɨrɨꞌpʉ uya tuna kaꞌ. I dropped my underwear in the water. 2) throw out eki sururuui maꞌkɨrɨtoꞌ kon pe eꞌma taꞌ. throw out cassava flour on the path 3) throw Toꞌ eꞌsaraꞌtɨꞌpʉ eke ton tɨꞌ maꞌkɨrɨ pɨꞌ ipona, iwɨnɨꞌpʉ toꞌ uya. They started to throw
big/plenty rocks at him, (and) they killed him.
makoi (poss: amakooi) n 1) sin 2) evil 3) devil, Satan, the originator of all things against God, the father of lies, etc.
makokopa n a container made from a leaf, often

© 2014 SIL International®

87

Akawaio-English Dictionary

to hold small items such as peppers or acushi ants maꞌku n (non-possessed) a variety of creeping vine maꞌkuma var. of maꞌkʉma
makuna vt 1) sin 2) spoil something 3) do something wrong or wicked
Makunaimɨ nprop mythical character
makunapa vt 1) treat with scorn, treat badly, joke about something serious Tʉmakunapai pʉra Areruya. Don't treat Alleluia badly. 2) sin
makuꞌpɨ 1) the worst one of many toꞌ makuꞌpɨ the worst of them 2) something rejected 3) female bird, or the duller one of a bird pair syn: menu pʉn ; cf: akoruwan 2 . 4) a baby born with deformities
makusi n 1) a Macushi person, the macushi tribe of Amerindians 2) the Macushi tribe
makʉiꞌ n land, someplace dry Iyanʉnpɨtʉꞌpʉ tuna eꞌpi pona, aꞌmun yaꞌ, makʉiꞌ. He put
himself beside the water, on the dry part, land.
maꞌkʉi (poss: amaꞌkʉi) n 1) mark 2) birthmark syn: karutu . 3) tattoo, the result of an indigenous practice, given to young women near or around the mouth, the design of which is based onthe taste of casiri she makes by chewing and spitting the casiri back into the pot syn: kansuꞌ . 4) sign of something to happen
maꞌkʉma (var: maꞌkuma) vt mark; to make a mark on something
maꞌkwai n 1) (non-possessed) a variety of river crab 2) a variety of large, mildly poisonous spider; similar to a tarantula piyaꞌma maꞌkwai
a larger variety of the same spider; lit. 'giant crab spider'
maꞌkwaiwaraꞌna n a variety of potato
mama n sister-in-law; more specifically, one's younger brother's wife; for direct address

maminiꞌtɨ nom someone mischevious syn: patantɨ .
man1 the aforementioned verbal phrase is an item of fact Iyeꞌnɨ pɨꞌ man. It is a fact that he is coming. Iꞌtu uya pʉra man. It is a fact that I do
not know.
man2 n a variety of plant with gum
mana2 n weaving, something woven Toꞌ enupa tʉkʉipʉnʉ uya mana pɨꞌ. Their own father
teaches them about weaving.
mana1 var. of mara
manaꞌ (poss: amanatʉ) n breast
manaꞌ akan pre-pubescent girl
manaꞌ eku breast milk
manaꞌ putu the nipple of the breast
manaꞌ yen bra, brassiere
manaiꞌmanaiꞌ n (non-possessed) a variety of small, burrowing insect that digs a conical hole in the sand to trap other bugs for its food
maꞌnapa 1) vt scorn, treat badly Tʉmaꞌnapai pʉra. Don't treat it badly. 2) vi dishonour the rules of bina use, such as talking to a girl between using a bina and going hunting
manare (poss: amanareei) n 1) a variety of grass used in weaving warishi 2) mukuru, used to make baskets, warichis, etc.
manari n waterfall
manenpa vt 1) trouble, bother Imanenpaꞌpʉ uya. I troubled him. tʉmanenpanin rʉꞌpʉ the one who was troubling 2) argue Paarʉ, Panapas pokon manenpaꞌpʉ mɨrɨ kasa pʉra rɨ man taꞌpʉ toꞌ uya. Paul, with Barnabas argued that
what they said was not so.
manka n a variety of tree whose roots can be used as a charm for hunting deer

© 2014 SIL International®

88

Akawaio-English Dictionary

mankurun n 1) (non-possessed) mango tree 2) mango fruit
mannʉꞌ nom 1) someone kind syn: sanoma2 . 2) someone gentle
maꞌnon (poss: amaꞌnon / amaꞌnomʉ) n girl, a young female, direct address
manowara n a variety of plantain
manpika vt 1) sweep away Iꞌmʉnpʉ nʉmanpikanʉ pe rɨ nin tapɨꞌnetʉ ke imaꞌtanʉkʉ pe rɨ. The flood that comes sweeping with strength destroys it. 2) carry away
mansiꞌ (poss: amansikʉʉi) n child syn: mʉre
1.
manunpa vt dance with someone Epuꞌkenaꞌ pasi umanunpa yan, ɨri, ɨri pe pʉra umanunpa yan. I am dancing with a prophet's
woman, I am dancing without wickedness.
maꞌpa n a variety of tree
maparuwa (cf: saro1) n (non-possessed) a variety of black otter, water dog, a larger variety than the saro Lutra macrodus
mapi n (non-possessed) a variety of mosquito, troublesome during the day
maꞌpiꞌ (poss: amaꞌpisi) n 1) a variety of small fish, found mostly near the A'taro River mouth, along the Kukui River, a tributary of the Upper Mazaruni River 2) a way to prepare fish by wrapping in certain tree leaves and roasting over the fire
Mapiꞌsa nprop the name given to a high-water bypass along the Kukui River between Jawalla and Pipiri pai
maꞌpisiꞌtɨ vt cook fish in leaves
mapɨꞌ (poss: amapɨri / amapɨkʉʉi) n any intestinal or other internal parasite
mapuru (poss: amapuruui) n 1) a variety of wild plant often called cane, used for fishing rods and hunting arrows mapuru yeꞌ the mapuru

plant 2) arrow, made from same high stat: urapa 1 .
maraꞌ n an instrument much like a maraca, with a gourd full of seeds/beads on a stick, shaken to make noise
mara (var: mana1) n a fair feeling, not too good "Ɨꞌrɨ pe nai?" "Mara rɨ." "How are you?" "Not too
good."
maraiꞌ n a variety of small fish
maran n (non-possessed) parakeet
marari n (non-possessed) rapids marari ena the
top of a waterfall
marariꞌta n (non-possessed) a long stretch of rapids
mare (poss: amareei) n a trap using string or cord
marikoꞌ n a variety of grassy plant with large, red root bulb
maripa n (non-possessed) a variety of small banana, yellow in colour
maritɨ n a variety of very poisonous scorpion, without claws Androctonus occitanus gen: mɨnɨꞌ .
mariya (poss: amariyarʉ) (cf: supara) n 1) a small knife 2) cutlass, machete
mariyamʉreꞌpʉ n small knife
marɨ2 n (non-possessed) a variety of bird that swings its body, small with dotted feathers, rarely found
marɨ1 postp 1) together with asaꞌrɨ rɨ marɨ all two of them 2) same as Mɨrɨ aꞌtai rɨ marɨ, . . .. At
the same time, . . ..
maruꞌ n (non-possessed) a variety of bird similar to the guinea bird, the maam bird Tinamus major
marupaꞌ n (non-possessed) bat Molossus obscurus

© 2014 SIL International®

89

Akawaio-English Dictionary

Marupaꞌ Pɨꞌpʉ nprop the name of a mountain where very large bats were found
Maruwaꞌ nprop the name given to a creek in Venezuela
Maruwaꞌna nprop the name given to a settlement where the James family lives
maruwasimɨ n (non-possessed) whirlpool
masa (cf: apʉne) interj wait
masaꞌ n a variety of savannah mosquito, troublesome at night
masaꞌpʉre n a variety of short, savannah grass with fuzzy white top
masarawe n a variety of smaller cockroach
maꞌsi n match
Masurimukoꞌ nprop the group of Akawayo Amerindians living along the Mazaruni River
Masurin nprop the name given to the Mazaruni River, both upper and lower stretches
maꞌswa (cf: maꞌ) the fish trap used in a structure built across a creek to block and catch the fish in the creek as they try to swim back into the river syn: moroiꞌ .
maꞌtaꞌ n a defect or malformation
mataꞌ n a variety of fruit tree bearing small grape-like fruit with large seeds
maꞌta vi 1) die Imaꞌtaꞌpʉ. It died. syn: erikʉ . 2) spoil, rot, decay Iyoꞌ maꞌtasaꞌ. His meat became rotten. 3) become broken Ina ensin maꞌtasaꞌ.
Our engine broke down.
maꞌtakʉꞌpan nom someone or something defective
maꞌtanʉkʉ vt waste Tʉpʉrataai maꞌtanʉkʉꞌpʉ iya mɨrɨ. He wasted his own
money there.
Matawi pai nprop the name given to a small creek on the left going down-river from

Wari'kwaima on the Upper Mazaruni River mateu n (non-possessed) a variety of large
firefly maꞌtoꞌ n a variety of chicken; Rhode Island Red
matuitui n a variety of dove-like bird with brown back and white belly
mauraimɨ var. of mɨuraimɨ
mawari n 1) an evil spirit 2) a person in training under a piyai'san imawari his mawa(ri)
mawasa n razor blade
mekoro n (non-possessed) negro, a black person, a person of African descent
Meꞌkoro Awen (cf: Aroꞌ Awon) nprop the name given to a bend in the Upper Mazaruni River, down-river from Jawalla and just past Kuyupenan
Meꞌkoro kʉpai nprop the name given to a small creek near Korʉme pai, along the Upper Mazaruni River, bottom-side from Jawalla village
mekuru n (non-possessed) banana; general term for banana mekuru iꞌnoꞌsaꞌ mashed banana
drink
menetewe n floating detritus such as leaves and sticks and seeds on the river's surface and gathered in one place
menka vt 1) judge Toꞌ menkaꞌpʉ iya. He judged them. syn: aimenka 1 . 2) choose 3) separate eꞌmenka (der.) vi judged
menkanin (der.) nom season
menkanin (der. of menka) nom season, a time of year (?)
meꞌnokoi n abdomen, stomach area of a person
mentaino 1) someone greedy for more of something s/he has tasted or experienced Mentaino kʉrɨ rɨ. He is greedy for more. 2) someone who is a glutton

© 2014 SIL International®

90

Akawaio-English Dictionary

menu (poss: ɨmenu) n 1) writing 2) drawing
menu pʉn plain, uncolourful, the female of the male-female bird pair syn: makuꞌpɨ 3 ; cf: tʉmenukenan .
menuka (var: menupa) vt 1) write Uyeseꞌ menukaꞌpʉ uya. I wrote/signed my name. 2) sign, as in write one's name
menupa var. of menuka
meremeꞌ (cf: ɨkɨɨimɨ) n 1) rainbow 2) a variety of snake
meriton merry, happy people, particularly in the Alleluia tradition
meru (cf: ) n (non-possessed) waterfall
merumeru n a variety of small hummingbird gen: tukuiꞌ2 .
Merumɨ nprop the name given to a creek along the Middle Mazaruni, near ? settlement
meruntɨ (poss: ɨmeruntɨrʉ) n 1) power opp: ɨꞌsɨꞌmʉn ; syn: apʉiꞌkeꞌ, panaꞌ pan 1 . 2) strength 3) grace
meruntɨtanʉkʉ vt strengthen, make strong Ɨyennaꞌposaꞌ pe iyesi aꞌtai anapurɨnʉ apai ɨyemoꞌkaꞌpʉ awonsiꞌkɨ, ɨtonpa ton mʉmeruntɨtanʉkʉiꞌ When you have returned
from being pulled away from your belief, strengthen
your partners. syn: panaꞌpantanʉkʉ .
miꞌ (cf: imun 1) n (non-possessed) root, the root of any plant syn: kara1 3 .
miꞌkɨ n a variety of small black ant with a funny smell
miꞌmiꞌ n 1) a female cousin of a female, direct address 2) sister-in-law; more specifically, one's husband's sister 3) older sister, direct address syn: pasi .
miꞌna (poss: ɨmiꞌnaai) 1) n (non-possessed) a variety of banana known for its yellow color 2)

nom something soft 3) nom a fertile place miniꞌa n (non-possessed) a variety of palm tree
Miripa yeꞌ 1) nprop the name given to a small creek top-side from Kukui Ken on the Upper Mazaruni River, on the right going up-river; the Jawalla village center; also called St. John's Creek 2) n a variety of tree
misikiri n a variety of bug that grows on people's hair, similar to lice
misimɨ (var: mɨsimɨ) n (non-possessed) a variety of large eagle, known to eat baboon
miyaꞌ (poss: ɨyemiya / ɨyemiyatʉ) n hand part: miyaꞌ mukuꞌpɨ 1 ; part: aꞌmiꞌpɨ 1 ; part: miyaꞌ aꞌmiꞌpɨ ; part: miyaꞌ epotorʉ ; part: miyaꞌ piꞌpɨ .
miyaꞌ aꞌmiꞌpɨ (poss: ɨyemiyatʉ aꞌmiꞌpɨ) the smallest finger whole: miyaꞌ ; syn: aꞌmiꞌpɨ 1 .
miyaꞌ epotorʉ (poss: ɨyemiyatʉ epotorʉ) n thumb whole: miyaꞌ . (lit: lord of the fingers)
miyaꞌ mukuꞌpɨ (poss: ɨyemiyatʉ mukuꞌpɨ) n 1) finger whole: miyaꞌ . 2) the three largest fingers of each hand
miyaꞌ piꞌpɨ (poss: ɨyemiyatʉ piꞌpɨ) n fingernail whole: miyaꞌ . (lit: hand-skin)
miyaꞌ ratoi six (lit: across hand)
miyarɨ2 much Ɨusiꞌnʉnkatoꞌ uya uyaꞌkwarʉ neꞌsaꞌ man, miyarɨ rɨ uporiꞌma iya. Your love
brings my heart much joy.
miyarɨ1 interj traditional greeting "Miarɨ." "Sarɨ." "Hello." "Hello." cf: sarɨ1 .
miyarɨ3 var. of niyarɨ
miyeꞌ (poss: ɨmiyepu) n 1) step 2) log bridge or other crossing over water Imiyepu konekakɨ iyeꞌkwɨrɨꞌtoꞌ poi pe. Use a log to make a bridge.
mɨ1 1) pron that Mɨ po ereutakɨ. Sit on that. 2) adv there

© 2014 SIL International®

91

Akawaio-English Dictionary

mɨ2 nom someone who is proud or satisfied with him/herself mɨ pe teꞌkuꞌsan pen someone who
is not proud or satisfied with what he has done
mɨꞌ (var: kanau yeꞌ) n 1) (non-possessed) purple heart tree Paltogyne sp. 2) general reference to any tree root
Mɨꞌ paru nprop the name given to a fish creek bottom-side from Jawalla village on the Upper Mazaruni River on the left going down-river.
mɨn pron that mɨn winɨ over there
mɨnɨꞌ n (non-possessed) a general term for scorpion spec: eke yapɨ ; spec: mʉremoꞌmo ; spec: maritɨ .
mɨnɨiraꞌ n (non-possessed) a variety of lethally poisonous centipede
mɨnpɨꞌta (poss: ɨmɨnpɨꞌtari) n (non-possessed) secondary bush, former farmland
mɨnwinɨkʉiꞌ adv further
mɨpe eꞌkuꞌna (cf: tensen) proud, great in one's own eyes
Mɨre tʉpʉ nprop the name given to a mountain peak behind the Kayama mountain range, near Jawalla village
mɨrɨ2 adv 1) (future tense) Awanapairɨ toꞌ utɨ mɨrɨ. In the morning, they will go. 2) immediately Mɨrɨ pe rɨ isepitɨꞌpʉ. Immediately, he was healed.
mɨrɨ1 1) pron that Ɨꞌrɨ mɨrɨ? What is that? 2) adv there
mɨrɨpan adv 1) while that Mɨrɨpan kon utɨꞌpʉ. While that was happening, they went. 2) while they
mɨsimɨ var. of misimɨ
Mɨꞌsɨꞌtɨ nprop the name given to a rapids along the Upper Mazaruni River, between Jawalla and Imbaimadai, especially during low water; after Mase'pɨ
mɨura n a variety of armadillo
Mɨura euta nprop the old name given to

Waira'ma'pʉ, an inhabited village up-river from Kako village (lit: armadillo hole) mɨuraima var. of mɨuraimɨ
mɨuraimɨ (var: mauraimɨ; var: mɨuraima) (cf: kaiꞌkan) n (non-possessed) a variety of large armadillo Pricdontes giganteu mauraimɨ
a variety of large armadillo
mɨyawɨrɨ adv 1) another way 2) otherwise, in the other sense 3) everywhere Papa esi mɨyawɨrɨ rɨ. God is everywhere.
mɨyeꞌpɨ n nape of the neck
moi (poss: ɨmooi) n pubic hair
moine (poss: ɨyemoinerʉ) 1) n young man Toꞌ uya moine eneꞌpʉ. They saw a young man. Moine pe iyesi. He is handsome. 2) nom a handsome young man
moineriꞌpɨ n young man Moineriꞌpɨ, eꞌmɨꞌsaꞌkaꞌ! Young man, stand up!
Moisiꞌ var. of Mosiꞌ
moꞌka vt 1) take away Makoi uya imoꞌka toꞌ piyapai. The devil takes it from them. 2) take out from the ground; harvest 3) rescue, save syn: koneka 5, pikaꞌtɨ 3 . aꞌkwarʉ moꞌka (id.) vr grieve
emoꞌka (der.) vi come out
usemoꞌka (der.) vr grow
moꞌke n (non-possessed) a variety of tree with short bean pods containing edible fruit
Moꞌke pai nprop the name given to a settlement about half way between Jawalla and Pipiri pai villages along the Kukui River.
mokon n a traditional variety of necklace
mokoro n fist
moꞌmo (poss: ɨmoꞌmo / ɨmoꞌmooi) (cf: ) n

© 2014 SIL International®

92

Akawaio-English Dictionary

beaded necklace monare n a variety of wild calaloo
moniꞌta n bladder
monoꞌ n (non-possessed) one who is pregnant monoꞌta (der.) vt impregnate
monori n a variety of brown or black, biting ant monoꞌta (der. of monoꞌ) vt make pregnant;
impregnate Papa Aꞌkwarʉ uya imonoꞌtanʉꞌsaꞌ. God's Spirit made her pregnant.
monsa n 1) a type of sandal, made from the palm kuwai or sʉre'pa Kuwai monsa konekaꞌpʉ toꞌ uya. They made sandals from the kuwai palm. 2) the cover of new leaf or flower of the puru tree puru monsa the cover of a new leaf/flower of the
puru tree
monsiriꞌka vt hatch eggs, as a hen does Tiꞌmoi ton monsiriꞌkaꞌpʉ kɨrɨtɨkɨ uya. The hen
hatched her own eggs.
eꞌmonsiriꞌka (der.) (var eꞌmonsiꞌka) vr hatch
monta n 1) the upper portion of thigh 2) groin
mooi n (non-possessed) boy
moꞌpa (poss: ɨmoꞌpai / ɨmoꞌpari) n the common peanut
mora n a variety of monster
Mora euta nprop the name given to the place chosen for the most recent Kako village
moꞌrau n a variety of scaled fish edible, similar to the wara; yarrau Hoplerythrinus unitaeniatus gen: tʉpiꞌpɨkenan .
moroꞌ (poss: ɨmoroko) n general term for fish spec: tʉpiꞌpɨkenan ; spec: kuraꞌ ; spec: piꞌpɨpʉn .
moro 1) pron there Moro peꞌ our nai? Is there (any) flour? Moro kaꞌpon esiꞌpʉ. There was a

man. 2) available Moro peꞌ our nai? Is there
flour available (to buy)?
Moro tɨpu nprop the name given to a rock opposite Kako village
moroiꞌ (poss: ɨmorosi) (cf: maꞌ) n fish trap made of woven sticks and nipi and then set into a ma' syn: maꞌswa .
moroꞌma vt catch fish with a hook and line Tuꞌke toꞌ memoroꞌmai peꞌ? Did you catch plenty fish with a hook? moroꞌmanin fisherman
moromoro n (non-possessed) a variety of insect that bears a white substance on its back
moronka vt bear something, withstand punishment Soton uya parɨ imoronkatoꞌ oton mɨrɨ. Sodom will be able to bear it. syn: aꞌkʉreꞌtɨ 1.
moronpɨ (poss: ɨmoronpɨɨi) n 1) beeswax 2) honeycomb
Moronpɨ paru nprop the name given to a settlement near Sinau yen (lit: beeꞌs wax creek)
moꞌsa2 n (non-possessed) a variety of plant from which leaves are taken to make a thatch roof
moꞌsa1 (poss: ɨmoꞌsa) n 1) underwear, panties 2) beaded half-skirt worn by Akawayo women before western clothes were introduced
mosaire something protruding from something else Tʉyɨ mosairen iyesi. Her teeth are
protruding (from her mouth).
Mosiꞌ (var: Moisiꞌ) nprop the name given to Moses, the Bible character
moꞌsoiꞌ n (non-possessed) a variety of black, biting ant
mosokoroi (poss: ɨmosokorooi) n worm, especially as bait for fishing Megasoolides sp.
mota (poss: ɨmota) n shoulder
motomoto nom something bumpy, lumpy or knobby opp: toꞌsarɨ .

© 2014 SIL International®

93

Akawaio-English Dictionary

moyoiꞌ n 1) (non-possessed) a variety of small, house spider 2) a variety of spider that commonly blocks a pathway with its web
mu2 nom something full or whole, especially the moon imu pe kapʉi enuku aꞌtai when the full
moon rises
mu1 (var: mumu; poss: ɨmu) n son, indirect reference dir add: pi 2 .
mukuꞌpɨ2 nom middle one pʉta mukuꞌpɨ one of
the three middle toes
mukuꞌpɨ1 n 1) finger 2) toe
muꞌkuru n a variety of plant that bears a hard tomato-like fruit
mumu var. of mu1
muꞌmuꞌ (var: muꞌmutuꞌ) n gray hair Muꞌmuꞌ pe iyenaꞌpʉ. He has gotten gray hair.
muꞌmutuꞌ var. of muꞌmuꞌ
mun n (non-possessed) cassava tuber, yam tuber, potato tuber, the general term for any tuber
muna n a type of leaf used in tuma; similar to the tania leaf
munkɨ (poss: ɨmunkɨ) n 1) children Eight kaisa rɨ imunkɨ amʉꞌ esiꞌpʉ. His children were eight in number. 2) young ones of any species birds, animals, people
munpɨ var. of unpɨ
muꞌpɨꞌ (cf: tɨꞌ, kapiriꞌ) n (non-possessed) rock
Muraiꞌ nprop a name given to a landing down the Mazaruni River from Kamʉran
muran (poss: ɨmuranʉ) n a general term for any charm or bina, something used to get someone else to do what you want them to emuranpa (der.) vi charm oneself
muranpa vt charm Pero muranpaꞌpʉ uya. I
charmed the dog (to be a better hunting dog).
muraurai n a variety of fruit tree, waiti

muꞌru2 nom someone who is dwarfed Muꞌru pe rʉꞌkwɨ iyesi. She is a dwarf.
muꞌru1 n (non-possessed) a variety of small armadillo
muru n (non-possessed) a variety of tree that bears a small fruit
muruku vt squeeze cassava, usually in a tenki' Eki murukuꞌpʉ uya. I squeezed grated cassava
(in a tengik).
muruma vt digest food
musun (poss: ɨmusunu) n 1) bait for fishing Ɨꞌrɨ imusunu pe aimara masaꞌ auya? What are you using as bait to catch aimara fish? 2) trap
musunpa vt attract, use bait
muꞌtan nom 1) something or someone prolific, bearing many children 2) fertile
mʉꞌ (poss: ɨmʉꞌ) n a band around something
mʉ- (var: m-) (cf: ɨ-) you, second person verb prefix M- eta -i? Did you hear?
-mʉ var. of -i2 mʉiꞌma n false healer or bad doctor
mʉꞌkuꞌ koꞌmamiyau day before yesterday cal: mʉꞌkuꞌ koꞌmamiyau, koꞌmamiyau, serɨ, awanapairɨ, awanapairɨ eꞌmaꞌpʉ .
mʉn (poss: ɨmʉnʉ) n blood mʉnpɨrʉꞌpʉ var. of mʉntʉkʉꞌpʉ
mʉnpɨꞌtɨn vi bleed Mʉnpɨꞌtɨn pɨꞌ iyesiꞌpʉ. He
was bleeding.
mʉntʉkʉꞌpʉ (var: mʉnpɨrʉꞌpʉ; poss: ɨmʉntʉkʉꞌpʉ) n afterbirth
mʉnʉimɨ n a type of intestinal disease; dysentery
mʉnʉꞌka vt take blood
mʉnʉꞌpan nom something or someone bloody

© 2014 SIL International®

94

Akawaio-English Dictionary

mʉnʉꞌtɨ vt give blood
mʉnwarimɨ n (non-possessed) a variety of poisonous snake
mʉraꞌta (poss: ɨmʉraꞌtaai) n 1) door 2) gate 3) opening Pata mʉraꞌta eporo iya koroꞌtau, . . .. As he came to the city gate (really, the opening in
the city's wall, . . ..
mʉraurai n a variety of fruit, poro
Mʉrawoko nprop 1) the name given to a settlement between Waramatan and Paruima on the Kamʉran River 2) the name given to a natural fish pond along the Kukui River between Jawalla and Pipiri pai
Mʉrawoko pai nprop the name given to a bay near the pond along the Kukui River between Usariwara pai and Pipiri pai
mʉreꞌ (poss: ɨmʉreꞌkɨɨi) n child Mʉreꞌ esi aꞌtai, . . . When I was a child, . . .
mʉre (poss: ɨmʉre) n 1) baby syn: mansiꞌ ; high stat: sanon . 2) child
mʉreei n a small bench with head and foot,

turtle-shaped mʉreꞌi n a variety of wild fruit similar to a
cherry; soury mʉremoꞌmo n a variety of poisonous scorpion
gen: mɨnɨꞌ .
mʉreꞌnʉmʉ vi crow, in particular, the crow of the powis at a certain time of year Pawʉiꞌ mʉreꞌnʉmʉ. The powis is crowing.
mʉreꞌpʉ nom something small yʉi mʉreꞌpʉ a small stick tɨꞌ mʉreꞌpʉ a small rock
mʉta (poss: anta / ɨyinta) n mouth
mʉta mura palate
mʉta paruta (var: etaku amʉraꞌpʉ) salivate (lit: mouth making water)
mʉta siꞌpoꞌ (poss: anta siꞌpoꞌ) n 1) facial hair 2) goatee
mʉtaꞌna pen (cf: mʉtaꞌna yeꞌ, akamana) someone who is not good at hunting or fishing
mʉtaꞌna yeꞌ (cf: akamana, mʉtaꞌna pen) n (non-possessed) a good hunter or fisherman

Nn

n- var. of nʉ-
-n3 var. of -nin
-n1 a suffix to say the item being mentioned is a person osorʉwaon kon kaꞌpon amʉꞌ three people tanporon everybody Ewarupɨ nau iyeꞌsaraꞌtɨꞌpʉ utɨn pɨꞌ. In the night, he started to
go.
-n2 uncertainty Ɨutɨ peꞌ miꞌtuyan? Do you know you are going? Wakʉ pe peꞌ meꞌan? Are you
well?
naꞌ1 (poss: anatʉ / anatʉʉi) n tannia, a variety

of root crop Xanthosoma sagithfolium na vt pull up weeds Wanaꞌ na auyaꞌnokon
koroꞌtaꞌ, iyaꞌtai pʉra iꞌkiyari yeꞌ kanan na auyaꞌnokon esi. While you are pulling up the
weeds, it might happen that you also pull up the food plants.
naꞌ2 postp in, through Koneriyas utɨꞌpʉ mʉraꞌta naꞌ Cornelias went in the door. sclr prop: naꞌ2, nau, napai .
nai adv where Nai yau Wrenton? Where is Wrenton? Moro peꞌ Father nai? Is Father here?

© 2014 SIL International®

95

Akawaio-English Dictionary

naire (poss: anaireei) n paddle
naka vt cut down Wayaka yeꞌ nakaꞌpʉ toꞌ uya.
They cut down the wayaga tree.
nakaꞌpɨ n stump Araꞌya nakaꞌpɨ moꞌkaꞌpʉ toꞌ uya. They pulled out the guava stump.
nakapu (poss: anakapu) n 1) top Wʉꞌ nakapu eporoꞌpʉ uya. I found the top of the mountain. 2) the top part 3) something above Aꞌtɨꞌpʉ iya tʉnakaꞌ tau. He cut (the branch) above him.
nakaꞌseꞌ n brain
nakaꞌta n the crown of the head
naꞌkɨ2 adv must have; showing certainty Ɨmɨrɨ uya naꞌkɨ utinkaꞌpʉ. You must have hit me. Itɨkaaꞌpʉ naꞌkɨ nai? Did he leave already? (I
didn't want him to.)
naꞌkɨ1 n (non-possessed) something; used when speaker is inquiring of hearer Ɨꞌrɨ naꞌkɨ? What do you want? Iyeꞌkaꞌsaꞌ naꞌkɨ ukatai nin. I
thought she would have already come.
nama vt respect, honour Toꞌ esiꞌpʉ Papa namanin nan pe. They were respectors of God.
namai n (non-possessed) a variety of bird, warakabura, a large, black fowl-like bush bird that is easily tamed syn: akami .
namaiꞌ postp lest; prevent from doing something, disallow Serɨ kupʉꞌpʉ iya teꞌma kon iꞌtu toꞌ uya namaiꞌ. He did this so they would be
prevented from knowing the trail.
nan nom ones who are, those which are, the plural portion of the personalizer suffix -nin entuꞌmanin nan ones who are poor
naꞌnaꞌ (var: naꞌna) n aunt; more specifically, one's father's older sister; for direct address cf: aꞌai 4 .
naꞌna var. of naꞌnaꞌ

naꞌneꞌ adv 1) about, similar Aꞌtai pʉra Pipiri pai awonsiꞌkɨ Kuraimaru naꞌneꞌ kasa. They
were about as far apart as Pipiri pai is from
Kuraimaru. 2) especially ɨnnɨ pe kuru naꞌneꞌ
especially far
nankuta vi the process of making any kind of local drink - cassava drink, pine drink, etc. Unankutaꞌnokon. We (incl.) are making drink.
nanʉkʉ vt splash Unanʉꞌpɨtʉꞌpʉ iya. He was
splashing me.
napai postp from in Aꞌnaiꞌ eꞌkwa napai iyeeꞌpʉ. He came from in the corn farm. sclr prop: naꞌ2, nau, napai .
naꞌpo vt cause to return; usually to home Toꞌ naꞌpoꞌpʉ iya. He returned them. ennaꞌpo (der.) vr return
napʉ vt eat sweet things Inaꞌpʉ auya. You ate it (something sweet). naꞌnin vegetarian, one who
eats only sweet things (and not meat)
napʉi (poss: anapʉʉi) n yam
nariꞌ1 vt frighten or scare someone enariꞌnʉmʉ (der.) vr frightened
nariꞌ2 n shadow nau postp in ewarupɨ nau in the night Ewaiꞌ
nawon. I'm not sure./In truth./There may be truth in it. sclr prop: naꞌ2, nau, napai . nawon2 (attrib.) n
nawon1 adv maybe, expressing uncertainty Apoꞌ rɨ nawon iꞌmo iya. Apparently, he is chopping
firewood (but I can't see or hear him).
nawon2 (attrib. of nau) n -ꞌne1 plural suffix on postpositions, referring to
the plurality of the object of the postposition Iyekainʉnpɨtʉꞌpʉ ɨutɨ ponaꞌne. He was
climbing onto many houses. (possibly from house to

© 2014 SIL International®

96

Akawaio-English Dictionary

house)
-ꞌne2 using a mode described by the attached noun; when used with the number two, it means 'two by two' asaꞌrɨꞌne two by two Ina pantakapɨtʉꞌpʉ toꞌ uya 7 peꞌne. They divided
us into groups of seven.
nepʉ vt bring Waꞌka nepʉ iya itenaꞌ. He brings the axe to him. Sineꞌyaiꞌ. I am bringing it.
niꞌkiti n the parents of one's child's spouse in relation to the child's parents, indirect address
nin adv really, very Aiko kuru nin si David esiꞌpʉ. David was really very small.
-nin (var: -n3) one who (verb)s, changing a verb into a noun Tʉron kon esi mɨrɨ wakʉ itekareei etanin nan. (There are) others who are ones who listen to his good word. Ewarupɨ nau iyeꞌsaraꞌtɨꞌpʉ wutɨ -n pɨꞌ. He started to go at
night.
nipi (cf: kami) n 1) (non-possessed) a variety of vine 2) a natural rope made from the nipi vine spec: waꞌkwama 2 ; spec: kami .
niyarɨ (var: miyarɨ3) interj Go away! Niyarɨ, pero! Go away, dog!
nɨ var. of rɨ emphasises the preceding word or phrase Wakʉ pen nɨ. I am not well.
-nɨ nominalizer suffix Itoto si uyeꞌnɨ pɨꞌ man!
Kanaima is coming!
nɨken var. of rɨken
nɨmɨ (var: nɨn) vt leave behind Tʉmunkɨ amʉꞌ nɨmɨꞌpʉ toꞌ uya. They left their children behind. eꞌnɨmɨ (der.) (var eꞌnɨn) vr 1) left 2) stay
nɨn var. of nɨmɨ
nɨpon (poss: ɨnɨpon) n 1) covering Ɨnʉꞌ uya tɨꞌ pɨrinkatoꞌ pe uruwaiꞌ nɨpon? Who will roll the stone (away from) the tomb opening? 2) opening

nɨpontɨ vt cover something Inɨpontɨꞌpʉ uya. I
covered it.
eꞌnɨpontɨ (der.) vr cover
nɨrɨ adv 1) also Urɨ nɨrɨ utɨ mɨrɨ ayaꞌkɨrɨꞌnokon. I also will go with you all. 2) included
noꞌ (poss: ɨnoꞌ) n grandmother dir add: noꞌnoꞌ ; dir add: koꞌkoi .
-ꞌnokon plural person, for either first or second person Urɨꞌnokon uya toꞌ eneꞌpʉ. We saw
them.
non1 var. of ton
non2 (poss: ɨnono) n 1) land unono my land/my farmland 2) ground 3) dirt 4) earth
non3 var. of kon
non eꞌmo n volcano Non eꞌmo eꞌtoiꞌkwaꞌpʉ.
The volcano erupted.
nonan1 n 1) (non-possessed) a variety of sandfly 2) a variety of insect; kabora; a large variety of biting fly, mostly found on the savannah
nonan2 n ancestor, indirect address; referring to those ancestors already long-dead Nai winon kon ɨnonan ton? Where are your ancestors from?
nonka vt 1) set aside Mɨrɨpan inonkaꞌpʉ toꞌ uya. And then they set him aside. 2) leave alone 3) get rid of eꞌnonka (der.) vr 1) set aside 2) finish
nonkɨ n small biting insect that leaves red blood drop in the center of the bite
noꞌnoꞌ (cf: amai, aꞌai, koꞌkoi, waꞌwa) n grandmother, direct address indir add: noꞌ .
noꞌpʉ (poss: ɨnoꞌpʉ) n wife high stat: tamoꞌpʉ .
noꞌpʉ rʉꞌpʉ widow " ," taꞌpʉ iya, inoꞌpʉ rʉꞌpʉ uya. " ," she said, his widow (said).

© 2014 SIL International®

97

Akawaio-English Dictionary

norʉkɨ n (non-possessed) a variety of small swallow
noꞌsan n old woman
Noꞌsoto (var: Noꞌsotoꞌpʉ; poss: ɨnoꞌsotooi) 1) nprop an old woman said to be responsible for giving a good cassava crop 2) n mother 3) n grandmother
Noꞌsotoꞌpʉ var. of Noꞌsoto
notau postp behind Yʉi notau iyeꞌsoꞌnansaꞌ.
He was hiding behind the tree.
nuirapaꞌ someone or something scornful Mɨrɨ aꞌtai ɨri pe saꞌne iyeꞌpɨtʉꞌpʉ nuirapaꞌ rɨ. At
that time, she was really scornful.
nunkɨ n a variety of biting fly, troublesome during the day
nurɨne nom 1) something or someone alive Tanporon kon esi ipona nurɨne. To Him (Christ), all are alive. opp: ekeꞌ 1 . 2) someone sober opp: eꞌtaripan .

nurunpa vt 1) ignore 2) hate
nʉ- (var: n-) absence of explicit object Nʉ- poka -i pɨrɨu ke. The thing he shot with an arrow. Tuna nʉyeꞌan. It's raining. / The thing coming is rain. Toron peꞌ nʉpokayan? Was the thing he shot a
bird?
-nʉ var. of -i2 -nʉꞌ var. of -nʉkʉ
nʉkʉꞌ nom sexually prepossessed; horny
-nʉkʉ (var: -nʉꞌ) 1) finally ereutanʉkʉ tʉuya aꞌtai tenkoꞌnetʉ winɨ Epʉn pata po when he seated him at his right hand in Heaven 2) future tense 3) causative suffix Kurun kanwa arintanʉkʉꞌpʉ iya. He made the airplane fly.
nʉꞌkwɨ var. of rʉꞌkwɨ
nʉmʉ vt to put someone to sleep eꞌnʉmʉ (der.) (var eꞌnʉn) vr sleep
-nʉꞌpʉ var. of -rʉꞌpʉ

Oo

oꞌ (var: yoꞌ2; poss: ɨyoꞌ) n meat -o var. of -i2 oꞌ pokon hunt for meat with hunting dogs -oi var. of -i2 oiꞌma nom something or someone dirty, filthy
Itoiꞌma iyenasaꞌ. He became dirty. oiꞌmane n an evil spirit oimentɨ vt surround oiwe n a variety of anteater oko nom 1) long in time spent doing something
Oko pe meeting esi. The meeting runs late/long.

2) something taking a long time to complete Okoꞌsɨ! Said when someone discovers something is
taking a long time to happen.
oꞌkoiꞌ postp on
Okomiyaka nprop the name given to a rock along the Upper Mazaruni River; on the right (going down-river), past the Mɨ'sɨ'tɨ rapids and past Ono' rock
okopi n (non-possessed) a variety of small lizard with read throat
oꞌkoroꞌno (cf: oꞌno, iꞌnau) postp under (water) Toꞌ usenasipaꞌpʉ tuna oꞌkoroꞌno. They dove
under the water.
okouokouma var. of wokouwokouma vt

© 2014 SIL International®

98

Akawaio-English Dictionary

shake, as in a tree, back and forth oꞌkʉra n (non-possessed) a variety of turkey-like
bird, marudi Peneolpe maraii oꞌkʉraimɨ n a variety of turkey-like bird
oꞌmere n a variety of small, rounded plantain
on something, usually a plant with hairy skin, that makes a person's skin itch when touched On pe iyesi. (That plant) is itch-producing. Sikaru yeꞌ si ono. The sugar cane (has fine hairs to) make you
itch.
onamʉ vt hide Ipon onamʉꞌpʉ iya. He hid his
clothes.
eꞌsonamʉ (der.) (var eꞌsoꞌnamʉ) vr hidden
oꞌno (var: woꞌnoro) (cf: oꞌkoroꞌno, iꞌnau) postp under Toꞌ usenasipaꞌpʉ tuna oꞌno. They dove under the water. itesen oꞌnon assistant
Onoꞌ nprop the name given to a rock along the Upper Mazaruni River; on the right side (going down-river) just past the Mɨ'sɨ'tɨ rapids
onoi n a variety of bird that sings "Ɨri'!"
onore n (non-possessed) a variety of bird known as tiger bird, crane, a river bird that eats fish Ardea cocoi
onpa vt taste something oꞌ onpaꞌpʉ uya. I tasted
the meat.
onpiꞌ n rash
ontʉman (var: untʉman; poss: ɨontʉmanooi) n hunter syn: akamana .
opa2 n a variety of tree from which roof shingles are cut, walaba tree, seed pods hang down from branches by long stems
opa1 (poss: ɨyopari) n a woven serving tray for serving cassava bread
oꞌpamʉ vi come back to life, be resurrected Mɨrɨpan itoꞌpamʉꞌpʉ kaꞌpon pe si iyenaꞌpʉ aꞌneꞌ pe. And then he was resurrected as a person,

as a piaichang.
utoꞌpamʉ (der.) vr recover
oꞌpan n 1) a variety of fruit tree 2) fruit of the same tree
opara n (non-possessed) a variety of stinging black ant Prenolepis longicornis
opaꞌwʉ n (non-possessed) island
Oꞌraimɨ nprop the name given to a giant who makes the same sound as the okʉra bird
Orana pai nprop the name given to a settlement along the Middle Mazaruni, near Enaku
orekoꞌ (poss: ɨyorekoꞌsi) n Holy Spirit; Holy Ghost Orekoꞌ si maimu, Areruya sikupʉi. The Holy Spirit's word, I am doing Alleluia. syn: Papa Aꞌkwarʉ .
oriꞌori (poss: ɨyoriꞌorii) n a square, woven spatula used to flip cassava bread on the griddle and fan the flame of the fire
oro n 1) (non-possessed) a variety of tree Ina iwʉꞌ oroꞌtɨꞌpʉ uya. I put up slats of wood on our house. 2) the wood of the oro tree, cut up into slats for roofing on which shingles or tin are nailed
oroioroi n (non-possessed) a variety of bird, also called mam suwa
oroꞌpai (poss: ɨworoꞌpai) n waist
Orosikoꞌ (cf: ; cf: Poitoꞌma) n 1) (non-possessed) the name given to a group of 'wild people' living between Akawayo area and the Venezuela border without any outside contact who are trying to maintain their hidden lifestyle 2) spirits who are active people in relating to the piaichang.
oroꞌtɨ vt build a house; in particular, putting up the horizontal slats (oro) of the roof of a thatched roofed house Mʉoroꞌtɨyan peꞌ? Are
you building?
Oroꞌwan ken nprop the name given to a creek mouth along the Upper Mazaruni River, above

© 2014 SIL International®

99

Akawaio-English Dictionary

Imbaimadai oroꞌwe n a variety of small parrot
orʉ n 1) world, the earth syn: inonkʉiran, urayanta . 2) worldly things, the wicked things that distract a spiritual (Alleluia) person Ɨri pe man orʉ man, Papa uyaponoꞌ pe pʉra The
world is wicked, God. It is not my throne.
osi2 n a small variety of calabash, the plant that bears same
osi1 (var: wosi) n (non-possessed) a variety of fresh-water shrimp
Osi nprop the name given to a waterfall near Paruima
oso adv a word of surprise at the beauty of something
osorʉwau 1) n (non-possessed) three osorʉwau teꞌkwa three times 2) third itosorʉwanno third osorʉwawon (attrib.) n

osorʉwauꞌne adv three by three
osorʉwawon (attrib. of osorʉwau) n three things
otaruwa n a variety of bird
otoka vt hunt for several days eꞌotoka (der.) vr hunt
oton what is to be (mine/yours/his) Uyuku oton iꞌse esi. I want what is to be my drink. tʉnoꞌpʉ oton his fiance (his future wife)
otori (cf: kamota) 1) nom hunting pero otori hunting dog 2) n what you get or obtain from any experience Nai ɨwotoriꞌpɨ? Where is what you got? 3) nom a result of something Ɨnʉꞌ rɨ esi yau iwan pe, pata po rɨ nentaꞌnakapʉi, ayamʉra kon pe iyesi aꞌtai eseru aimenkatoꞌ otori pe enan namaiꞌ. If anyone is
hungry, let him eat at the place/at home, so that when you all gather, so that you will not be a victim to judgment/so that it will not result in judgment.

Pp

pa2 conj then, in order to, so that iꞌtunin pe ɨwesi pa so that you are as one knowing him Miyarɨ parɨ kanau akɨ iꞌnawon yaꞌ parɨ. Mɨrɨpan ɨpunwerʉi kon enoꞌma kon pa tuna kaꞌ moroꞌ amʉꞌ aꞌsi kon pa. Carry the boat farther,
deeper, in order to cast your nets into the water in order to catch many fish.
pa1 (var: payan; var: paanon; poss: apaa) n grandchild, both male and female, indirect address dir add: paꞌri .
pa3 n 1) a sweet, a candy Kuyapoꞌ ipa yeꞌ the
toucan fruit tree - a tree with small red fruits that are a
favorite of toucans 2) anything sweet to eat
-pa a denominalizing suffix, meaning to make

whatever noun it is attached to sakoropa to make someone vexed Isakoropaꞌpʉ uya. I made
him vexed.
paanon var. of pa1 paaraipu n a variety of snake
pai (poss: aꞌpai1) n 1) point Ɨꞌrɨ ꞌpai yau toꞌ nesii? At what point were they? 2) stretch along a river 3) place along a river
-pai want Utɨnpaiꞌnokon. Let us all go./I want us all to go Ɨutɨpai toꞌ man. They want to go.
paiki (poss: apaikii) n bag, sack, pack
paima n mermaid

© 2014 SIL International®

100

Akawaio-English Dictionary

paipaiso n (non-possessed) a variety of bird with a loud, high-pitched song
Pairamen nprop the name given to a small creek on the Upper Mazaruni bottom-side from Jawalla, on the left side going down-river
paisima var. of paisin
paisin (var: paisima) n poison
paiwa (poss: apaiwarʉ) n a relatively strong form of the traditional cassava drink
paiwari var. of payawaru
paiwatʉpu n a variety of tree, candlewood tree Euphorbia antisphyllitica
paꞌka vt remove, take out Ipaꞌkaꞌpʉ uya. I
removed it.
epaꞌka (der.) vr 1) go out 2) go outside 3) escape paꞌkanʉkʉ (der.) vt let out
paka n (non-possessed) domesticated cow or bull
pakaꞌ n a variety of small, red bird with white on back and tail, known for its beauty
paꞌkanʉkʉ (der. of paꞌka) vt let someone out from a building Toꞌ uya upaꞌkanʉkʉꞌpʉ. They
let me outside.
pakara n 1) a small bag used to carry matches on a trip 2) a type of bag carried by piyai'ma (a mythical giant) to carry things in 3) a type of disease that causes a bag, or inflammation of something under the arm
paꞌkaraka vt scatter
pakira n (non-possessed) a variety of small, wild bush pig
pakirau n (non-possessed) a variety of bird similar to the swallow
paꞌko1 nom something small Paꞌko pe kanau esi. The boat is small.
paꞌko2 nom foolish, or mad

paꞌkupa (cf: kupaꞌkupaꞌ) n (non-possessed) a variety of large, purple banana
paꞌkʉrai n 1) a variety of berry, edible 2) a variety of berry bush
pakʉtan n 1) (non-possessed) backdam, away from any settled area 2) inland area 3) farm area away from the village
pamʉ vi be or become frightened Itemʉꞌ pamʉꞌpʉ. His face became frightened.
pan n 1) increase, either for the worse or for the better Ipan pe rɨ toꞌ usiꞌnʉkʉꞌpʉ. They were very frightened. Sises usentuꞌmaꞌpʉ pan pe toꞌ pɨꞌ. Jesus felt much pity for them. Pan pe iyenasaꞌ. She has become worse (more sick). (Or,
she has become even more of a stealer, or whatever
else you have been talking about.) 2) emphatic Ɨꞌrɨ pan pʉse sɨ emiyaꞌneꞌ rɨ! Is he ever lazy!
panaꞌ nom 1) someone or something strong Panaꞌ pe iyesi. He is strong. 2) difficult to correct or adjust
pana (poss: apana) n ear ipanapʉn a deaf person; literally 'without ears' (id.: aku pana)
pana eꞌma var. of pana euta
pana euta (var: pana eꞌma) ear canal
pana iꞌnarɨ ear drum
pana kiri ear lobe
panaꞌ pan (cf: saꞌman) nom 1) someone or something strong Panaꞌ pan itewan. He is emotionally strong. syn: apʉiꞌkeꞌ, meruntɨ 1 . 2) someone stubborn
panaipan nom something warped, especially related to boats
panaꞌkaꞌ nom something or someone noisy Panaꞌkaꞌ iyesi. He is noisy. opp: tʉtʉi 2 .
panakonta n the point at which a branch divides into two branches

© 2014 SIL International®

101

Akawaio-English Dictionary

panama vt warn Toꞌ panamaꞌpʉ ina uya. We
warned them.
panamari var. of paramari
panaꞌpantanʉkʉ vt strengthen, make strong syn: meruntɨtanʉkʉ .
panaꞌpiyoꞌ n (non-possessed) a variety of small, creek fish, known as patwa
panaꞌpo n a variety of mushroom that takes a long time to grow
panasika n a type of hook made from wire
panaꞌtɨ vt 1) tell Toron amʉꞌ panaꞌtɨꞌpʉ itakon uya. His brother told birds. 2) advise
paꞌne postp in groups of Ɨsiꞌtɨꞌ tikin paꞌne.
Come (up) one-by-one.
panka (poss: apankari) n sieve, used to sift grated cassava before baking cassava bread
pankaiꞌ n (non-possessed) a local style of waricha in the shape of a triangle and not open in the back like the more traditional warishi; usually also less sturdy than the other; worn in the same way
panta n 1) branch of a tree Saraurai yeꞌ panta po toꞌ enkurumʉ koroꞌtau, .. .. As they climbed on the branch of the saraurai tree, . . .. 2) branch of a river tuna panta the branch of a river
pantaka (var: pataika) vt 1) branch off, leave the trail 2) divide Ina pantakapɨtʉꞌpʉ toꞌ uya 7 peꞌne. They divided us into groups of seven. epantaka (der.) 1) vr branch off 2) vi deviate
pantaꞌma vt 1) fight Ɨnʉꞌ uya pʉse pantaꞌma? Who is fighting this person? 2) beat
pantarʉka vt break off branches Warapari yeꞌ pantarʉkaꞌpʉ iya. He broke branches from the
warabari tree.
panton (poss: apantomʉ) n story
paꞌnʉꞌ var. of paꞌnʉkʉ

paꞌnʉkʉ (var: paꞌnʉꞌ) 1) vt curse Ipaꞌnʉkʉꞌpʉ uya. I cursed him. 2) vi be or become shocked
Papa 1) nprop the name given to God; Father God; the Creator God, God of the universe, infinite in Being and transcending time, etc. syn: Kaatʉ . 2) n grandfather, for direct address indir add: tamokori . Papa Aꞌkwarʉ (comp.) nprop Holy Spirit
Papa Aꞌkwarʉ (comp. of Papa, aꞌkwa1, see under Papa) nprop Holy Spirit, the Spirit of God, the manifestation of God at work in and through his believers syn: orekoꞌ.
papai n 1) (non-possessed) father, direct address, term used by children with the equivalent of 'Daddy' indir add: kʉipʉnʉ1 1 . 2) grandfather, direct address 3) uncle, one's father's brother, direct address indir add: kʉipʉnʉ1 2 . 4) uncle; more specifically one's mother's sister's husband, direct address indir add: kʉipʉnʉ1 3 .
papaꞌtan n 1) cousin 2) grandfather, direct address 3) old man, direct address
paraꞌ n a variety of large, black wasp
Paraiꞌkau nprop the name given to the falls; sometimes called 'Wild Cow Falls' nobody seems to know why
paraꞌkari (poss: aparaꞌkarii) n a variety of cassava drink, stronger than normal
parakwa (poss: aparakwaai) n 1) a variety of tree, known as mora tree 2) mora tree seed
paramari (var: panamari) n 1) paint 2) tar
paran n 1) illness, sickness, a general term ɨsɨ paran eꞌtoꞌ oton mɨꞌta awɨrɨ rɨ A severe illness will come here. 2) epidemic 3) trouble
paranakʉrʉ n (non-possessed) white person
paranka (poss: aparankaai) n lumber, boards Paranka amʉꞌ eꞌmaꞌtɨiꞌ ina uya. We are

© 2014 SIL International®

102

Akawaio-English Dictionary

drugging boards.
parantarai n 1) (non-possessed) a variety of bird, known as bell bird 2) preying mantis
parapi (poss: aparapii) n plate, something to hold food while one eats it
pararaipu n a variety of snake that can jump, bushmaster snake syn: sarɨimɨ .
paraꞌta (poss: aparaꞌtaai) n a variety of tree, the bulletwood tree, the rubber tree, also produces a type of fruit
parau n 1) (non-possessed) ocean, sea 2) flood
parauwiꞌ (var: parawʉi) n 1) a variety of animal that lives underwater, possibly walrus syn: paruwena 1 . 2) capybara
parawakasi n a variety of tree, trysil tree Pentaclethra
paraꞌwʉ n (non-possessed) wood plank boat
parawʉi var. of parauwiꞌ capybara
pare1 (var: parenkoꞌso; var: parenkoꞌko; poss: apare) n 1) an abdominal organ, likely the spleen, or the pancreas 2) labia, the outer portion of a woman's sex organ
pare2 n slug
parekoꞌso n a chicken's comb kɨrɨtɨkɨ parekoꞌsooi a chicken's comb
parenkoꞌko var. of pare1 parenkoꞌso var. of pare1
parepʉ (poss: aparepʉʉi) n a variety of nut small, oblong, yellow-orange, from a palm tree with very bitter flavour
pareta (poss: aparetaai) n ground itch
paꞌreura n a variety of lily Hippeastrum puniceum
paꞌri n grandchild, direct address indir add: pa1 .
pari (poss: aparii) n rack, shelf

parikiꞌsi n prison
pariꞌkiya1 (var: pariꞌya) n (non-possessed) a variety of multi-coloured parrot
pariꞌkiya2 var. of pɨrɨꞌkiya
pariri n barrel
parisara1 n a style of indigenous singing and dancing
parisara2 n a type of alcoholic drink pariꞌya var. of pariꞌkiya1
parɨ adv more inke pʉra parɨ more quickly Aꞌneꞌ pe parɨ ikuꞌkɨ. Make it more hot.
paru2 n 1) a variety of tree 2) the seed from the same tree
paru1 (cf: apɨrʉ) n creek kan paru Kanparu, the
settlement, named after the creek beside it, which is
named Kan syn: apɨrʉ .
paruiꞌ (poss: aparusi) n younger sister of a male aparusi your younger sister
Paruimɨ nprop 1) the name given to an Arekuna village beyond Waramatan 2) the name given to the river on which the village Paruimɨ is situated
paruka vt bail water Kanau parukaꞌpʉ uya. I bailed water from the canoe. opp: paruꞌtɨ2 ; syn: iꞌkwamʉ 1 .
Parupa 1) nprop the name given to a small creek running behind the Alleluia church in Jawalla village 2) n a variety of fruit tree
paruꞌpɨ n (non-possessed) meat broth usari paruꞌpɨ deer broth
paruru n (non-possessed) a variety of large plantain paruru iꞌtoꞌsaꞌ plantain drink
paruꞌtɨ2 vt dilute Tuma paruꞌtɨꞌpʉ uya. I diluted the pepperpot. opp: paruka .
paruꞌtɨ1 var. of parʉka

© 2014 SIL International®

103

Akawaio-English Dictionary

paruwe n 1) (non-possessed) a variety of tree having a wide trunk at ground level 2) the seed of the same tree
Paruwe pai nprop the name given to a place above I'moi ken along the Kukui River, named after the tree which is prevalent in the area
paruwena n 1) a variety of river mammal, common in the Kamʉran River, possibly the walrus syn: parauwiꞌ 1 . 2) capybara
parʉka (var: paruꞌtɨ1) vt pour, empty casiri from the cooking pot into a barrel Mɨrɨpan ina uya kanan iparʉkakapʉ aꞌtai, And then, when
we pour it again,
eparʉka (der.) vi poured
parʉra n a fine-toothed comb used for removing nits from hair
paꞌsanon var. of paꞌse
paꞌse (var: paꞌsanon) n 1) niece; a man's sister's daughter 2) daughter-in-law; a man's son's wife
pasi (poss: apasi) n older sister, indirect address toꞌ pasi ton their sisters tʉpasi kon their own sister syn: miꞌmiꞌ 3 ; dir add: asi1 .
pasiko n (non-possessed) younger sisters, a term of mutual identification among members of the Alleluia Church Ayakaru rɨpoi rɨ peꞌ mewakʉmai pen pasiko. Are you not glad with
all your spirit, sisters?
paꞌsima vt 1) watch 2) guard 3) care
pasiꞌwa n older sister to a male
pasiꞌwʉ n a variety of tree, the leaves of which are used for thatch
paꞌta var. of pata
pata (var: paꞌta; poss: apata) n 1) place 2) the Holy City, Heaven 3) settlement
pata moronnʉꞌpʉ n a disease from visiting a place one never visited before; now, it is known to be malaria

pataika var. of pantaka
pataka vt 1) imitate Mɨrɨpan manare iꞌpopɨtʉ iya koroꞌtau toꞌ uya ipatakapɨtʉ esiꞌpʉ. And
while he stripped manare, they were imitating him. 2)
repeat, tell about something that happened patama vt plant Ekki yeꞌ patamaiꞌ toꞌ utɨꞌpʉ.
They went to plant cassava sticks. (lit: to give something a place) patantɨ nom someone mischievous or wild Patantɨ pe iyeꞌpɨtʉꞌpʉ. He kept on being mischievous. syn: maminiꞌtɨ .
pataꞌpʉ (cf: wataꞌpʉ) 1) n old place, former place, abandoned settlement 2) after ipataꞌpʉ yaꞌ utɨꞌpʉ. I went after he left.
patarʉ vi stay overnight
pataꞌseꞌ (poss: apataꞌseꞌ) (cf: patatʉseꞌ) n home toꞌ pataꞌseꞌ their place
pataꞌtɨ vt put Tesaꞌ saꞌkii pataꞌtɨꞌpʉ iya tʉmota pɨꞌ. He put his owner's sack on his
shoulder.
patatʉseꞌ (cf: pataꞌseꞌ) n 1) a place of temporary residence, a campsite Mɨrɨpan kon uya patatʉseꞌ esiꞌpʉ wʉꞌ nakapu po kaꞌtau. And so they camped high on a mountain top. 2) a campsite, a temporary place to live
patawa (cf: kunwa) n 1) (non-possessed) a variety of palm tree Jessema sp. 2) thatch roofing from the padawa tree, a medium-quality thatch
paꞌtiya n (non-possessed) watermelon
paꞌto n (non-possessed) boat with outboard motor
pawana (poss: apawanarʉ) n trader, someone from outside Akawaio communities, coming with things to trade Upawanarʉ eponin uyeꞌsaꞌ man. I have come to find my trading
partner/someone who owes me money.

© 2014 SIL International®

104

Akawaio-English Dictionary

pawanaꞌtɨ vt beg Sises pawanaꞌtɨꞌpʉ toꞌ uya, "Ina kʉsennokʉi, taꞌmu kenan pen nɨ yaꞌ!"
They begged Jesus, "Don't send us to the far-away place!"
pawanatoꞌ nom a call for help from someone
Pawin nprop the name given to a small creek bottom-side from Takai'ka pai on the Upper Mazaruni River, on the left going down-river
pawisimʉ n 1) (non-possessed) a variety of creeper vine Aristolochia daemonioxia 2) a variety of yam
Pawisimʉ pai nprop the name given to a landing along the Kukui River near Wanawan Paru, between Pipiri pai and Jawalla
paꞌwʉ n island
pawʉiꞌ n (non-possessed) a variety of wild fowl, easily tamed, known as powis
payan var. of pa1
payawaru (var: paiwari) (cf: ) n (non-possessed) a variety of 'burnt' cassava drink
payunu (poss: apayunu) n son-in-law cf: upayun .
peꞌ question word in questions requiring a yes-no answer Wakʉ pe peꞌ meꞌan? Are you well? Wakʉ pe rɨ. (I'm) well.
pe postp as Ikomiꞌ pe tuna esi. The water is cold.
pee iꞌpoꞌ (poss: ɨpee iꞌpoꞌ) n bangs
peeꞌpɨ (poss: ɨpeeꞌpɨ) n forehead Mɨrɨpan si tʉꞌ anin si Goliath wɨnɨꞌpʉ mɨrɨ ipeeꞌpɨ pɨꞌ.
So, with only a stone, he hit Goliath on his forehead.
Peimɨ pai nprop the name given to a settlement along both sides of the Upper Mazaruni River between Kako and Kamʉran
peipan n 1) a single-sided backpack used to collect clay for making pots 2) case for holding and transporting multiple numbers of cassava

bread cakes syn: wapiro . peiruku n pig, a domesticated pig
peisuꞌka (cf: pisuꞌka) vt kiss epeisuꞌka vr kiss
peiꞌtɨ vt fill Toꞌ uya si asaꞌrɨ rɨ marɨ tʉkanwa kon peiꞌtɨꞌpʉ. They filled their two boats (with
fish).
peitura n (non-possessed) a variety of water turtle
pekai (poss: ɨpekaai) n bald head Pekai pan iyesi. He is bald.
pekwa vt burn Wakʉ pe rɨken ipekwakɨ. Keep
it burning good.
pen adv not Toꞌ pen peꞌ utɨꞌpʉ? It wasn't they
who went?
pena (var: penaroꞌ) adv 1) long ago 2) forever syn: inke 3, tɨwɨrɨ 1 .
penanne nom an early time Penanne awanakʉiꞌ pata esi. It is very early in the morning. opp: emenʉꞌpʉ .
penaroꞌ var. of pena
penputu (var: punpupu) n (non-possessed) a variety of dung beetle, with a cap-like head covering
pentɨ n fish net, closely knit
peꞌpaꞌ n a flat place; a flat thing Peꞌpaꞌ pe ikonekakɨ. Make the place flat.
pereiꞌ (poss: ɨperesi) n elbow
pereiꞌ rʉꞌpʉ appendix
pereikɨ n (non-possessed) a variety of large duck with a long beak
pero (cf: iyoꞌneꞌ) n (non-possessed) dog
peꞌrupeꞌru n a variety of catfish; edible
peseꞌtɨ n (non-possessed) wind, breeze

© 2014 SIL International®

105

Akawaio-English Dictionary

peꞌtapuru n lid for a cooking pot ɨinɨ peꞌtapuru the pot's lid
peten1 nom available to do a job Tanporon nɨ esi peten pʉra. Everyone is busy/not available.
peten2 n anchor Mɨrɨ aꞌtai, kanau kuꞌnin peten anʉmʉꞌpʉ toꞌ uya At that time, they took
up the anchor
peꞌtoꞌkoroꞌmaꞌpʉ n (non-possessed) the starch that settles out from the water squeezed from grated cassava when a tenki' is used; can be rubbed onto cassava bread as it is baking
peyaꞌ (poss: ɨpeyakʉrʉ) n landing
peyoꞌ n a type of skin disease
pi n 1) younger brother of a female; also used in direct address 2) son; more specifically, a woman's son; for direct address indir add: mu1 .
pika1 n (non-possessed) a variety of beautiful, burnt-red-colored bird with a long tail and distinctive call
pika2 vt heat, as in the effect of the sun on the earth Ɨsɨ pe rɨ iꞌpai pikaꞌpʉ iya. It (the sun)
heated his head so that it hurt.
pikaꞌtɨ vt 1) help Elias pikaꞌtɨꞌpʉ uya. I helped Elias. Sipikaꞌtɨyaiꞌ. I am helping (someone/at something). 2) save in a physical sense, from a burning house or from drowning in the river 3) save, especially God saving mankind from their sins by sending Jesus Ɨpikaꞌtɨnin kon entusaꞌ man, Kʉrai, Itepuru. Your saviour has been born, Christ, the Lord. syn: koneka 5, moꞌka 3 . epikaꞌtɨ (der.) vr 1) help oneself 2) help each other 3) help oneself to something
pikonpɨꞌ n a variety of bird
piꞌkwa vt blink Enu piꞌkwaꞌpʉ uya. I blinked my
eyes.
piꞌnaꞌ n a variety of fish with a skinny nose

pininpa vt carry, walk with something or someone Itekepu pininpaꞌpʉ ikʉipʉnʉ uya.
His father carried his body around.
upinimʉ (der.) vi walk
pipi (poss: ɨpipi) n older brother, for a female; also used in direct address
Pipi nprop the name given to a creek that flows into the Kukui River at the village of Pipiri pai
Pipiri pai nprop the name given to the Akawayo village on the Kukui River at the mouth of Pipi creek
pipɨꞌ2 n a variety of insect that smells like a stink bug when mashed
pipɨꞌ1 n a variety of plant that burns one's skin piꞌpɨ (poss: ɨpiꞌpɨ) n 1) skin 2) fish scales 3)
turtle shell piꞌpɨpʉn (der.) scaleless
tʉpiꞌpɨkenan (der.) nom scaled
piꞌpɨpʉn (der. of piꞌpɨ) without scales, referring to skin fish Koruwaꞌ esi moroꞌ piꞌpɨpʉn. Koruwak is a fish without scales. spec: tenmaꞌsa; gen: moroꞌ.
piriꞌka vt 1) shave 2) cut one's hair
pirikʉ2 (var: piriꞌtɨ) vt 1) enlarge, make more 2) make something to increase
pirikʉ1 nom something added to a larger whole, in addition to Tanporon kon pona ɨpʉreman tawon piriꞌnin pe, . . .. In addition to telling them to be praying for everyone, . . .. cf: tonpaꞌtɨ .
pirimoꞌ n (non-possessed) dragonfly Libellula depressa
pirimokon n a variety of fruit
piriꞌori var. of piriyori
piriꞌoro var. of piriyori
piriꞌtɨ var. of pirikʉ2

© 2014 SIL International®

106

Akawaio-English Dictionary

piriukwa vt pelt
piriyoi n (non-possessed) a variety of tree-climbing vine with red, trumpet-like flowers
piriyori (var: piriꞌoro; var: piriꞌori) n (non-possessed) a variety of short, green bean
Piroi nprop the name of a creek on the Upper Mazaruni River, bottom-side to Jawalla
Piroi Ken nprop the name given to the settlement located at the mouth of the Piroi creek, along the Upper Mazaruni River, down-river from Jawalla
pirorʉnpa vt make someone scream mɨrɨ uya ipirorʉnpapɨtʉ. That makes him scream.
piroto n 1) lead, used for fishing weights and bullets 2) bullet 3) mud ball 4) projectile 5) bulletwood tree Manilkara bidentata
pisaꞌma vt mash, trample Epeꞌ kenaꞌ pe teꞌsen tiwanoꞌ kon kʉsenoꞌmatʉu peiruku amʉꞌ enaꞌ toꞌ uya ipisaꞌma esi. Don't throw your own
expensive things to dogs for them to trample on them.
pisi (poss: ɨꞌsi) n calf, the lower half of the leg
piꞌsikʉ vt 1) drag Ipiꞌsikʉꞌpʉ toꞌ uya apoꞌ piyapai. They dragged it from the fire. 2) pull
Piꞌsiwon (var: Iꞌsiwon) nprop the Alleluia prophet
Pisuꞌ nprop the name given to a creek running into the Kukui River up-river from Jawalla village
pisuꞌka (cf: peisuꞌka) vt smack one's lips Teꞌpi pisuꞌkaꞌpʉ iya. She smacked her lips.
piꞌtɨ vt heal someone epiꞌtɨ (der.) vi 1) heal 2) treat
epiꞌtɨnin (der.) n 1) health care worker 2) healer usepiꞌtɨ (der.) vr healed

piyaꞌ postp 1) by Ɨpiyaꞌ nokon uyeeꞌsaꞌ. I have come by you all. 2) to sclr prop: piyaꞌ 2, piyau 1 . 3) toward
piyaiꞌma n (non-possessed) giant dir add: Atatai .
Piyaiꞌma pai nprop the name given to a bay along the Upper Mazaruni River, above Imbaimadai
piyaiꞌma pʉmʉi giant pepper
piyaiꞌma wariꞌsa var. of ene wariꞌsa
piyaiꞌsan n 1) (non-possessed) shaman, a person who deals with spirits and the spirit world syn: enewokeꞌ . 2) the act of practising shamanism Piyaiꞌsan esi piyaiꞌsan pɨꞌ. The shaman is
practising shamanism.
piyan (cf: ariya) n 1) (non-possessed) a variety of bat-catching bird with a night-time screech 2) eagle
piyapai postp away from Makoi uya imoꞌka toꞌ piyapai. The devil takes it from them.
piyapaino (poss: ɨpiyapainorʉ) n orphan
piyaꞌpaꞌpɨ vt purify a house from illness using smoke and ritual Eꞌneꞌ piyaꞌpaꞌpɨ piyaiꞌsan uya. The piyaichang purified (the house) of illness.
piyaꞌpɨ n piece, section eki piyaꞌpɨ a piece of cassava bread sikaru piyaꞌpɨ a short section of
sugar cane
piyaꞌtɨ vt begin
piyau postp 1) beside sclr prop: piyaꞌ 2, piyau 1 . 2) at piyawon (attrib.) n
piyawon (attrib. of piyau) n
piyɨꞌ n 1) a variety of tree with edible fruit similar to the orange 2) a variety of wild fruit from the same tree

© 2014 SIL International®

107

Akawaio-English Dictionary

piyɨꞌnʉkʉ vt make someone feel shame Emiyaꞌpokeꞌ pe teꞌsan piyɨꞌnʉꞌtoꞌ tʉuya iyai pe. Their wisdom is their shame. Serɨ tasaꞌ auya aꞌtai, ina piyɨꞌnʉꞌpɨꞌpɨtʉ auya. When you say
that, you shame us.
epiyɨtʉ (der.) vi embarrassed
piyoꞌ n blackhead, pimple
pɨ vt shoot (with a dart and blow pipe Ɨpɨ uya. I
am shooting you (with a dart and blow pipe).
pɨꞌ postp 1) to Ereuta pʉra rɨ tenki ta pɨꞌ, esi serɨ Papa pɨꞌ, ɨpɨꞌꞌnokon. I have not rested with saying thanks, to God, for you all. 2) toward 3) in order to 4) about 5) on 6) with Ereuta pʉra rɨ tenki ta pɨꞌ, esi serɨ Papa pɨꞌ, ɨpɨꞌꞌnokon. I
have not rested with saying thanks, to God, for you
all. 7) for Ereuta pʉra rɨ tenki ta pɨꞌ, esi serɨ Papa pɨꞌ, ɨpɨꞌꞌnokon. I have not rested with
saying thanks, to God, for you all.
-pɨꞌ var. of -pɨtʉ
pɨinkɨ (poss: ɨpɨinkɨri) n a variety of wild pig
pɨirɨ n a variety of plant from which is taken a medicine to treat kuwasu'
pɨkɨ postp 1) behind 2) after
pɨkɨi n a variety of tree
pɨkɨrɨ 1) postp with Toꞌ pɨkɨrɨ kɨꞌtʉu. Don't go with them. toꞌ ɨpʉrema nɨrɨ ɨsipɨkɨrɨ they also pray with each other 2) postp before, in front of Simon Peter uya se eꞌkupʉ toꞌkaꞌnʉꞌsaꞌ aꞌtai, iyeꞌsekunkaꞌpʉ Sises enupɨkɨrɨ. When
Simon Peter realized what had happened, he kneeled
before Jesus. 3) cause "Ɨꞌrɨ rɨ pʉse rɨ umaꞌtatoꞌ ipɨkɨrɨ eposaꞌ uya pʉra man," taꞌpʉ iya. "He
has done nothing to cause him to die," he said.
pɨkɨron (attrib.) n
pɨkɨron (attrib. of pɨkɨrɨ) n
pɨmɨ vt plant Tʉwɨꞌpɨnse! Plant!

eꞌpɨmɨ (der.) vi plant
pɨnɨ vt shoot a prey with a blowpipe Toron pɨnɨꞌpʉ uya. I shot a bird.
pɨpiyaꞌmu n heel syn: pɨpiyaꞌsa .
pɨpiyaꞌsa n heel syn: pɨpiyaꞌmu .
pɨpu n 1) (non-possessed) a large variety of grass, sectioned like bamboo; grass from which boys make short blow pipe 2) a whistle made from the kwɨpu grass cf: wai2 .
pɨrau var. of pʉrau n illegitimate, a child born without his mother being legally married
pɨꞌre n a variety of tree
pɨrin be or become moving pɨrin pe rɨ tʉukoꞌmansen. living without moving.
pɨrinka vt 1) move Ɨnʉꞌ uya tɨꞌ pɨrinkatoꞌ pe uruwaiꞌ nɨpon? Who will roll the stone (from the) tomb opening? 2) roll
pɨrɨꞌka vt 1) inquire, ask about isapatooi pɨrɨꞌkapɨꞌnin nan those inquiring about her shoes 2) rebuke
pɨrɨꞌkiya (var: pariꞌkiya2) n a variety of small bird with white beak and dark feathers, screeching call
pɨrɨtuku n 1) (non-possessed) a variety of large, poisonous frog that lives underwater 2) a variety of toad
pɨrɨu (poss: ɨpʉre) n arrow
pɨrɨukansaꞌ n a variety of soup (tuma) that consists primarily of meat
Pɨrɨyumɨ nprop the name given to a small creek top-side from A'piu pai on the Upper Mazaruni River
pɨrʉkɨ n a type of intestinal disease; threadworms
pɨꞌsai var. of pɨꞌsɨi
pɨꞌsɨi (var: pɨꞌsɨiꞌ; var: pɨꞌsai) n (non-possessed)

© 2014 SIL International®

108

Akawaio-English Dictionary

a variety of small bird with a long tail that gives short, high calls pɨꞌsɨiꞌ var. of pɨꞌsɨi
pɨtɨ (poss: ɨpɨtɨ) n chest syn: poropo 1 .
pɨtɨ siꞌpoꞌ (poss: ɨpɨtɨ siꞌpoꞌ) n chest hair
pɨtɨne (var: pɨtɨnɨ; poss: ɨpɨtɨneei) n a variety of mussel, bivalve syn: rato 2 .
pɨtɨnɨ var. of pɨtɨne
pɨtura n chin ipɨtura siꞌpoꞌ his chin hair/beard
pɨtura siꞌpoꞌ (poss: ɨpɨtura siꞌpoꞌ) n beard
pɨtʉ vt pick Ɨri pe rɨ tepetasen epetasaꞌ pɨtʉ kaꞌpon amʉꞌ uya pʉra rɨ si mɨrɨ. People do
not pick bad fruit.
-pɨtʉ (var: -pɨꞌ) 1) present continuous tense Ikoꞌmamʉ -pɨtʉ -ꞌpʉ He continued to stay (there). Utɨ -pɨtʉ -ꞌpʉ. I used to go / went often. 2) repeated action sense
pɨyɨ n cassava bread made hard, to last a long time sclr prop: ekeꞌnan 1, akuse, pɨyɨ .
po1 postp 1) on 2) onto Tʉron nɨ pata poi rɨ iyepaꞌkaꞌpʉ. He came out onto another place.
po2 nom something delicious or tasty Tuma esi po pe. The pepperpot is tasty.
poi (var: woi) (cf: aꞌkɨrɨ) postp 1) with Ensin poi utɨꞌpʉ. I went by way of engine. 2) from, from off of Iyuꞌtɨꞌpʉ tʉikʉn poi. He came off of his pet (donkey). 3) by way of
poirɨ1 postp nearby
poirɨ2 n a variety of tree, the bark of which is boiled and drunk to stop excessive menstrual bleeding Pouteria sp.
poito (poss: ɨpoitorʉ) n 1) nephew 2) son-in-law 3) a male cousin of another male 4) servant, helper 5) disciple Mɨrɨpan kon enaꞌpʉ Sises poitorʉ ton pe. And they became Jesus' disciples.

poitoma vt praise Tʉpoitoma pe ekama iya.
He thinks he is being praised.
Poitoꞌma (cf: Orosikoꞌ) 1) nprop (non-possessed) the name given to a group of people living between the Upper Mazaruni and Venezuela, having no outside contact 2) n people who live in the bush and shun contact with other humans 3) n evil spirits
poka vt 1) spear fish with bow and arrow Moroꞌ pokaiꞌ utɨnpai. Let's go and spear fish. 2) shoot any other animal for food 3) nail Ipokapɨꞌsaꞌ rʉꞌpʉ kurusuꞌ pona. He (is) the one who was
nailed on a cross.
poken2 n comfort ipoken pe ɨwesi you are her
comfort
poken1 adv might be, likely, possible Ipoken peꞌ ɨpʉrataai nai? Is your money (change) right? Imaꞌtakapʉ poken si. It is likely he wil die. Pon tuꞌkunapɨtʉ uya poken man, tunaꞌkwa taꞌ utɨ yau. I might wash the clothes, if I were to go
down to the river.
pokoi (poss: ɨpokooi) n sadness Pokoi peꞌ nai? Are you sad? opp: poriꞌ . upokoita (der.) vi sadden
pokoita vi 1) be or become sad Ipokoitaꞌpʉ ipɨꞌ. He was sad at her/because of her condition. 2) be or become sorry
pokoitanʉkʉ vt make someone sad Mɨrɨ uya ina pokoitanʉkʉ. That makes us sad.
pokon postp together with ɨnoꞌpʉ pokon pe
together with your wife
pokʉrʉ (poss: ɨpokʉrʉʉi) n belt
pon2 n 1) a bird's nest 2) a wasp's nest 3) a spider's web
pon1 (poss: ɨpon) (cf: won1) n 1) covering 2) clothes 3) dress 4) shirt
pon enu (poss: ɨpon enu) n button (lit: clothesꞌ

© 2014 SIL International®

109

Akawaio-English Dictionary

eye) enuꞌtɨ (der.) vt button
pon nakaꞌtawon n shirt
pon ton (poss: ɨpon ton) clothes, multiple items of clothes
pona postp 1) to 2) in 3) in the direction of 4) onto 5) until mɨrɨ pona rɨ until then
ponantɨ vt build a fire, start a fire apoꞌ ponantɨꞌpʉ iya eke rɨ. He built a big fire.
poni (poss: ɨponi) n navel, belly button
ponsiꞌkɨ postp from syn: awonsiꞌkɨ 2 .
pontɨ vt 1) cover Oꞌ pontɨkɨ. Cover the meat. 2) dress epontɨ (der.) vr dress oneself
pooiꞌpɨ (var: poꞌpɨ) nom something old Pooiꞌpɨ pe ensin esi. The engine is old. opp: emennaꞌ 1.
poꞌpɨ var. of pooiꞌpɨ poraiꞌ n a variety of weaved walling
poreka n a variety of tree
Poreporeimɨ nprop the name given to a mythical bridge, believed to be a camoudi
poriꞌ n (non-possessed) someone happy opp: pokoi .
poriꞌma vt make happy Wrenton poriꞌmaꞌpʉ Winston uya. Winston made Wrenton happy. eporiꞌma (der.) vr happy
poro1 (poss: ɨipa poro) (cf: maipa; cf: kuran; cf: akarasa; cf: wairawoꞌ) n (non-possessed) a variety of fruit tree, waiti (small pods)
poro2 postp at mʉ poro rɨ at there poropo (var: pʉropo) n 1) chest, breast toron
poropo the bird's chest/breast syn: pɨtɨ . 2) lungs

cf: upʉroꞌmerumʉ .
pororomai n a variety of fruit tree, waiti
posi n a small calabash bowl
posiꞌma vt 1) fan a fire, to make it burn brighter or hotter Apoꞌ posiꞌmakɨ. Fan the fire. 2) blow, like the wind
posin nom 1) something delicious, usually referring to the taste of meat or local soup posin pe oꞌ esi. The meat is delicious. 2) something nutritious
potawa (poss: ɨpotawaai) n extra, left-over, reserve Ɨpotawaai oton tʉkuꞌse entaꞌnakɨ.
Eat some and leave some for later.
poꞌtɨ vt 1) light apoꞌ poꞌtɨ, apoꞌ ipoꞌtɨkɨ, apoꞌ ipoꞌtɨtɨꞌ light the fire; command for one person; command for more than one person 2) burn 3) clean, as in cleaning one's farm by burning up the cut-down jungle on it Amainarʉ tʉpoꞌtɨpɨꞌse! Clean your farm! epoꞌtɨ (der.) vr burning
potoꞌpotoꞌ nom something shaking back and forth, like an unbalanced kɨwɨ'
poꞌtoro n bottle
pouta (poss: ɨpoutaai) n powder
powa (var: puwa; poss: ɨpowaai) n 1) a variety of tree, Balsam of Peru tree Myroxyl peruiferum 2) medicine taken from the same tree
pu vt burn a spot on the skin Waruwa uya upusaꞌ. The waruwa burned me (on the skin).
puꞌ pʉn (pl: puꞌ pʉnon) nom someone without knowledge or insight, ignorant, senseless Puꞌpʉnon ekoneka, Papa. Those without
knowledge are getting ready, God.
puꞌ pʉnon pl. of puꞌ pʉn
puꞌ pʉra 1) ignorant 2) n forgetting, not remembering

© 2014 SIL International®

110

Akawaio-English Dictionary

puꞌkeꞌ n wisdom Iyeꞌsaꞌ Saraman puꞌketʉ etaseꞌna. She came to hear Solomon's wisdom. Puꞌ pʉn! You foolish person!
puꞌkenaꞌ (poss: ɨpuꞌketʉ) n (non-possessed) prophet, usually from the Bible or from Aleluia traditions and history
puꞌkuima vt 1) get a short haircut Ipuꞌkuimaꞌpʉ. I got a short haircut. 2) prune a fruit tree, for it to bear more fruit
puma vt blow Candle pumakɨ. Blow (out) the
candle.
pun2 n a variety of snake that is slow-moving, black and white and moves more like a worm
pun3 nom thick, as smoke is thick Ipun pe ikɨrɨsin eꞌtoꞌ oton. The smoke will be thick.
pun1 (poss: ɨpun) n 1) flesh Mɨrɨ Main ekonekasaꞌ esiꞌpʉ ipun pe. And the Word was made (into) flesh. 2) body 3) muscle
-pun having many of something Waꞌkapunkaꞌsaꞌ pe iten ton esi. It had many axes in its mouth.
puneꞌ n fat
punpupu var. of penputu
punuꞌka vt pinch Apaꞌse punuꞌkakɨ. Pinch your
neice.
punuꞌpɨ n 1) crumbs eki punuꞌpɨ cassava bread crumbs 2) shavings 3) dust
punwe (poss: ɨpunwerʉ) n a cord-type fish net Moroꞌ amʉꞌ aꞌsiꞌ punwe yaꞌ. I am catching fish
with a net.
pupiyau postp 1) under Masurin pupiyau under the Mazaruni River 2) below, especially referring to the surface of water
puꞌpɨ (poss: aꞌpai2) n 1) head 2) hair spec: inseꞌ .
puꞌpɨ ɨꞌpʉ n skull
puru1 n a variety of tree with fruit to pick puru

mu; puru monsa the covering of the new leaf or
flower pod of the puru tree
puru2 vt 1) smoke a thatch roof in order to cure it for a long life Ina iwʉꞌ puru toꞌ uya iyaꞌmota namaiꞌ. They are smoking our house so it doesn't rot. 2) toast cassava bread or meat with some oil on a griddle cf: putu2 . 3) scorch, as in the sun scorching a plant in dry weather eꞌpuru (der.) (var eꞌpu) vr roasting
purukoꞌpo n anything for sale purukoꞌpoma var. of kʉrʉpoꞌpoma sell
puruꞌku (poss: ɨpuruꞌkuui) n 1) pants 2) shorts purukuꞌpoma var. of kʉrʉpoꞌpoma sell
purumapi n a variety of black berry, the bush of which has leaves similar to sandpaper
purusuꞌ var. of kurusuꞌ
puruwe n rubber tree
puꞌsi n cat puꞌtɨkaꞌnʉkʉ var. of puꞌtɨkaꞌnʉpʉ
puꞌtɨkaꞌnʉpʉ (var: upuꞌtɨkaꞌnʉkʉ; var: puꞌtɨkaꞌnʉkʉ) vt 1) forget Mary uya tanporo serɨ puꞌtɨkaꞌnʉpʉ pʉra iyesiꞌpʉ. Mary didn't forget any of these things. 2) neglect
putu1 (poss: ɨputu) n 1) the point of a pencil, stick or other object 2) point of an arrow 3) upper lip low stat: eꞌpi 1 . 4) bow of a boat 5) bill, beak of a bird toron putu a bird's beak
putu2 vt roast Moroꞌ putuꞌpʉ uya. I roasted fish. moroꞌ puꞌsaꞌ roasted fish cf: puru2 2 .
putu piꞌpɨ n the upper lip low stat: eꞌpi 1 .
putuꞌsiꞌ pan nom something pointed
putuꞌsiꞌpoꞌ (poss: ɨputuꞌsiꞌpoꞌ) n moustache
putuꞌsiꞌtɨ vt make pointed Iputuꞌsiꞌtɨkɨ. Make it
pointed (as in a pencil or arrow).

© 2014 SIL International®

111

Akawaio-English Dictionary

putuꞌtɨ vt sharpen, to make something have a sharp point Yʉi putuꞌtɨpɨtʉꞌpʉ iya. She made
the stick sharp.
puwa var. of powa
-ꞌpʉ 1) past tense Toꞌ userenkaꞌpʉ. They sang. 2) old; previous; previously used as a (stem) pataꞌpʉ the former place (home/farm/etc.)
pʉika vt pick a fruit Puru eperu pʉiꞌpɨꞌseꞌna toꞌ utɨꞌpʉ. They went to pick the fruit of the puru
tree.
pʉꞌkʉ1 (poss: ɨpʉꞌkʉ) (cf: ) n 1) end Ipʉꞌkʉ aꞌsikɨ. Hold the end. ipʉꞌkʉ pʉn nɨ infinite, without end 2) a part of something Ɨꞌrɨ pʉꞌkʉ pona mɨrɨ kupʉ Timothy uya? Until when
should Timothy do that?
pʉꞌkʉ2 n family ɨpʉꞌkʉ ton your family
pʉꞌkʉnaꞌtɨ vt join together inanimate objects Kareta amʉꞌ pʉꞌkʉnaꞌtɨkɨ. Join the papers.
pʉmʉ (poss: ɨꞌmʉ) n neck
pʉmʉi2 n a variety of beetle that explodes at its posterior to ward off preditors, people
pʉmʉi1 (poss: ɨpʉmʉʉi) n a variety of hot pepper with small gourd-shaped fruits on a bush Capsicum frutescens
Pʉmʉi kupai nprop the name given to a bay along the Upper Mazaruni River, above Imbaimadai
pʉmʉkamʉꞌ n a traditional variety of necklace
pʉn postp without negative for a noun phrase or verb phrase Iteseru pʉn warawoꞌ esi. The boy is not smart. Ɨꞌrɨ pe ikupʉ uya pʉn nɨ. I didn't do anything to him. Sises utɨꞌpʉ kaꞌpon amʉꞌ pʉn yaꞌ. Jesus went to a place without people. toꞌ iꞌkiyari pataꞌseꞌ pʉnon kon nɨ they don't plant
food farms
-pʉn negative Aꞌpɨꞌpʉn iyesi. She is not touched

(a virgin). Kane, utɨpʉn. No, I haven't gone.
pʉnʉ vt bathe, give someone a bath Toꞌ uya ipʉnʉꞌpʉ. They gave him a bath.
pʉra adv 1) not Toꞌ pʉra man. They are not here. 2) without tʉꞌtuiꞌ pʉra rɨ without number
pʉrai (poss: ɨpʉraai) n indigenous sandals made from a palm leaf stalk (no longer made), also known as kuwaimonta (is this an Akawayo word?)
Pʉraikoman nprop Elijah, from the Bible's Old Testament, as referred to in Alleluia traditions
pʉraꞌkai (poss: ɨpʉraꞌkaai) n a variety of vegetable bean
pʉrakon (poss: ɨpʉrakon) n 1) ankle 2) base, as in base of a mountain wʉꞌ pʉrakon base of the mountain 3) source
pʉraꞌmu n beaded bracelet worn around leg between knee and ankle
pʉrantin n (non-possessed) plantain
pʉrasokoꞌme vt hurt or injure another's ankle epʉrasokoꞌme (der.) vr hurt one's own ankle
pʉrata (poss: ɨpʉrataai) n money
pʉrataru n 1) throne, Alleluia word Pʉrataru inuꞌtɨkɨ, Papa, inuꞌtɨkɨ, Papa Bring down your throne, God, bring it down, God 2) the ground of Heaven, said to be shiny like silver, particularly in the Alleluia tradition
pʉrau (var: pɨrau) n 1) orphan 2) illegitimate child, bastard
pʉrau yan n a variety of ant that steals another ants' babies (lit: mother of orphans)
pʉreka (poss: ɨpʉrekaai) n an evil spirit that possesses people temporarily and deceives them
pʉrema vt pray for; pray regarding Ɨpʉremaꞌpʉ uya. I prayed for you.

© 2014 SIL International®

112

Akawaio-English Dictionary

pʉremasaꞌ n something or someone consecrated, prayed over or otherwise set aside for religious purposes
pʉremekʉ vt 1) miss Toꞌ uya kanau pʉremekʉꞌpʉ. They missed (getting on) the boat. 2) disobey Amaimu pʉremeꞌnin pen saꞌne urɨ ko. I have not disobeyed your word at all.
pʉremʉ vt put into a line or a row epʉremʉ (der.) (var epʉrenʉ) vr lined
pʉren var. of kurun kanawa
pʉreꞌpoꞌsi (poss: ɨpʉreꞌpoꞌsii) n 1) breakfast 2) lunch
pʉreri n food, any food
pʉresiman n policeman
pʉreti n (non-possessed) bread cf: u .
pʉrikɨ vi be or become patient
pʉroꞌ n 1) surface Wanaꞌ amʉranʉꞌpɨꞌsaꞌ eke pe tuna pʉroꞌ po. A lot of grass collected on the water's surface. mɨ pe rɨ ɨsipʉroꞌpo tɨꞌ eꞌnonkatoꞌ oton pen nɨ those rocks put on top of each other will be thrown down 2) something in a location above something else, on top of tɨwɨ ipʉroꞌpon pokon pe ɨpon eꞌkwatʉi. let him
take the piece of your clothing on top of the one (he is already taking).
pʉroꞌmerɨ (var: pʉroꞌmerumʉ) n heavy breathing, from the chest

pʉroꞌmerumʉ var. of pʉroꞌmerɨ pʉropo var. of poropo
pʉroroi (poss: ɨpʉrorooi) n 1) yard Kɨrɨtɨkɨ amʉꞌ esi Father pʉrorooi po. The chickens are in Father's yard. 2) area
pʉrowa n flour
pʉrʉ n flower petal
pʉsamo pron these, referring to people or living things nearby the speaker
pʉsamoro pron those
pʉsau (poss: aꞌsawʉ) n 1) bowl 2) cup 3) drinking gourd
pʉse pron this; referring to a person or other living thing nearby
pʉta (poss: aꞌta2) n foot pʉta kʉipʉnʉ the large, first toe pʉta epotorʉ the large, first toe
pʉta piꞌpɨ n toenail
pʉta putu n tiptoe Pʉta putu po utɨn. I go by
walking on tip-toe.
pʉtaꞌpʉ (poss: aꞌtaꞌpʉ) n footprint
pʉtari n blind or hunting shelter, built up in a tree to wait in for wild animals to pass Mɨrɨ yau wanaꞌ inakɨ, pʉtari pona utɨ tane. Weed the
grass here while I go to a blind (to hunt).
pwiꞌpwiꞌso n a variety of bird with a loud whistle-like call

Rr

raꞌ postp in sclr prop: raꞌ, rau, rapai . raanꞌpu (poss: aranꞌpuui) n lamp raiꞌpa (poss: araiꞌpaai) n a less-travelled path
through the bush

raitawa n 1) throne, particularly in the Alleluia tradition syn: tawai 1 . 2) place
rakʉiꞌ postp 1) under, as in physical position or authority Iutaꞌmoꞌkaꞌpʉ non rakʉiꞌ itemʉꞌ.

© 2014 SIL International®

113

Akawaio-English Dictionary

He fell, the ground (being) under his face. Papa uya tanporon nɨ tʉsaꞌ irakʉiꞌ. God put everything under him. 2) to Toꞌ nepʉꞌpʉ toꞌ uya mɨrɨ Romans amʉꞌ rakʉiꞌ. They took them to the
Romans.
ransa (poss: aransaai) n lance
rapai postp from in front of sclr prop: raꞌ, rau, rapai .
raꞌrunpa vt carry something, holding it off the ground
rasin (poss: arasimu) n ration kaꞌpon rasimu yen yaꞌ to the man's ration bag
rasiten n squall, strong wind or storm, particularly in the Alleluia tradition and hymns
raꞌtɨ vt 1) twirl, spin Mɨrɨpan iraꞌtɨpɨtʉꞌpʉ iya tʉropai yau. And then he was twirling the rock in his sling. 2) turn over, flip Eki raꞌtɨ iya. She is flipping the cassava bread on the grill. 3) take back something someone has previously given
rato n 1) (non-possessed) water spirit 2) mussel, a bivalve syn: pɨtɨne .
ratoi (poss: aratoi) n 1) a twin to another person cf: ɨsimunuiꞌ 1 . 2) partner 3) opposite Ɨꞌrɨ mɨrɨ eke ratoi? What is the opposite of eke (big)? Aiko esi eke iratoi pe. Aiko (small) is the opposite of eke (big). 4) the other side, opposite from where one is Iratoi pona ina utɨ mɨrɨ. We are going to the other side/place. Iratoi peꞌ ɨutɨpai? Do you want to go across it (the river)?
ratoika vt divide Mɨrɨpan uya tʉimamin ratoikaꞌpʉ toꞌ kaisa rɨ. And he divided his things
between them.
rau postp before, in front of sclr prop: raꞌ, rau, rapai .
rawɨ postp 1) before, in front of Goliath utɨ aꞌtai kaꞌpon utɨpɨꞌpɨtʉꞌpʉ irawɨ rɨ. When Goliath

goes, a person runs before him. 2) before, in time Kamoro upakaꞌpʉ toꞌ rawɨ rɨ. These awoke
before them.
rawoika vt turn over Mɨrɨpan si rawoikaꞌpʉ iya mɨrɨ. Then she turned him over.
rawoirawoima vi be or become rocking back and forth
reꞌkɨ n a variety of edible catfish, skinfish Pimelodus sp. gen: tenmaꞌsa .
remuiꞌ n a variety of hummingbird, with white chest and blue-green back
ren nom glowing, something like a fire Iyepoꞌtɨꞌpʉ ɨsɨ pe irenpansaꞌ esiꞌpʉ. It was burning, very dangerous and glowing. Sises pon enaꞌpʉ iren kenaꞌ pe kamiriꞌ eꞌweiꞌtɨ kasa.
Jesus' clothes became glowing, being lighted like lightning.
repa vt supply Urepakɨ umunkɨ ke. Supply me
with children.
retʉ n 1) horn of a cow, often used as an instrument to call others to a meeting or other event usari retʉ deer horn cf: watapu . 2) antler
rikarika (poss: awaai rikarika) n a variety of musical instrument important in Alleluia tradition, of unknown origin and quality cf: wai2 .
riyuru n a variety of tree from which roofing slats are cut
rɨ (var: nɨ) emphasises the preceding word or phrase Wakʉ pe rɨ. I'm well. kʉrɨ rɨ the very one/he mɨrɨ rɨ that same one
-rɨ var. of -i2
rɨken (var: nɨken) adv only Kaatʉ munkɨ pe rɨken only as God's children.
rɨmo vi be or become exhausted, very tired Irɨmoꞌsaꞌ. He had become very tired.

© 2014 SIL International®

114

Akawaio-English Dictionary

rɨmon var. of rɨmonoꞌ
rɨmonoꞌ (var: rɨmon) n 1) desert-like environment, a place devoid of plant and animal life 2) a flat place or area, a plain opp: wʉꞌ .
rɨnau adv uncertainty, whatever Mɨrɨpan arɨꞌpʉ ɨnʉꞌ uya rɨnawon. Then someone (I don't know
who) took it.
rɨnawon (der.)
rɨnawon (der. of rɨnau)
rɨwʉn n any kind of decoration
roma1 n dark clouds roma2 vi fan, make a breeze ropa (poss: ɨropaai) n 1) rubber 2) something
elastic in nature 3) sling, slingshot rora nom something green in colour, also yellow
or clear Roroimɨ nprop the name given to a mountain
peak at the point where Guyana, Brazil and Venezuela meet. roꞌta n small intestine
rui (var: runan; var: ruita; poss: ɨrui) (cf: aita) n elder brother, to a male, indirect address
ruita var. of rui
ruꞌku1 adv beg, taking a lower position in a conversation Ina ruꞌku enupakɨ. You must teach
us.
ruꞌku2 adv 1) but, on the other hand 2) instead rumaꞌ n 1) a variety of tree, kupa tree chisia

genus 2) the fruit of the kupa tree, used in a game where the fruit is rolled on the ground and hit with an arrow by the next person runan var. of rui
rupɨ n something similar or akin to something else Punwe kaꞌnin kanan eneꞌpʉ iya, tʉron nɨ pata yawon kon si, Makusi amʉꞌ rupɨ ton nɨ. He was a person sewing a fish net, in another
place similar to (where) the Makusi (live).
rusi n male cousin of a female, indirect address
ruweta n a variety of tree, balata tree panicium genus
-rʉ var. of -i2
rʉi n a variety of bird
rʉka vt sever, cut off Isan iꞌpai rʉkaꞌpʉ uya. I
cut off John's head.
rʉꞌkwɨ (var: nʉꞌkwɨ) 1) small, little Apʉne rʉꞌkwɨ. Wait a little. 2) little Mɨrɨpan kon uya tʉmunkɨ kon nɨmɨꞌpʉ asaꞌron kon rʉꞌkwɨ esiꞌpʉ. And they left behind their children, who were
two little ones.
-rʉꞌpʉ (var: -nʉꞌpʉ) old, an action or relationship that happened in the distant past and/or is no longer in effect tʉmanenpanin rʉꞌpʉ the one who troubled (something) kamo tʉsanomanin rʉꞌsan those who received (him)
rʉtaꞌ (var: rʉtau) postp among Nonamʉʉi wanaꞌ rʉtaꞌ tuna eꞌpi po. She hid him among
the grass at the water's edge.
rʉtau var. of rʉtaꞌ

Ss

s- var. of sisaꞌ (poss: asaku) n 1) a variety of purple potato
© 2014 SIL International®

2) a variety of sweet potato Ipomea batatas -saꞌ 1) perfective tense Uy- eꞌ -saꞌ man. I have
come. 2) recent past 3) completed past tense
115

Akawaio-English Dictionary

sai n vulva
Sai nprop the name given to a rock along the Upper Mazaruni River; on the right (going down-river) between Ipana'muru pai and Mɨssɨttɨ rapids
saꞌka vt 1) disturb 2) make someone drunk eꞌsaꞌka (der.) 1) vr disturbed 2) vi loose
saka (poss: asakaai) n saw
sakaiꞌsakaiꞌma vt tickle Mʉre amʉꞌ sakaiꞌsakaiꞌmaꞌpʉ iya. She tickled the children. syn: aꞌkʉranʉkʉ .
sakaꞌma vi sawn, cut with a saw Isakaꞌmasaꞌ. It
was sawn.
sakasaꞌ n 1) (non-possessed) a variety of small, poisonous snake, rattle snake Crotalidae 2) a variety of wall lizard
sakaꞌsakaꞌpan nom someone walking in a zig-zag fashion Sakaꞌsakaꞌpan pe itɨꞌpʉ. He
went walking in a zig-zag fashion.
saꞌkau n a variety of bird found near Kurupung, in the Lower Mazaruni
saꞌki (poss: asaꞌkii) n sack, bag isaꞌkii his sack
sakoroꞌ nom sober, not drunk Sakoroꞌ pe iyesi.
He is not drunk.
sakoro (poss: asakorooi) n anger Sakoro pe iyesi. He is angry.
sakoropa vt make angry Isakoropaꞌpʉ uya. I
made him vexed.
eꞌsakoropa (der.) vi mad
sakorota vi be or become angry
sakui n a variety of parrot
sakura (poss: asakuraai) n 1) variety of cassava 2) a variety of potato 3) a thick drink made to mix with water and drink
saꞌma vt 1) trap Aku saꞌmaꞌpʉ uya. I trapped an agouti. 2) the practice of fishing with a pole put

into the ground near the river and checked periodically Moroꞌ amʉꞌ saꞌmaꞌpʉ uya sererema pɨꞌ. I caught many fish by putting my
pole into the ground near the river and checking it periodically.
eꞌsaꞌma (der.) 1) vr hang 2) vi choked
samaku (poss: asamakuui) n a speciallyshaped clay pot, a large clay pot
saꞌman (cf: akiꞌnɨ; cf: panaꞌ pan) nom 1) something difficult saꞌman itewan a stubborn person 2) something hard as in texture opp: ekeꞌnan 1 ; opp: ɨntʉ .
saꞌmantanʉkʉ vt 1) harden by drying, as in setting cassava bread out in the sun to dry Eki saꞌmantanʉꞌkɨ. Harden the cassava bread. 2) make someone a hardened person Tewan kon saꞌmantanʉꞌsaꞌ toꞌ uya apurɨ iꞌse toꞌ esi aꞌtai Papa uya tatoꞌ, toꞌkaꞌnʉkʉ toꞌ uya.
They have hardened their hearts. . ..
samoroni n venereal disease
samururun nom 1) dry Mɨrɨ yau kanan iyeꞌkwipɨ samururun pe tenaiꞌ. In there it is
boiled again until it becomes dry/granulated. 2)
something granulated san (poss: asan) n 1) mother, Indirect address cf:
sanon ; dir add: aꞌai 1 . 2) aunt, indirect address; in particular, one's mother's sister or one's father's brother's wife dir add: waꞌwa ; dir add: aꞌai 4 .
-san var. of -sen
saꞌne adv especially iwanpɨꞌsaꞌne especially of hunger wakʉ rɨ saꞌne especially good
sanka nom a boat having a high bow Sanka pe kanau esi. The boat has a high bow./The boat's bow sticks out high above the water. opp: sururui .
sanoma2 someone kind syn: mannʉꞌ 1 .

© 2014 SIL International®

116

Akawaio-English Dictionary

sanoma1 vt 1) make a fuss over Toꞌ peꞌ nʉsanomatai? Did they make a fuss over him? 2) receive 3) recognize Itonpaton uya isanomaꞌpʉ pen. His own kind/people/family didn't recognize him. 4) accept 5) pay attention
sanon (poss: asanon) n parents cf: san 1 ; low stat: mʉre 1 .
sanpa n adze
sanpana (poss: asanpanaai) n (non-possessed) bell
sanpura (poss: asanpuraai, asanpurʉ) n 1) drum 2) any item banged on as a drum during a time of sporting
santo n doll
sanwoto n 1) a variety of tree 2) blowpipe
sapa1 n 1) a variety of tree, annato Bixa orellana syn: anontɨ, karapiyaꞌpɨ1 . 2) the face paint that comes from the annato tree's fruit, deep red in colour
sapa2 n hunter
sapaꞌ n 1) Saturday, the Jewish Sabbath 2) Sunday, the Christian Sabbath
saparaꞌwʉ n 1) a variety of fruit tree with small green berries that turn ripe 2) fruit of the same tree
Saparuwʉi nprop the name given to a village along the Middle Mazaruni, near Kankarumʉ village
sapato (poss: asapatooi) n 1) shoes 2) boots 3) footwear
sapeꞌ (poss: asaperʉ) n someone humble syn: tʉn 2 .
sapema vt 1) speak against Papa poitorʉton sapemasaꞌ iya. He has spoken against God's servants. 2) criticise eꞌsapema (der.) vr disagree

saꞌpotoꞌ n (non-possessed) a variety of creek fish
sapuru (var: sapuruꞌma) n a variety of sweet cassava bread porridge
sapuruꞌma var. of sapuru
sapʉreteꞌ n a variety of woodpecker Celeus elegans
sara n (non-possessed) a variety of grass or weed, razor grass
saraika vt comb someone else's hair eꞌsaraika (der.) vi comb
saraipan (cf: sereiꞌpan) 1) nom something or someone combed opp: kisiꞌkisiꞌpan . 2) something straight
saraisarai (poss: asaraisaraai) n 1) comb 2) rake
saraꞌmo vt split open, split in two relatively equal parts Toron iꞌpai saraꞌmoꞌpʉ uya. I split
open the bird's head.
sarani n 1) a variety of grass with seeds that children like to eat 2) a variety of creek grass that lives underwater
sarara n (non-possessed) a variety of bamboo-like tree, also called congo pump Cecropia
sararaikapan nom something striped Sararaikapan pe ɨpon. Your dress is striped.
sararanpan nom hair standing straight out
saraꞌtɨ vt start something Ensin saraꞌtɨꞌpʉ uya. I
started the engine.
eꞌsaraꞌtɨ (der.) vi start
sarauka n indigenous bone flute
saraurai n (non-possessed) a variety of small, round fruit
sarawera n a variety of Alleluia dancing, where couples move in a square-dance style; not often

© 2014 SIL International®

117

Akawaio-English Dictionary

practised today sare Go away! Sare, pero! Go away, dog!
saresare n (non-possessed) a variety of purple parrot
sarɨ2 adv only Tikin sarɨ eꞌnʉnpɨtʉ serɨ pata tau. I am the only one sleeping in this place.
sarɨ1 interj I'm here. a common response to the common greeting, Miyarɨ. "Miyarɨ." "Sarɨ." "Hello.".. "Hello." cf: miyarɨ1 .
sarɨimɨ n a variety of large snake, bushmaster snake syn: pararaipu .
sarɨparɨ adv 1) more 2) closer Sarɨparɨ ɨsiꞌkɨ.
Come closer.
saro1 (cf: maparuwa) n (non-possessed) a variety of otter, water dog, a smaller variety than the maparuwa Lutra macrodus
saro2 n loincloth syn: kamiꞌsa, waiku, kareku .
saroroimɨ n (non-possessed) a variety of large snake Trigon ocephalus
sarowaikɨ n (non-possessed) a variety of large bumble bee with butterfly-like tongue
sarʉkɨu n (non-possessed) a variety of small rat that eats cockroaches
saꞌsaꞌ (var: kanaꞌsakaꞌwa) n a variety of locust
satiꞌ nom standing Satiꞌ pe iyesiꞌpʉ. He was
standing.
saukwa vt break Yʉi uya si iteꞌmata ratoi saukwaꞌpʉ. The stick broke his leg. eꞌsakwa (der.) vr break
sausauma vt cut up, make little cuts Toꞌ uya isausaumaꞌpʉ kuyapoꞌ piyau naꞌneꞌ, kuyapoꞌ menu pe si naꞌneꞌ. They made little
cuts on the toucan, to give him his colourful pattern.
Sawa nprop the name given to a creek along the Upper Mazaruni River, on the right side (coming

down-stream) just before the big rock that looks like the bow of a cruise ship sawaisawai (poss: asawaisawaai) n double paddle, as is used in kayaking sawasaꞌ n (non-possessed) soursop fruit; the same tree se2 (cf: Serekon) nom someone or something foolish Tʉumaꞌtasan pona kurusuꞌ ekareei esi se pe rɨ, To those dying, the message of the
cross is foolishness,
se1 pron this Ɨꞌrɨ se? What is this? -se2 var. of -seꞌna -se1 var. of -iꞌ1
seiꞌ interj suddenly; probably refers to having something suddenly come into one's sight; to see something one didn't know was there syn: tɨʉ .
sei (var: seisei) n a spatula-like tool used to round off the edges of cassava bread as it bakes on the griddle
seisei var. of sei
Seiso 1) nprop Jesus 2) interj Amen
seꞌkerente n (non-possessed) a variety of banana, cayenne banana Musa sp.
sekwa (cf: ) n leak isekwa its leak
seꞌme n a bend in the river
-sen (var: -san) one who does V Tʉukoꞌmansen tanporon kon nɨ tʉron kon kiyawoꞌ amʉꞌ piyau. (He was) one who lived
with all the other kushi ants.
-seꞌna (var: -se2) wanting Iutɨꞌpʉ iꞌpopɨꞌseꞌna.
He went wanting to strip it.
senoꞌmariꞌ 1) nom troublesome Senoꞌmariꞌ pe warawoꞌ esi. The boy is troublesome. 2) vi be or become mad
Senpi ken nprop the name given to a creek mouth along the Upper Mazaruni River, above

© 2014 SIL International®

118

Akawaio-English Dictionary

Imbaimadai sepan1 n small bush, brush
sepan2 nom lowly Sepan nɨ tʉpoitorʉ kuꞌsaꞌ iya pɨꞌ tenu yau. He has remembered his lowly
servant.
sepe n nothing, something stupid or meaningless
sereiꞌpan (cf: saraipan) nom straight hair, smooth hair
Serekon (cf: se2) nprop a person without knowledge or ability, someone dumb or stupid Kʉrɨ rɨ, iꞌtunin pen nɨ Serekon He is Serekon, the person without knowing. cf: Sikɨ 2 .
sererema n fishing supplies, most often the pole, line and hook used to catch fish by putting a pole in the ground near the river and coming back to check the hook periodically Moroꞌ amʉꞌ saꞌmaꞌpʉ uya sererema pɨꞌ. I caught
many fish by putting a pole in the ground near the river and checking it periodically.
serɨ n today cal: mʉꞌkuꞌ koꞌmamiyau, koꞌmamiyau, serɨ, awanapairɨ, awanapairɨ eꞌmaꞌpʉ .
serʉ n (non-possessed) a variety of bird, oil bird
seꞌse n 1) brother-in-law, direct address indir add: eꞌse 1 . 2) cousin, male addressing a male cousin, direct address indir add: eꞌse 2 .
si var. of esi
si- (var: s-) 1) I S- ene -i. I see it. 2) me
siꞌaꞌ n a variety of maggot found in the palm trees, can be eaten
sikaru (poss: ɨsikaruui) n sugar cane
sikiriꞌ n cigarette
sikiriꞌma (poss: ɨsikiriꞌmaai) (cf: tuneren) n salted hot pepper; mostly made to be portable to take on extended trips
sikiꞌsikiꞌ n (non-possessed) a variety of yarrow

fish, especially in its young stage of development sikɨ (poss: ɨsikʉri / ɨsikʉrii) n chigger; actually, a variety of burrowing flea sikɨꞌpan (der.) nom infested one
siꞌkɨ (var: siꞌkɨrɨ) postp 1) from Serɨ ukaretaai nepʉꞌpʉ ina uya town pon siꞌkɨ. We brought this book from town. Itɨpiya siꞌkɨrɨ rɨ Kaatʉ piyau iyesiꞌpʉ. From its beginning, he was with God. 2) since Mɨrɨ siꞌkɨrɨ eꞌma eꞌnonkaꞌpʉ Kʉrʉpʉn poi utɨnnɨtoꞌ Kamʉran ken pona.
Since then, the path from Kʉrʉpʉn going to Kamʉran river mouth has been established.
Sikɨ 1) nprop the name given to a mythical figure; brother of Makunaimɨ 2) n a smart person cf: Serekon .
sikɨꞌmoi n a variety of potato
sikɨniꞌ (cf: isakari) n a variety of fruit tree with small, round fruits
sikɨꞌpan (der. of sikɨ) nom someone or something infested with chiggers or burrowing fleas Sikɨꞌpan, eke pe rɨ. She was infested with
many chiggers.
siꞌkɨrɨ var. of siꞌkɨ
siꞌkoroꞌtɨ vt tangle, entangle Peseꞌtɨ uya itewa amʉꞌ siꞌkoroꞌtɨꞌpʉ. The wind tangled the pieces
of string.
sikuru (poss: ɨsikuruui) n school
sikʉꞌ n (non-possessed) a variety of small snail
siꞌkwa vt cut Tʉkwiwa pun nin si isiꞌkwaꞌpʉ mɨrɨ. So, he cut his own buttocks.
simaꞌna n 1) (non-possessed) a variety of tree that puts out baseball-sized seeds; the Baramani tree 2) the seed of the same tree
Simaꞌna pai nprop the name given to a farming settlement next to Kankarumɨ pai along the Urapa pai stretch of the Upper Mazaruni River

© 2014 SIL International®

119

Akawaio-English Dictionary

simari (var: sumari; poss: ɨsimarii) n cassava grater
simitin n a type of dance in the Alleluia tradition
siꞌnaꞌ (poss: ɨsiꞌnatʉ) (cf: ; cf: karipon) n 1) the variety of tree from which inner bark is stripped to make shoulder and head straps for warishi and bundles of other things to be carried out of the bush; the tree from which the fruit is taken to make the toy kɨwɨ' 2) rope or strap made from the bark of the same tree wariꞌsa siꞌnakʉri the backpackꞌs strap
Sinaꞌai nprop the name given to a creek along the Kukui River, below I'moi ken
sinau2 n a variety of tree from which a part is extracted to make a person sneeze sinau yeꞌ the
frog tree
sinau1 n (non-possessed) a variety of large frog, also called 'mountain chicken'
sinka vt hang, tie up Sinkaꞌpʉ iya weꞌnaꞌsokoi pe toꞌ arɨ rawɨrɨ. He hung them upside down and
carried them that way.
sinkiri (poss: ɨsinkirii) n shingle
sinkokoiꞌ n swing; a rope or vine hanging from a tree used for same Sinkokoiꞌ po peꞌ ɨsenakapai meꞌan, maꞌnon? Do you want to
play on the swing, girl?
sinsinka (var: eꞌsinsinka; var: eꞌsinsinma) vi swing
Siꞌpaniyoro nprop the name given to people from Venezuela; more generally, anyone who speaks Spanish
siꞌparari n roti baking pan
sipaꞌsipaꞌ n 1) (non-possessed) ripples on the water's surface caused by wind 2) wave of water
sipipa (var: sipiꞌroko; poss: ɨsipipaai) n 1) cassava starch fried into small eki-like patties 2) a cooked, starch patty
sipiꞌroko var. of sipipa

siꞌpɨn n flea
siꞌpotai n (non-possessed) a variety of thorny vine
siriꞌka vt prick a wound or sore to relieve pressure underneath Uwereei siriꞌkaꞌpʉ uya. I
pricked the skin of my blister.
siriꞌkan n a variety of parrot that flies together in large numbers
sirikare n a variety of insect that lives in a hole in the ground (bee; wasp; millipede?)
sirikɨ1 n (non-possessed) star sirikɨ2 n a variety of plant Sirikɨwai nprop a mythological figure married to
Wayarare sirikoꞌ n (non-possessed) a variety of yellow-
bellied bird sirimɨ (poss: ɨsirimɨɨi) n a variety of brown ant,
of which the larvae are edible siriꞌmɨ n a variety of hot pepper
sirimoꞌ n 1) a variety of termite 2) a variety of long, black ant
sirinsirin n (non-possessed) softness, often used to describe hair
siriparaꞌ n a variety of termite with a bigger head than the small, white termite; flies in season
sirɨn nom bright Sirɨn pe iyesiꞌpʉ kamiriꞌ kasa. He was bright like lightning. syn: en2 .
Sises nprop Jesus
siꞌsiꞌ (var: kisiꞌkisiꞌ) n a variety of biting fly, no-see-um, sandfly, troublesome during the night
sisiu nom seatedness Sisiu pe iyesiꞌpʉ enwoꞌneꞌ winɨ. He was sitting at the right side.
sitanʉkʉ vt prevent something from growing
sitiꞌsitiꞌ n a variety of insect - but what?

© 2014 SIL International®

120

Akawaio-English Dictionary

situꞌka vt push Mʉre amʉꞌ situꞌkaꞌpʉ iya kanau apai. He pushed the children out of the
boat.
siwankama vi be or become worried Siwankamaꞌpʉ tʉnkupʉꞌpʉ pɨꞌ. She was
worried about what she did.
siya adv 1) far, over there Toꞌ utɨꞌpʉ pata pona ekareꞌtɨseꞌna siya rɨ pata kaisarɨ rɨ. They
went to the place to tell (about what happened) in
that faraway place. 2) far into the future, forever Tanporon nɨ esi ɨiwanoꞌ pe pɨꞌ, siya roꞌ rɨ. Amen. Everything is yours, forever. Amen.
sɨ (var: ꞌsɨ) interj Oh!, sharing hopeless feelings Nai rɨ si anapurɨnʉ kon sɨ? Oh, wherever is
your faith?
sɨꞌ interj the sound made in sharpening an axe or machete
ꞌsɨ var. of sɨ
sɨꞌkʉrʉrʉ (var: eꞌsɨꞌkʉrʉrʉma) be or become heated, to have a fever or temperature Eꞌneꞌ pe upun yau eꞌsɨꞌkʉrʉrʉmaꞌpʉ. His body was
hurting with a temperature.
soisa n soldier
soiꞌsoiꞌ n a variety of hump-backed grasshopper, the sound of which aids in keeping time, chirping fast in evening, slow in morning
Soiꞌsoiꞌ nprop the name given to a mountain along the Upper Mazaruni River, about 2-hours up-river from Inbaimadai
soꞌkoipita vt 1) blister Eꞌpusaꞌ uꞌsoꞌkoipitaꞌpʉ. 2) burn
sokoisokoi (poss: ɨsokoisokooi) (cf: kasiri wɨrɨi, wɨrɨiwɨrɨi) n stick or paddle-like instrument used to stir cassava drink before it is poured for drinking
soꞌkoro n 1) tumor Soꞌkoro pe iꞌmʉ esi. He has a tumor on his neck. 2) a lump or growth under the skin

sokouꞌsokouꞌma vt shake, as a liquid in a bottle Kasiri sokouꞌsokouꞌmaꞌpʉ uya. I shook
the kasiri in the container.
sonkoꞌto (poss: ɨsonkoꞌtooi) n a small ditty bag
sonson nom 1) someone staggering, as if drunk Sonson pe iyennaꞌpoꞌpʉ. He went home staggering. 2) someone walking fast Sonson pe utɨn. I'm walking fast.
sopai n 1) a madness that affects kanaima 2) a person who wants to suck blood 3) a mad or crazy person; someone without a sound mind
sopera nom cutting a path Sopera pe tʉutɨsen raiꞌpa aꞌtɨ pɨꞌ. As he went along, he was cutting a
path, . ...
sopi n any form of strong alcoholic drink from outside sources
soreꞌwaꞌpan nom someone or something thin
sorin vr nosebleed
soroiꞌ interj sound word, the sound of something piercing something else Mɨrɨpan uya tʉꞌta kʉipʉnʉ aꞌtʉꞌkapɨtʉꞌpʉ, "Soroiꞌ!" Then he
pierced his big toe, "Soroi'!"
soroiꞌso n a variety of bird with red beak and feet and gray feathers
soroma n a variety of large, green parrot
soronpan n valley Piyaiꞌma ʉntaꞌmoꞌkaiꞌ wʉꞌ eꞌpi poi soronpan yaꞌ enton pe pʉra rɨ. The
giant fell from the edge of the mountain into the valley, never to be seen again.
soꞌsi (poss: ɨsoꞌsii) n church
soꞌsoꞌma vt mash, usually yam, pumpkin or banana, to make it edible Kauyama soꞌsoꞌmaꞌpʉ uya. I mashed pumpkin. Usoꞌsoꞌmayaiꞌ! I am (a pumpkin) being mashed!
sotoꞌka vt make something or someone to stand

© 2014 SIL International®

121

Akawaio-English Dictionary

upright eꞌsotoꞌka (der.) vi stand
sowesowe n a whistle of a kanaima or large bat-like animal
suꞌ (poss: ɨꞌsuku) n urine Iꞌsuku yen pe mɨrɨ esi. This is her urinal. suꞌta (der.) vi pass urine
suꞌ euta urethra (lit: urine hole)
suꞌ yen bladder (lit: urine container)
sukusuku n (non-possessed) passionfruit Passiflora foetida
sukuꞌsukuꞌma vt wash, usually refers to washing clothes by hand Pon ton sukuꞌsukuꞌmaꞌpʉ uya. I washed clothes by
hand.
sumari var. of simari
sunkupi n 1) a disease that causes pale skin 2) anemia; including a swelling of the face
suntaaka n 1) Sunday 2) week, from Sunday to the next Sunday
sunwa nom a place far away from the speaker Sunwa toꞌ nesii. They are far away.
suꞌpa vt soak Mɨrɨ rɨ eꞌtane tuna uya ina suꞌpaꞌpʉ. But then the rain soaked us.
supara (poss: ɨsuparaai) (cf: mariya) n 1) cutlass, machete 2) any knife
suparari n 1) arrow 2) spear
sura (var: surapan; poss: ɨsuraai) n 1) a frame of sticks put over a fire to lay meat on for smoking 2) frame for tarpaulin Mɨrɨpan yau eke pe tuna uyeeꞌpʉ, surapan konekaꞌpʉ ina uya. In that place, a big rain fell, and we built a
frame for a tarpaulin.

suraika vi lay down in a hammock Uyeꞌkweꞌ po isuraikaꞌpʉ. He lay down in my hammock.
surapan var. of sura
sururu n 1) flour eki sururuui cassava flour 2) the scraping from the cooked sides of cassava bread
sururui nom a boat with a bow very low/close to the water Sururui pe kanau esi. The boat has its bow very low to the water. opp: sanka .
suruwa (poss: ɨsuruwaai) n 1) a variety of tree which produces edible seeds 2) the seed from the same tree
suruwatiꞌtiꞌ n (non-possessed) a variety of frog, living in the suruwa tree
suꞌta (der. of suꞌ) vi pass urine
suwa nom sudden Suwa rɨ eꞌnɨtoꞌ It will be
sudden.
Suwepu nprop the name given to a high-water bypass along the Kukui River between Jawalla and Pipiri pai
suwita (var: suwɨita) vi blush Isuwitaꞌpʉ. She
blushed.
suwitanʉkʉ (var: suwɨitanʉkʉ) vt make someone blush Toꞌ suwɨitanʉkʉꞌpʉ iya. He
made them blush.
suwɨita var. of suwita
suwɨitanʉkʉ var. of suwitanʉkʉ
sʉkʉi n (non-possessed) a variety of blue-colored bird; saki
sʉkʉsʉkʉma vt 1) wag, as in a dog's head or tail Tiꞌpai sʉkʉsʉkʉmaꞌpʉ iya. He wagged his head. 2) disagree, as in shaking one's head to say 'no'
sʉreꞌpa n a variety of tree, perhaps a palm tree

© 2014 SIL International®

122

105 of 131

Akawaio-English Dictionary
Tt

t- var. of tʉ-
ta (cf: te) vt speak, say something "Utɨnpai," taꞌpʉ iya upɨꞌ.. "Let's go," he said to me.
taꞌ postp 1) in Soꞌsi taꞌ toꞌ utɨꞌpʉ. They went in the church. sclr prop: taꞌ 1, tau, tapai . 2) into 3) at
-ta2 command verb suffix Papa nʉkupʉꞌpʉ ayaꞌkɨrɨ ekamata. Tell what God has done for you. Ikuꞌta si kʉrɨ rɨ kasa. Do it like he did.
-ta3 past tense ꞌEwaiꞌ,ꞌ mʉkatai. You said, 'Yes.' -ta1 var. of -tanʉꞌ taanꞌpʉ var. of tamoꞌpʉ
tai interj yes, uh-huh, affirmation by the hearer, used while listening to someone else talk
taiꞌkwa vi burn with pepper Itenna taiꞌkwaꞌpʉ.
He burned his mouth with pepper.
taiꞌtaiꞌ n (non-possessed) a variety of long, black ant that stings
taitaima vt type Ɨnʉꞌ uya rɨ soꞌsi konsʉrʉʉi ton usauroꞌsaꞌ taitaimakaꞌtoꞌ rɨ. Someone
should type the minutes of the Church Council meeting.
takaiꞌka n (non-possessed) a variety of kingfisher bird Alcede torquata
Takaiꞌka pai nprop the name given to a large rock at the Kako/Jawalla district line
takapiya n (non-possessed) a variety of palm tree from which thatch material is taken; similar to a blow pipe tree frond, making good-quality upper thatching
takataka nom shaky Takataka pe imariyarʉ epu esi. His knife's handle is shaky
takauka var. of tʉkʉuka

takautakauma vt shake someone in a hammock Mʉre amʉꞌ takautakaumaꞌpʉ iya iteꞌkweꞌ tau. He shook the children in his
hammock.
takiꞌka vt mash Mɨrɨpan yau yʉi karakwasaꞌ ke iꞌpai takiꞌkaꞌpʉ iya. And then he mashed his
head with a broken off stick.
taꞌkɨpi n a variety of small bird with green head, orange and yellow back, turquoise and purple markings on breast and wings
taꞌkɨpiya n (non-possessed) a variety of bird, similar to the blue saki, with a short chirp of a call
takuruꞌ n (non-possessed) illness Takuruꞌ ke kɨiꞌ esi. The old man is sick / with an illness. opp: atuꞌ 1 . takuruꞌkenan (der.) nom sick one
takuruꞌkenan (der. of takuruꞌ) nom someone who is sick or ill
takurupa var. of tapuruka
Taꞌkʉrau nprop the name given to a creek off the Upper Mazaruni River, near Ku'mʉrasi, above Jawalla village by about 40 minutes
tamɨ adv very Wakʉ pe man tamɨ. It's very good.
tamo (poss: atamo) (cf: umʉi) n 1) fatherin-law, indirect address 2) uncle, one's mother's brother; one whose children are of marriagable status to the speaker, indirect address 3) sir, a term of respect for the older age of the hearer over the speaker
tamokori (poss: atamokori) n grandfather, indirect address dir add: Papa 2 .
tamoꞌpʉ (var: taanꞌpʉ; poss: ataanꞌpʉ) n husband low stat: noꞌpʉ .

© 2014 SIL International®

123

Akawaio-English Dictionary

tamʉ (poss: atamʉri) n 1) tobacco 2) cigarette
tane conj 1) while Mɨrɨ aꞌtai si Jericho apai Jerusalem pona itɨ tane tuꞌkan kon kaꞌpon amʉꞌ uya eꞌmaꞌpʉkaꞌpʉ. While going from
Jericho to Jerusalem, many people followed him. 2)
though, nevertheless Mɨrɨ rɨ eꞌtane, ... Nevertheless, ... 3) although, even though taꞌnekʉ vt divide
tanpirai (poss: atanpiraai) n arrow point, often shaped from a section of deer antler
tanporo n all tanporon (attrib.) n all
tanporon (attrib. of tanporo) n all, every one
-tanʉꞌ (var: -ta1) inviting the hearer to 'Come and V' Entaiꞌkwatanʉꞌkɨ! Come and eat.
tanwaya n (non-possessed) a variety of bush plant (bird's nest fern) from which leaves are taken to make thatch roofing, philodendron plant
tapai postp from in Tʉutɨsen pen nɨ tiwʉꞌ tapai. She never went from in her own house. She never went out from her own house. sclr prop: taꞌ 1, tau, tapai .
tapi interj a wish for something to be so Atuꞌ pe kuru eꞌpai eꞌaiꞌ tapi! Oh, how I wish I was
healthy!
taꞌpimʉꞌnan var. of aimuꞌne
tapiyaꞌ (var: tapiyakʉ) n a variety of larger hummingbird gen: tukuiꞌ2 .
tapiyakʉ var. of tapiyaꞌ
tapiyara2 n sickness tapiyara1 n (non-possessed) a person
well-provided-for by his farming acumen opp: iwannɨkoꞌ .
tapiyu something flat, especially relating to canoes going flat as they age Tapiyu pan

akanwa esi. Your canoe is flat.
tapiyuka n (non-possessed) a variety of wasp, brown marabunta Hymen optera
taꞌpuru n table
tapuruka (var: takurupa) n house with rectangular thatched roof
tapʉrenken n a variety of tree, the leaves of which are used to make a drink to prevent or cure worms, cold symptoms, or fleas and chiggers
tararan n 1) wagon 2) chariot, especially as in the Alleluia tradition
taꞌrau n large salt crystals, found in Brasil
taꞌreꞌ nom someone or something fed Taꞌreꞌ ke iyesi. He is well-fed. opp: wan .
taren (poss: ɨyetaremu) n the art of blowing for the purpose of healing or harming oneself or another taren po kon people who receive taren etarenpa (der.) vt blow
tarika n a variety of small, blue, iridescent bird with black on wings and brown breast
Tarikiran nprop the name given to John Charlie, a prophet in the Alleluia church
taripa vt make someone else drunk Itaripaꞌpʉ iya. He made him drunk.
tarita vr be or become dark in skin colour Itaritasaꞌ man. He became dark. Yʉi uya itaritanʉꞌsaꞌ. The wood/stick/splinter made his
skin dark.
tarui nom craving, especially meat, fish, or something of substance to go with cassava bread tarui pe ɨwesi. You are craving
(something).
Taꞌsaren nprop the name given to a village along the Middle Mazaruni, near Tu'po'ko village and falls
tasin n (non-possessed) dasheen

© 2014 SIL International®

124

Akawaio-English Dictionary

tatan n 1) (non-possessed) a variety of tree good for lumber, whose seeds float on the river 2) the seed from the same tree
tau postp in Ɨutɨ tau esi mɨrɨ. I will be inside the house. sclr prop: taꞌ 1, tau, tapai .
tawa (poss: atawari) n 1) clay soil 2) clay syn: iꞌkoro 2 .
tawai n 1) throne, particularly in the Alleluia tradition syn: raitawa 1 . 2) place 3) Heaven, particularly in the Alleluia tradition
tawaru n a variety of bird with white and purple feathers
tawenka vt twist; injure by twisting Esther uya itemekon tawenkasaꞌ. Esther twisted her arm.
te (cf: ta)
teireꞌ n side of a human body or paddle
teꞌka vt bring ashore Mɨrɨ kanau teꞌkakɨ. Bring
that canoe ashore.
tekeꞌsen (poss: ɨtekeꞌsemu) n walking stick
teketeke var. of tokotoko1
teketekema vi wiggle
tekiꞌ (poss: ɨtenkisi) n 1) the long tubular container used to squeeze the poison juice from the grated cassava cf: tʉrapisi . 2) a long leaf, the juice of which is sometimes added to the cassava drink
temaꞌkwaiꞌ n night Mɨrɨpan tuna eꞌsaraꞌtɨꞌpʉ, pata temaꞌkwaiꞌ. And then rain started (and
continued) the whole night.
temekʉ vt keep for oneself
tenki interj Thank you. Simeon uya anʉmʉꞌpʉ tenaꞌ tenki taꞌpʉ iya iyɨpʉremaꞌpʉ Papa pɨꞌ.
Simeon took him to himself and said thank you (as he) prayed to God.
tenkuꞌnan (der. of enkuꞌ) nom someone blind

tenmaꞌsa n a variety of fish spec: reꞌkɨ ; gen: piꞌpɨpʉn .
tennankɨꞌ (cf: akaruwa) n a variety of small fish, often caught in a trap gen: kuraꞌ .
tenparaꞌsaimuꞌnan nom someone or something pale
tenpataikuꞌnan nom someone with a dirty face
tenpuruꞌnan (der. of ene2) nom someone having blurred vision
tensen (cf: mɨpe eꞌkuꞌna) n a variety of tree with red colour under the bark, good for building material
tenten n a big bell Tenten uturunkaꞌpʉ uya. I
rang the big bell.
tenu ennoꞌsaꞌ iya forward thinking, looking ahead (lit: he has sent his eyes)
tenupasen n student high stat: enupanin .
tepiꞌ (poss: ɨyepiꞌ) n 1) tablet 2) any kind of medicine in pill form 3) solution, the answer to a problem
tepitoren n a steep bank
Teꞌpʉn ken (var: Tɨꞌpɨn ken) nprop the name given to a creek mouth along the Upper Mazaruni River, above Imbaimadai
tereka n strips of vine material used to plait panka, etc.
tero n a variety of tree
teꞌtaripasen n drunkard
teusan var. of tɨusan
tikin n (non-possessed) one thing Tikin nɨ toron pokaꞌpʉ uya. I shot one bird. tikinanpa (der.) adv 1) finally 2) once
tikinanpa (der. of tikin) adv 1) for the last time, never to be repeated Tikinanpa rɨ toꞌ

© 2014 SIL International®

125

Akawaio-English Dictionary

ennaꞌpoꞌpʉ. They returned, never to go again. 2) once Tikinanpa anɨnkaꞌkɨ. Pick at it just
once./Don't keep picking at it.
tikitiki nom ruptured, pushed out Tikitiki pe iponii enakapʉ. He belly button is becoming
ruptured/sticking out.
tinin (poss: ɨtinimu) n 1) tin syn: kurumaꞌ . 2) a tin roof 3) any metal material used to make a roof
tinka vt 1) hit Eꞌneꞌ pe utinkaꞌpʉ auya. You hit me hard./It hurt when you hit me. 2) knock
tiꞌsa n teacher cf: enupanin .
tɨ emphasises the preceding phrase Mɨrɨpan aꞌtai si tɨ, . . .. And after all of that, . . ..
tɨꞌ (poss: ɨtɨpu) (cf: kapiriꞌ, muꞌpɨꞌ) n 1) rock, stone moroꞌ tɨpu, eki tɨpu fish rock, cassava rock 2) boulder 3) mountain Aiyama Tɨpu Aiyama Mountain 4) idol Ina ɨpʉrematoꞌ ipɨꞌ esi tɨꞌ pe, tʉpana kenan pen nɨ. We pray to idols
that have no ears (to hear).
-ꞌtɨ to use (N) Araꞌtɨ uya. I am building a home./I am
using ara, or, beams (in order to build a house).
-tɨꞌ command suffix for more than one hearer Apʉne en -tɨꞌ inonkaꞌpʉ rʉꞌpʉ yau. But look
in where he was laid.
tɨꞌ mukuꞌsan n gravel, a stony place
tɨkɨtɨ n a motion of something swinging back and forth Ipon pʉn mʉre usarɨ, "tɨkɨtɨ, tɨkɨtɨ, tɨkɨtɨ," tukaiꞌ. The boy without clothes walks (with
his penis swinging back and forth).
tɨꞌmoi nom 1) something round in shape Itɨꞌmoi pe iyesi. It is round in shape. tuna tɨꞌmoi round water stones (referring to hailstones) syn: tɨririn . 2) something lumpy in an otherwise homogenous entity
tɨmui nom someone who walks with a bent back Tʉmui pe itɨ. He walks with a bent back.

tɨmuipan (der.) n cripple
tɨmuika vt bend something eꞌtɨmuika (der.) vi bent
tɨmuipan (der. of tɨmui) n a person bent over without being able to straighten up
tɨnɨn n (non-possessed) slowness tɨnɨn pɨꞌ with slowness tɨnɨn po kon in a slow manner opp: aituneꞌ .
tɨnka var. of tunka
tɨpiya (poss: ɨtɨpiya) n 1) beginning Itɨpiya siꞌkɨrɨ rɨ Kaatʉ piyau iyesiꞌpʉ. From its (the world's) beginning, he was with God. 2) ancestor David tɨpiyaꞌ rʉꞌpʉ pe tesi pɨꞌ. He was David's
grandson/ancestor.
Tɨꞌpɨn ken var. of Teꞌpʉn ken
tɨpoiꞌ (var: tɨꞌpoiꞌ) (cf: tokotoko2) n general term for owl
tɨꞌpoiꞌ var. of tɨpoiꞌ
tɨrin nom something thin tɨrin pan itemʉꞌ esi.
His face is thin.
tɨrinka vt roll; push something round and make it roll
tɨrintɨiꞌ n a variety of caterpillar with a stick cocoon in which it walks around
tɨririn nom something round Tɨririn pe ball esi. The ball is round. syn: tɨꞌmoi 1 .
tɨriye n a variety of fish, morocot; also called tari fish; found in the Lower Mazaruni Myletes
tɨrɨrɨ nom concurrent, at the same time Tɨrɨrɨ pe rɨ toꞌ uyepʉꞌpʉ. They came at the same time.
tɨtɨtɨiꞌkwa var. of eꞌkɨtɨtɨiꞌma
tɨtɨtɨma 1) vt shake Toꞌ uya toꞌ tamo tɨtɨtɨmaꞌpʉ. They shook their uncle (to wake him up). 2) vi shiver eꞌtɨtɨtɨma (der.) (var eꞌtɨtɨtɨiꞌka) vr shake

© 2014 SIL International®

126

Akawaio-English Dictionary

tɨu nom 1) unadorned, especially of hair 2) loose, not tied up Tɨu pe uꞌpai esi. My hair is not put
up.
tɨusan (var: teusan) n 1) (non-possessed) bee Apis mellifera 2) honey sclr prop: tɨusan 2, kotoko . 3) bees' nest
tɨutɨ vt brush off dust aꞌta kon mʉtɨutɨtʉiꞌ. You
all must brush off dust from your feet.
tɨʉ interj suddenly syn: seiꞌ .
tɨwɨrɨ adv 1) everlasting, always syn: inke 3, pena 2 . 2) long ago
tɨwo (var: tʉwo) n (non-possessed) a variety of bird with a loud whistle
toꞌ pron 1) they Toꞌ utɨꞌpʉ. They went. 2) them Toꞌ pokaꞌpʉ iya. He shot them. 3) their toꞌ mariyarɨ their knife
-toꞌ 1) the means to (verb) Aware u- tunta -toꞌ weyu eꞌsepon -kapʉ -ꞌpʉ. The day for the opossum's return was met/came. 2) the purpose of (verb)ing tʉutɨtoꞌ kon the purpose/means of their going 3) a suffix to make the verb a noun menukatoꞌ a writing, something written toꞌ usenuminkatoꞌ their thoughts
toꞌkaꞌnʉkʉ vt 1) know Epuru si ayarɨiꞌnokon, Papa uya iꞌnʉnkannɨtoꞌ toꞌkaꞌnʉꞌnin pe parɨ may the Lord lead you into a greater understanding of God's love 2) understand 3) recognize eꞌtoꞌkaꞌnʉkʉ (der.) vr know oneself
toꞌkenaꞌma vt shorten, to make shorter in time
tokotoimɨ n a variety of rat
tokotoko2 (cf: tɨpoiꞌ) n (non-possessed) owl, the general term gen: toron .
tokotoko1 (var: teketeke) nom something loose or slack Tokotoko pe ewa esi. The rope
is slack.

ton (var: non1) (cf: kon) quant plural suffix for the noun to which it is attached Mɨrɨpan tʉron nɨ ton utaꞌmoꞌkaꞌpʉ tɨꞌ pona. And then others fell among rocks. ɨyeyaton non your (singular)
enemies (plural)
tonan nom something hidden Tonan tau iyesiꞌpʉ, toꞌ uya itoꞌkaꞌnʉkʉ poken pʉra. It
was hidden, they couldn't understand it.
tonpaꞌ eight things
tonpa2 n a portion tonpa1 (pl: tonpaton; poss: ɨtonpa) n 1) a
relative 2) friend 3) partner Zebedee munkɨ amʉꞌ toꞌ esi, Simon tonpa pe teꞌsan. They were Zebedee's sons, partners with Simon. syn: etapu 1 . 4) family tonpaꞌtɨ (der.) vt join
eꞌtonpaꞌtɨ (der.) vr joined
tonpaꞌpʉ n small scraps left over from a meal eki tonpaꞌpʉ remains from a cake of cassava
bread
tonpaꞌtɨ cf: pirikʉ1. (der. of tonpa1) vt join, become part of a larger group Ina tonpaꞌtɨꞌpʉ iya. He joined us (as in getting married).
tonpaton pl. of tonpa1 toꞌpoiꞌso n a variety of plantain
toretorepan nom a person with tuberculosis Toretorepan iyesiꞌpʉ. He had tuberculosis.
toro1 (poss: ɨtoro) n lung toro2 n 1) a variety of tree, the mora tree, a large
tree that grows near water, with large seeds that float and wide lower buttresses 2) the seed of the same tree, edible toron n (non-possessed) bird, the general term spec: tokotoko2 ; spec: tukuiꞌ2 .

© 2014 SIL International®

127

Akawaio-English Dictionary

toron kan n the season from March to May; usually more rainy cal: iwankan 1, toron kan, Tʉmon 2, wʉipiya 2 .
toroꞌtoroimɨ n a variety of yellow, sweet pepper, a variety of large red pepper
torouma vt crumple Tesanon apuruui toroumapɨtʉꞌpʉ iya. He used to crumple his
owners' belongings.
toꞌsarɨ nom immediate, straight away opp: motomoto .
toꞌsaron (attrib. of toꞌsarɨ)
totopʉ n a type of dwarf; shy but sometimes eating people
tu- var. of tʉ-
tuiꞌ (poss: ɨtusi) n nail
tuꞌke nom 1) plenty, so many Tuꞌke toꞌ maꞌsii peꞌ? Did you catch many (fish)? 2) too many 3) crowded place, as in many trees crowded together
Tukuꞌ nprop the name given to a creek along Kukui River near I'moi ken settlement
tukuiꞌ1 (var: anɨꞌsaꞌ) n a style of indigenous singing and dancing
tukuiꞌ2 n (non-possessed) hummingbird spec: merumeru ; spec: tapiyaꞌ ; gen: toron .
Tukuiren nprop the name given to a creek off the Kukui, top-side from Jawalla village by about 30 minutes, on the left going up-river
tuꞌkuna vt wash, especially clothes Pon ton tuꞌkunapɨtʉ uya. I am washing clothes. Uꞌpai sutuꞌkunapɨtʉ. I am washing my head. syn: iꞌkuka .
tukusipan a style of round house syn: waipa .
tukutuku nom 1) boiling sound of cooking soup 2) poached Tukutuku pe uyoꞌ kɨrɨtɨkɨ pʉmoi

ikuipɨkɨ. My chicken eggs rattle when they are
boiling.
tuma (poss: aꞌma) n soup in which to dip cassava bread
tun n a variety of tree aspidospermia genus
tuna (cf: tunaꞌkwa) n 1) water 2) river 3) rain
tuna eꞌpi n shore, bank (lit: waterꞌs lip)
tuna pe (cf: aiꞌku)
tuna tɨꞌmooi n hail
tunaꞌkiriꞌ (var: tʉnaꞌkʉriꞌ) n thirst Tunaꞌkiriꞌ ke esi. I am with thirst. Poriꞌ pe kamo esi mɨrɨ tʉnaꞌkʉriꞌ ke naꞌneꞌ nan wakʉ enupɨkɨrɨ.
Happy are those who thirst after good things.
tunaꞌkwa (poss: ɨꞌtunaꞌkwaai) (cf: tuna) n 1) riverside Jordan tunaꞌkwa kaꞌ ɨsemuꞌpɨꞌseꞌna, seven kaisa rɨ iteꞌkwa. Dip yourself in the Jordan water, seven times. 2) landing, one's place for getting to the water or river 3) a place where one finds water
tunaruntɨ n an old-time story
tunayana n a group of people, exceptionally large Amerindians, living in Brazil
tuneren (poss: ɨtuneremu) (cf: sikiriꞌma) n salted hot pepper
tunka (var: tɨnka) vt finish, complete untunkaꞌpʉ pʉra what I didn't finish
tunta vi go Teꞌtʉrawasomatoꞌ weyu uꞌmaꞌsaꞌ aꞌtai, ituntaꞌpʉ tiwʉꞌ taꞌ. When the time of his
work was finished, he went to his own house.
Tuꞌpoꞌko nprop 1) the name given to a village along the Middle Mazaruni, near Saparuwʉi village and the Tu'po'ko falls 2) the name given to the falls, after which the village is named
turakaiꞌ var. of kurakaiꞌ
Turakaiꞌ Awen nprop the name given to a settlement on the Mazaruni River between Kamʉran and Kako, on the left going upriver

© 2014 SIL International®

128

Akawaio-English Dictionary

turanen n the Patamona word for a hot pepper drink, used by persons suffering from hernia or internal growth or from amariwakaimɨ
turen n a variety of water snake
turima n 1) a type of disease in general; sent by a piyai'san to curse another piyai'san; usually a communicable disease like abcesses or diarhea, etc. 2) abcess
turɨꞌ (var: turʉꞌ) n 1) (non-possessed) cowfly Tabanus sp. 2) a green biting fly
turunka var. of turunpa
turunpa (var: turunka) vt play an instrument Guitar turunpaꞌpʉ uya. I played the guitar.
turupe vi paddle
turʉꞌ var. of turɨꞌ n a variety of fly
tuwari n a runaway, a person running away from home
tuwenkaron n female water spirit
tuwi n bump or lump under the skin pɨinkɨ tuwi
pig's lump - a lump under a person's skin from contact
with a wild pig yʉi tuwi tree's lump - a knot in the
wood of a tree
tʉ var. of tʉrʉ1
tʉ- (var: tu-; var: t-) his own tʉ- n- wɨnɨ -ꞌpʉ
what he has killed for himself
tʉ-...-iꞌ (var: tʉ-...-se; var: tʉ-...-san) a thirdperson prefix and suffix combination that changes a verb into an adjective tʉ-uka-iꞌ saying tʉ-koꞌman -se-n the one staying
tʉ-...-san var. of tʉ-...-iꞌ
tʉ-...-se var. of tʉ-...-iꞌ
tʉi n (non-possessed) savannah Inpaima tʉi Inpaima tʉi opp: yuꞌ 1 .
tʉꞌka vt kill Saul esiꞌpʉ Sises eseꞌ pokon kon tʉꞌkapɨꞌnin pe. Saul was one who persecuted
those belonging to Jesus.

tʉꞌkenan n 1) desert, a place where not many people live 2) a lonely place
tʉꞌkenaꞌpɨ n alone; a lonely place; a place apart from a crowd
tʉkotonpire nom a faint yellow colour; the colour of grated cassava (before cooking) that signifies it will be good-tasting
tʉkotonpiren nom the colour orange
tʉkuꞌse vt save, reserve Awanapairɨ tʉkuꞌse.
Save it for tomorrow.
tʉkʉiꞌma (var: tʉkʉiꞌtʉkʉiꞌma) vt shake, as in liquids Kasiri tʉkʉiꞌmaꞌpʉ uya. I shook the
casiri.
tʉkʉiꞌtʉkʉiꞌma var. of tʉkʉiꞌma
tʉkʉuka (var: tʉkʉuꞌka; var: takauka) vt 1) shake Remona yeꞌ takaukwakɨ. Shake the lemon tree. 2) shake a tree to harvest fruit Remona yeꞌ tʉkʉukwaꞌpʉ uya. I shook the
lemon tree.
tʉkʉuꞌka var. of tʉkʉuka
tʉkʉutʉkʉu vt make something sway or swing back and forth Yʉi tʉkʉutʉkʉuma iya. It (the
wind) is swaying the tree.
tʉmenen n jaguar Felis niger
tʉmenukenan nom colourful one, the male of the male-female bird pair syn: akoruwan 2 ; cf: menu pʉn .
Tʉmon 1) nprop the name given to the constellation Pleiades, named after a mythical figure 2) n the season from June to August; usually dry cal: iwankan 1, toron kan, Tʉmon 2, wʉipiya 2 ; syn: iꞌmʉnpʉ 2 .
tʉmʉ vt 1) beat, pound Aiya tʉmʉ uya. I am beating the hayari. 2) poison, using haiya root in river water to float fish to catch with a net Mɨrɨ aꞌtai moroꞌ amʉꞌ tʉmʉꞌpʉ toꞌ uya. At that time, they poisoned fish. Tuꞌke peꞌ moroꞌ amʉꞌ

© 2014 SIL International®

129

Akawaio-English Dictionary

netʉmʉi? Did you catch many fish by poisoning them? 3) make one shake Upun tʉmʉ iya. It
(the sickness) makes my flesh shake.
tʉn n 1) someone gentle Tʉnpan iyesi. She is gentle. 2) someone humble syn: sapeꞌ .
tʉnaꞌkʉriꞌ var. of tunaꞌkiriꞌ
tʉꞌnɨ (cf: tʉtʉika) vt stop something from happening eꞌtʉꞌnɨ (der.) 1) vi stilled 2) vr calmed
tʉpiꞌpɨkenan (der. of piꞌpɨ) nom with scales, referring to a group of fishes Aruwai esi moroꞌ tʉpiꞌpɨkenan. Aruwai is a fish with scales. spec: waraꞌ; spec: moꞌrau; spec: korʉwaꞌ 1; spec: uri; spec: aruwai; gen: moroꞌ.
tʉpɨpiren nom the colour brown
tʉpo postp after Mɨrɨ tʉpo, . . .. Afterwards, . . ..
Tʉpoꞌkenʉꞌ pai nprop the name given to a place along the Mazaruni River between Jawalla and Imbaimadai
tʉpʉꞌkʉ nom ending; something with an end; something that will stop being or happening
tʉpʉreꞌporon nom someone stout in stature, a short person
Tʉramen nprop the name given to famous rock paintings near Maipuri Falls; Timehri
tʉranpa n trap used to catch birds Tʉranpa yaꞌ toron eꞌwɨnsaꞌ esiꞌpʉ. The bird was caught in a
bird trap.
tʉrapisi (poss: ɨtʉrapisii) n sugar cane squeezer; used together with a yaina cf: tekiꞌ 1 ; low stat: yaina .
tʉrawaso (poss: ɨtʉrawasooi) n assigned work, work one is employed to perform eꞌtʉrawaso (der.) vr work
tʉron 1) another tʉron kon kaꞌpon amʉꞌ uya

wakʉ itekare eta teꞌporiꞌmaiꞌ. Other people
who listen to his good news (or, listen well to his
words) are happy. 2) next tʉrʉ1 (var: tʉ) vt 1) put 2) place Toꞌ uya iꞌtaꞌpʉ
anʉmʉꞌpʉ si eripoi pona toꞌ uya itʉrʉꞌpʉ.
He took their footprints and placed them in the pot. 3)
set, as in setting fishing poles for catching fish Tʉ hiskonsi tʉpɨꞌseꞌna itaanꞌpʉ si utɨꞌpʉ.
Her husband went to set his fishing hooks.
eꞌtʉrʉ (der.) vr given
tʉrʉ2 (cf: ) vt 1) give Bible itʉkɨ. Give us the Bible. 2) lend Kʉrʉkʉrʉ itʉkɨ. Lend (me) (your)
file.
tʉrʉka var. of tʉrʉnka
tʉrʉꞌkwa vt 1) break out aꞌsisaꞌ kon iwʉꞌ pe teꞌsen tʉrʉꞌkwaꞌpʉ toꞌ uya. They (the earthquakes) broke open the prison. 2) tear down Uyapuruui iwʉꞌ tʉrʉꞌkwa uya serɨ. I'll tear
down my storage building.
tʉrʉnka (var: tʉrʉka) vt chase Usari tʉrʉnkaꞌpʉ iya. He (a dog; not a hunter) chased a
deer.
tʉrʉꞌpʉnʉ2 n a short variety of banana
tʉrʉꞌpʉnʉ1 (cf: kaꞌneꞌtai) n (non-possessed) earthquake
tʉrʉpʉpɨ n (non-possessed) a variety of cassava with red skin under the peel of the tuber
tʉtorire (var: tʉtoriwa; var: tʉtoriwaren) something purple, blue, or pink
tʉtoriwa var. of tʉtorire
tʉtoriwaren var. of tʉtorire
tʉtʉi (var: tʉtʉipan) (cf: eꞌpana) nom 1) someone or something silent Tʉtʉi pe uriꞌsan esiꞌpʉ. The girl was silent. 2) someone quiet Tʉtʉi pe iyesi. He is quiet. opp: panaꞌkaꞌ .
tʉtʉika (cf: tʉꞌnɨ) vt stop something from happening

© 2014 SIL International®

130

Akawaio-English Dictionary

eꞌtʉtʉika (der.) vr 1) stopped 2) calm
tʉtʉipan var. of tʉtʉi nom someone silent -tʉu you all, used with verbs as a command to
more than one person Kɨusiꞌnʉꞌtʉu! Don't you all
shake (with fear)!

tʉusemʉꞌsen (der. of usemʉꞌnʉkʉ) n diver, one who goes underwater for the purpose of mining Tʉusemʉꞌsen pe iyesi. He is a diver.
tʉwenkaron n mermaid
tʉwo var. of tɨwo n a variety of bird

Uu

u (poss: ɨyu) (cf: pʉreti; cf: yu; cf: eki 2) n cassava bread
u- (var: uy-) (cf: urɨ) 1) I, first person verb prefix 2) me, first person verb prefix Upokaꞌpʉ iya. He shot me. 3) my, first person noun prefix umariya -rɨ my cutlass
-ui var. of -i2
uisi n a variety of tree from which bark is peeled to make straps for back packs and smaller pieces as ties across the open side of same uisi piꞌpɨ the bark from the uisi tree uisi yeꞌ the uisi
tree
uka speak Eꞌpana pe ukayaiꞌ. I am speaking
softly.
ukaramʉ2 vi be or become rusty Ukonsi ukaransaꞌ. My fish hook became rusty.
ukaramʉ1 vi cry Toꞌ ukaramʉꞌpʉ. They cried. syn: entaime .
ukɨiꞌpamʉ vi be or become old Asaꞌrɨ rɨ marɨ toꞌ ukɨiꞌpansaꞌ esiꞌpʉ. The two of them were old.
ukɨꞌpɨꞌnʉmʉ vi shout, cry out Paul ukɨꞌpɨꞌnʉnpɨtʉꞌpʉ Paul was crying out.
uꞌkɨrɨtʉ vi paddle Mɨrɨpan enukuꞌpʉ kanau yau iyuꞌkɨrɨtʉꞌpʉ. So he went up-river in a
canoe, he paddled.
ukɨta (der. of kɨ) vi be or become stinky

Ikɨtaꞌpʉ. It became stinky. dev: aꞌkʉra 1, akʉꞌpʉ, isaramenu, isuweyu, ukɨta.
ukoꞌmamʉ 1) vi stay, remain Ikoꞌmamʉꞌpʉ. He stayed. 2) vi live 3) nom late in the day; a late time Pata ukoꞌmamʉ. It's late. opp: awanakʉiꞌ ; syn: ewarumamʉ 1 .
ukururumʉ vi growl, as in that of a dog
ukwipɨ vt cook by boiling Toꞌ yoꞌ oton ikipɨkaꞌkɨ. Cook their meat. (command for one
person)
uꞌma2 vi rise, as in the level of a river Tuna uꞌmasaꞌ. The river has risen. opp: apa1 1 .
uꞌmaꞌ var. of uꞌmatʉ
uꞌma1 (poss: ɨipa uꞌma) n a variety of fruit similar to but smaller than the sapadilla; also smelly, but sweet gen: ipa 1 .
umainta vi be or become silent because you are sad
umanumɨ vi dance Toꞌ umanumɨ. They are
dancing.
umanunpa (der.) vt dance
umanunpa (der. of umanumɨ) vt dance with someone; referring to the western style dancing and not the Alleluia tradition Tanporon kon toꞌ umanunpaꞌpʉ iya. He danced with them all.
uꞌmatʉ (var: uꞌmaꞌ) vi 1) end Mɨrɨ kasa

© 2014 SIL International®

131

Akawaio-English Dictionary

piyaiꞌma amʉꞌ airɨ uꞌmatʉꞌpʉ. It was just like that that the giants came to an end. 2) last Unpɨ nin si esiꞌpʉ toꞌ uꞌmaꞌkapʉ pe iyeꞌsanʉmʉꞌpʉ kanau yaꞌ. The mouse was the
last one to jump into the canoe.
umɨ (cf: mainarʉ) n farm Umɨ ipoꞌtɨkɨ. Burn
the farm.
umoronkapʉ vr rest, relax Umoronkapʉ esi. I
am resting.
umotaika vt make proud emotaika (der.) vr proud
umuꞌta vt 1) bear children tʉumuꞌtatoꞌ kon pe ones having children 2) give birth 3) procreate
umʉi (cf: tamo) n 1) father, direct address 2) one's mother's brother, direct address 3) fatherin-law, direct address
uꞌna vt inhale, but only in reference to smoking tobacco Tamʉ uꞌnaꞌpʉ iya. He smoked tobacco.
uꞌnaika vt discover, uncover Iyuꞌnaikaꞌpʉ toꞌ uya. They discovered it.
uꞌnaꞌtɨ vt bury Toꞌ uya enpaꞌkaꞌpʉ iyuꞌnaꞌtɨiꞌ. They carried (him) out and buried him. syn: anʉꞌnʉkʉ .
unpɨ (var: munpɨ) n (non-possessed) a variety of mouse or rat Muridae
untʉman var. of ontʉman
upaka vi wake up Toꞌ upakaꞌpʉ. They woke up. enpaka (der.) vt waken
upayun be or become married cf: payunu .
uꞌpiꞌ n (non-possessed) dandruff upinimʉ (der. of pininpa) vi walk Toꞌ
upinimʉ. They are walking. (Usually, strolling, with
no end or purpose.)
upirorʉmʉ vi scream Ina upirorʉmʉ. We are
screaming.

upɨnʉmʉ vi swim Ina upɨnʉmʉꞌpʉ plastic kan kanau konekatoꞌ pe. We swam with a
plastic canoe we made.
upokoita (der. of pokoi) vi make sad Epokoimayaiꞌ awaꞌkari anoꞌmasaꞌ uya ke. I
am sorry I lost your axe.
upuꞌtɨkaꞌnʉkʉ var. of puꞌtɨkaꞌnʉpʉ vt forget something
upuꞌtɨkapʉ vi forget Toꞌ upuꞌtɨkaꞌpʉ. They
forgot.
upʉroꞌmerumʉ (cf: poropo 2) vi breathing fast, after walking, running or working hard
uramiꞌ2 n a variety of plant with flowers that put out little orange petals in a ball shape, edible
uramiꞌ1 n (non-possessed) a variety of bird that mocks other birds, small, yellow breast and black
urana n (non-possessed) labba Coelogenys paco
urapa (poss: aurapaai) (cf: arakapʉꞌsa) n 1) bow urapa ewa bowstring low stat: mapuru 2 . 2) a general term for any weapon
urari (poss: ɨurarii) n 1) a variety of vine, bearing a type of fruit 2) a type of poison made from the urari vine, used on dart tips for hunting
urariꞌ n (non-possessed) a variety of large rat with a white belly, edible
urayanta n world, the earth, Areruya word, possibly Makushi or Patamona syn: inonkʉiran, orʉ 1 .
urenpamʉ vr flash, with lightning or a glowing stick waving around syn: eꞌweuweuma .
uri n (non-possessed) a variety of fish, hourie fish Hoplias malabaricus gen: tʉpiꞌpɨkenan .
Uri paru nprop 1) the name given to a small creek to the left topside of Jawalla 2) the name given to a small creek near Kanparu village
urin (poss: ɨurimu) n a variety of underwater

© 2014 SIL International®

132

Akawaio-English Dictionary

grass Urintʉwʉꞌ nprop Orinduk, the name given to
Orinduk Falls, from which the English name is derived uriꞌsan (poss: ɨuriꞌsamo) n 1) girl 2) young woman 3) any female uriyaꞌ postp 1) because of, for the reason of King amʉꞌ rakʉiꞌ toꞌ uya ɨeꞌmaꞌtɨtoꞌ oton kon urɨ uriyaꞌ. They will bring you before kings because of me. 2) in place of urɨ (cf: u-) pron 1) I 2) me 3) my
urumaꞌ n 1) (non-possessed) seed, the size of a cricket ball, that opens up like a tulip flower 2) a variety of plant with broad leaves and big fruit that birds eat
uruꞌma1 var. of urupɨ1
uruꞌma2 n a variety of tree with nut-like flowers uruꞌma eꞌ the uru'ma tree
urumʉrʉꞌpʉ n ash
urupere (var: erupere) n 1) (non-possessed) dragon 2) a man in a mythical story who dresses up as a dragon
urupɨ2 n an illness with indications of burning skin and insides
urupɨ1 (var: uruꞌma1) n 1) a variety of tree with red seeds that burn like red pepper and are probably poisonous Iyuruꞌmaseꞌna iyeeꞌpʉ mɨrɨ, urupɨ ke. He came to poison him with urubɨ. 2) a type of poison from the red seeds of the urubɨ tree
urutuimɨ n a variety of bird
uruwaiꞌ (poss: ɨuruwasii) n 1) grave Toꞌ utɨꞌpʉ uruwaiꞌ pona. They went to the grave. 2) tomb
usaꞌka vr be or become stirred to cause trouble
usakarata vi be or become fermented Kasiri usakarataꞌpʉ. The cassava drink fermented.

usakorota vi be or become vexed Isakorotaꞌpʉ. He became vexed. syn: eꞌsɨꞌma .
usapiyeꞌkwa vi be or become impatient Sises Kʉrai uya enpoikatoꞌ pe tikinan pa tɨnɨn pɨꞌ, tʉusapiyeꞌkwaiꞌ pen urɨ pɨꞌ toꞌ makuꞌpɨ pɨꞌ. Jesus Christ might display his perfect patience
for me, the worst of sinners.
usari n (non-possessed) a variety of large bush deer Mazama americana
Usari pai nprop the name given to a small creek on the Upper Mazaruni River about 1000 feet down-river from the Kukui River mouth
usariwara n (non-possessed) a variety of tiger that is brown like a deer but with black stripes down its back
Usariwara nprop the name of the village located at the mouth of the Kukui River; Jawalla; a specific place near the mouth of the Parupa creek, near the Kukui mouth, for which the village is named
Usariwara pai nprop the original pronunciation of the area around Kukui mouth, named for the bay (pai) on the Kukui River near its mouth; the name given to the area behind present-day Jawalla village, Kukui mouth
usarɨ (der. of arɨ) vi walk Isarɨꞌpʉ. He walked. Tʉusasen nɨ. He is a walker.
usauroꞌ var. of usauroko
usauroko (var usaurokʉ; var usauroꞌ) (der. of auroko) vr speak Usaurokoꞌpʉ. I spoke. Ansauroꞌpai. I want to speak.
usaurokʉ var. of usauroko
useeꞌkwa (der. of eeꞌkwa) vr leak of its own accord Ɨutɨ useeꞌkwa. The house (roof) leaks. cf: utamuku.
useka vr be or become served tʉron nɨ pɨꞌ eꞌnɨ aꞌtai usekan nɨ pɨꞌ rɨ (in order) for us to be
serving others

© 2014 SIL International®

133

Akawaio-English Dictionary

usekama (der. of ekama) 1) vi confess 2) vr tell about oneself
usekamaꞌpo (der. of ekamaꞌpo) vr be asked questions Mɨrɨpan arɨꞌpʉ toꞌ uya usekamaꞌpo pɨꞌ nɨtoꞌ iwʉꞌ piyapai. And they took him from
the house of questioning/courthouse.
usekamʉ vr share among each other Amʉreꞌ pe pʉra toꞌ usekamʉꞌpʉ. Without selfishness they
shared among each other.
usekareꞌtɨ (der. of ekareꞌtɨ) vr blow a horn Isekareꞌtɨꞌpʉ. He blew a horn.
useketa vr be or become withered
useketuꞌka vr tired
useꞌkwaꞌtɨ (der. of eꞌkwaꞌtɨ) vr echoed
useꞌma (der. of eꞌma1) 1) vr take revenge Toꞌ useꞌmaꞌpʉ. They took revenge. 2) vi sacrifice Iseꞌmaꞌpʉ. He made a sacrifice. useꞌman tʉrawasomanin priest (one who works with
sacrifices)
usema vi prolific, having many babies in short succession
usemaika vt pack up one's things
useꞌme (der. of eꞌme) vi 1) warped, as in lumber Iseꞌmesaꞌ. It is warped. 2) crippled, unable to walk from Luke
usemenuꞌtɨ (der. of emenuꞌtɨ) vr paint oneself with annato dye, a traditional practice of the Akawayo Amerindians Mɨrɨ ke toꞌ usemenuꞌtɨ. They painted themselves with it.
usemiyakʉ vr wash one's own hands
usemiyaꞌtɨ vr grow arms or hands, as a tadpole turning into a frog Ɨꞌrɨ pe ɨyeꞌsaꞌ? Ɨusemiyaꞌtɨsaꞌ! What happened to you? You have
grown arms!
usemiyawa vi be or become lucky when trying something for the first time

usemo vi look for food, as hummingbirds and pigs do, with their snouts; not referring to people looking for food Isemoꞌpʉ. It rooted (looked for
food).
usemoꞌka (der. of emoꞌka, see under moꞌka) vr grow, referring to people or plants anapurɨnʉ kon nɨ usemoꞌka pɨꞌ miyarɨ rɨ
you are growing more in what you all believe
usemʉkʉ vi 1) flood Ina pata usemʉkʉꞌpʉ tanporo. Our whole place flooded. 2) be or become submerged, to go underwater, after already being partly in the water Wanaꞌ usemʉkʉꞌpʉ. The (floating) grass went underwater. opp: usenpo 2 . 3) swamp; for a boat to fill up with water
usemʉꞌnʉkʉ vr dive underwater Camel usemʉꞌnʉꞌpɨtʉ, iyɨkɨnta kʉrɨ rɨ pɨꞌ. The camel
dove, being mad with him.
tʉusemʉꞌsen (der.) n diver
usena (der. of ena1) vr shop useꞌnaiꞌka (var useꞌneꞌka) (der. of eꞌnaiꞌka)
1) vr cough syn: eꞌtoretorema. 2) vt cough Mʉn pe iseꞌnaiꞌkaꞌpʉ iya. S/He coughed up
blood.
usenaikʉ var. of usennaaikʉ
usenariꞌpa (der. of enariꞌpa) vr be or become scared Kaꞌpon amʉꞌ uya tʉwɨnɨ kon tukaiꞌ toꞌ usenariꞌpaꞌpʉ. They became afraid that
people would kill them.
useꞌnatuꞌka var. of useꞌnetuꞌka
usene (der. of ene2) vr be or become seen tʉusensen pen something that can't be seen, invisible Wanamari yau ɨusenkɨ. See you(rself)
in the mirror.
useꞌneꞌka var. of useꞌnaiꞌka
useꞌnetuꞌka (var: useꞌnatuꞌka) vi breathe Iseꞌnetuꞌka pʉra moroꞌ enaꞌpʉ. The fish

© 2014 SIL International®

134

Akawaio-English Dictionary

couldn't breathe.
usenkʉtʉ (der. of enkʉꞌnʉkʉ) vi go out, become extinguished, as in a fire Apoꞌ usenkʉtʉꞌpʉ. The fire went out.
usenna (der. of enna3) 1) vr ask for oneself; be asking tanporon kon pona rɨ tʉusennasen pe be about asking/praying for all people 2) vi pray 3) vi beg
usennaaikʉ (var usenaikʉ) (der. of ennaaikʉ) vr sniff
usennaiꞌpɨꞌnɨ (der. of ennaiꞌpɨꞌnɨ) vr perform a ritual on oneself, to apply a bina or traditional herbal medicine Isennaiꞌpɨꞌnɨꞌpʉ. He did a ritual
on himself (to apply a bina).
usennaiꞌsiꞌka var. of ennaꞌsiꞌka
usennaka vi 1) play usennakan nɨtoꞌ a game to play 2) work lightly 3) tease 4) pretend Tapuruui enʉꞌtɨ nin tʉutɨkapʉ iteseꞌ rʉꞌkwɨ rɨ isenakapɨtʉꞌpʉ. She would pack her things and
pretend to go somewhere.
usennaꞌmo (der. of ennaꞌmo) vi fall down so as to injure one's nose Mʉre usennaꞌmoꞌpʉ.
The child fell and hit his nose.
usennasika (der. of ennasika) 1) vr fall into water Tuna kaꞌ isennasikaꞌpʉ. He fell into the water (by himself/by accident). 2) vi dive into the water from a high place, being totally out of the water to begin with 3) vr submerge; to go underwater
usennaꞌsiꞌka vi sneeze Isenaꞌsiꞌkaꞌpʉ. He
sneezed.
usennasiriꞌmo vi choke on fluid going down into the trachea Usennasiriꞌmoꞌpʉ tuna kaꞌ. I
choked on water.
usenpataukwa2 (der. of enpataukwa) 1) vr wash oneself, wash one's face 2) vi be or become baptised Isenpataukwaꞌpʉ. He was baptised. syn: useuranka.

usenpataukwa1 vi preach Isenpataukwaꞌpʉ.
He preached.
usenpo (der. of enpo) vi 1) be or become floating Isenpokaꞌsaꞌ. It is floating. 2) be or become out of water from being submerged opp: usemʉkʉ 2.
usenpoika (der. of enpoika) vi be or become known Eke puꞌkenaꞌ usenpoikasaꞌ man ukoroꞌtaꞌnokon! A big prophet has been made
known to us!
usensima (der. of ensima) vr 1) change oneself Tanporo piꞌpɨ isensimasaꞌ aimorun ton pe. All his skin was changed to a white color. tʉusensimasen pen nɨ cannot be changed 2) change for oneself
usentaka (der. of entaka1) vi be or become passed up, passed by
usentuꞌma (der. of entuꞌma) vi have pity, show pity Ɨpɨꞌ usentuꞌma. I have pity for you. Ina pɨꞌ ɨusentuꞌmakɨ! You have pity on us!
usenuꞌmereꞌma vr be or become unknowing soꞌsi epuru usenuꞌmereꞌmaꞌpʉ mɨrɨ the
church leaders didn't know about it
usenuminka (der. of enuminka) vr think for oneself, study Mɨrɨ pɨꞌ isenuminkaꞌpʉ. He
considered that for himself.
usenupa (der. of enupa) 1) vi be or become taught, be or become learned 2) vr teach oneself
usenuꞌtɨ (var: usenutʉ) vi hurry Usenuꞌtɨnpaiꞌnokon. Let's all hurry.
usenutʉ var. of usenuꞌtɨ
usepiꞌkoma (der. of epiꞌkoma) vr to give oneself a ritual to be a better hunter, for example Isepiꞌkomaꞌpʉ. He gave himself a ritual.
usepiꞌtɨ (der. of epiꞌtɨ, see under piꞌtɨ) vr be or become healed syn: utoꞌpamʉ.

© 2014 SIL International®

135

Akawaio-English Dictionary

useremuku vi fall Mɨrɨpan useremukuꞌpʉ irau. And he fell before him.
userenka (der. of erenka) vr sing Toꞌ userenkaꞌpʉ. They sang.
useruma (der. of eruma) vr fast for oneself Iserumaꞌpʉ. He fasted.
usesakʉ (der. of esakʉ) vi be or become called or named Ɨmɨrɨ umʉre usesaꞌtoꞌ oton puꞌkenaꞌ Papa iwanoꞌ tukaiꞌ. You, my child, will
be called one of God's prophets.
useseꞌtɨ (der. of eseꞌtɨ, see under eseꞌ) vr name oneself Iseseꞌtɨꞌpʉ rɨ. He named himself.
useꞌseꞌtɨ (der. of eꞌseꞌtɨ) 1) vi steady Iseꞌseꞌtɨ pʉra iyesi. It is not steady./It can't stand up. 2) vr able to stand up 3) vr control oneself
useta n sound Main useta tʉpo, toꞌ uya Sises eneꞌpʉ tikin sarɨ. After the word's sound was
heard, they saw Jesus alone.
usetaꞌka (var usetakʉ) (der. of etaꞌka) vi 1) be or become physically tired 2) be or become weary or tired Usetaꞌkaꞌpʉ. I was disgusted.
usetakʉ var. of usetaꞌka
usetanʉkʉ (der. of etanʉkʉ) vr be or become ill by eating something forbidden Isetanʉkʉꞌpʉ. He became ill by eating something
forbidden.
usetuma vr twitch syn: eꞌkɨtɨꞌkɨtɨꞌma .
useuranka vr be or become baptised syn: usenpataukwa2 2 .
usewankama vi worry Toꞌ usewankama.
They worry.
usewankonoꞌma vi 1) be or become worried, troubled 2) be or become offended
usewaꞌnoman n (non-possessed) battle
usewansiriukwa vi 1) be or become shocked or dismayed 2) be or become dizzy

usewansiukwa vi be or become amazed or surprised Mɨrɨ aꞌtai toꞌ usewansiukwaꞌpʉ meruntɨ pe isauroko pɨꞌ. At that time, they were
amazed with his strong speech.
usewaꞌtɨ (der. of ewaꞌtɨ) vi 1) be or become tied up, usually referring to tying up one's hammock Mɨrɨpan usewaꞌtɨꞌpʉ sunwa tʉiwʉꞌ tepose. She tied up (her hammock) far from her house. 2) build, especially the tying involved in building a traditional trash roof house Tʉron kon iwʉꞌ ɨusewaꞌtɨsaꞌ. You built other's house. syn: amɨ.
usiꞌka (der. of iꞌka) vr be or become itchy
usiꞌkiꞌma (der. of iꞌkiꞌma) vr be or become shaken
usiꞌkɨrɨpɨtʉ vr be or become cramped
usiꞌkura (der. of iꞌkura) vr paddle Ina uyeeꞌkaaꞌpʉ tʉusiꞌkuraiꞌ. We came again,
paddling.
usiꞌminamʉ vi play
usiꞌnʉꞌ var. of usiꞌnʉkʉ
usiꞌnʉkʉ (var: usiꞌnʉpʉ; var: usiꞌnʉꞌ) vi shake with fright Ipan pe rɨ usiꞌnʉkʉꞌpʉ. They
shook badly (with fright).
usiꞌnʉnka (der. of iꞌnʉnka) 1) vi be or become loved Ɨusiꞌnʉnkatɨꞌ! You two (or more) must love! 2) vr love each other 3) vr love oneself
usiꞌnʉpʉ var. of usiꞌnʉkʉ
usiꞌpo vi be stung Usiꞌpoꞌpʉ. I was stung. eꞌsiꞌpo (der.) vr sting oneself
isiꞌponin (der.) n stinger
usipʉtʉꞌtɨ (der. of ipʉrʉꞌtɨ) vr be or become adorned, decorate onself
usitanʉkʉ vi growing poorly Mɨrɨpan uya usitanʉkʉꞌpʉ. And then they were not growing
healthy.

© 2014 SIL International®

136

Akawaio-English Dictionary

usiꞌtɨ2 vi pack
usiꞌtɨ1 vi be or become tangled Siꞌnaꞌ usiꞌtɨꞌpʉ.
The bush rope became tangled.
usiꞌtu (der. of iꞌtu) 1) vr know for oneself Usiꞌtuꞌpʉ. I knew that for myself. usiꞌtupɨꞌnɨ practise/I'm trying. 2) vi try Kaꞌpon usiꞌtuꞌpʉ aꞌpɨtʉ iꞌse. The man tried to touch/reach him.
usɨꞌnɨ vi engage in sexual intercourse Usɨꞌnɨpai.
Let's have sex.
usɨnka (der. of ɨnka) vi be or become stretched or elongated Isɨnkaꞌpʉ. It became stretched.
usɨurɨ vi sport, be more active, look for sexual partners Sinau amʉꞌ usɨurɨꞌpʉ si. The chinau
toads were sporting.
usuꞌta vi urinate Isuꞌtaꞌpʉ. He urinated.
usuꞌwaikɨta vi be or become spoiled, especially meat or stew
utaiꞌkwa vi feel the burning sensation of hot pepper in one's mouth
utaimerunpa (der. of aimerunpa) 1) vi be or become restless 2) vi itch 3) vi writhe, especially in pain Toꞌ utaimerunpaꞌpʉ. They writhed in pain. 4) vr be or become pained Soisa amʉꞌ utaimerunpaꞌpʉ ipan pe rɨ. The soldiers
became very worried.
utaipo vr be or become confused
utaka vi be or become bubbly, as in cassava drink as it ferments eki utakasaꞌ the foam from
cassava drink as it ferments
utakama 1) vi leaving something undone 2) vi take the lesser one, the less perfect one, the rotten piece Iwarʉka utakamaꞌpʉ. The monkey got the leftovers. 3) vi failed to do what you hoped to do Umɨ utamakasaꞌ man. The farm failed to burn properly. 4) vr be or become prevented from doing something Utakamasaꞌ. I was prevented from it. 5) vr prevent oneself from

doing something utakaꞌma vi be or become confused Eraꞌ iꞌpai
utakaꞌmaꞌpʉ. Herod's head was confused.
utakaruꞌtɨ (var: utaꞌkwarʉꞌtɨ) vi be or become filled Kʉrɨ rɨ utakaruꞌtɨꞌpʉ Papa Aꞌkawarʉ ke. She was filled with God's Spirit.
utakitiꞌkwa (der. of akitiꞌkwa) vr become broken Kʉrɨ tɨꞌ pona itaꞌmoꞌkasaꞌ utakitiꞌkwa mɨrɨ ipʉra rɨ tʉutaꞌsiꞌkɨrɨiꞌ.
Whoever falls on the rock will become broken so that nothing can be picked up.
utaꞌkɨrɨ vi 1) laugh Toꞌ utaꞌkɨrɨꞌpʉ. They laughed. 2) smile
utaꞌkoka (der. of aꞌkoka) vr be in an open state or to become open Ekamaꞌpo uya ɨyewan kon utaꞌkokatoꞌ pe iweyu ene pa. I ask that
your hearts be open so that you see the light.
utaꞌkuꞌtɨ vr be or become fulfilled Wakʉ pe kuru ɨwesi mɨrɨ apurɨ auya pɨꞌ Papa Maimu ɨpiyaꞌ iyeꞌsaꞌ rʉꞌpʉ utaꞌkuꞌtɨ yau. It is very
good that you believe what God's Word says about you will be fulfilled.
utakʉꞌma vr be or become held back eꞌtane rɨ itakʉꞌma pɨꞌ teꞌsen uya rɨ itakʉꞌma kaꞌpon amʉꞌ uya rɨ Papa ewaꞌnoma namaiꞌ but
something is holding him back so that people cannot hate God. . ..
utaꞌkwaka vi be or become bright Pata utaꞌkwakaꞌpʉ. The place became bright.
utaꞌkwarʉ vr be or become spirited itaꞌkwarʉ pʉra iyesiꞌpʉ. He was without a spirit/He became
mentally retarded.
utaꞌkwarʉka vr 1) be or become depressed 2) taken by force Tʉutaꞌkwarʉkaiꞌ pʉra toꞌ esiꞌpʉ. They did not use force.
utaꞌkwarʉꞌtɨ var. of utakaruꞌtɨ
utama (der. of ama1) vr move oneself; move

© 2014 SIL International®

137

Akawaio-English Dictionary

something for one's own benefit Autamakɨ.
Move yourself.
utaꞌmo vi get bigger "Poꞌ!" itaꞌmokaaꞌpʉ asaꞌ iteꞌkwa. "Pok!" she got bigger a second time.
utaꞌmoꞌka vi 1) fall Mɨrɨpan tʉron nɨ ton utaꞌmoꞌkaꞌpʉ tɨꞌ pona. And then others fell among rocks. 2) to lose a baby by spontaneous abortion, by no fault of anyone 3) backslide, to fall back into sin after leaving a life of sin
utamoꞌkoro (der. of amoꞌkoro) vr 1) wrestle each other Toꞌ utamoꞌkoropɨtʉꞌpʉ tuna kau. They wrestled each other in the water. 2) wrestle oneself
utaꞌmorʉka (var iꞌmo1) (der. of aꞌmorʉka) vr be thrown down tanporo rɨ itaꞌmorʉkatoꞌ oton everything will be thrown down Se kasaꞌkʉra utaꞌmorʉkanin. This calabash will be thrown
down.
utamuku (cf: ) vi enter Tuna utamuku kanau yaꞌ. Water is entering into the canoe. cf: useeꞌkwa .
utamʉriꞌtɨ vt smoke tobacco
utanoꞌma (der. of anoꞌma) 1) vr lose oneself Mɨrɨpan pɨꞌ itanoꞌmapɨtʉꞌpʉ, asanta anoꞌmapɨtʉꞌpʉ iya. And he became lost, he lost the path. 2) vi be or become lost 3) vi be or become mad, insane
utanpokʉma (der. of anpokʉma) vr bother or trouble oneself Katanpokomai. Don't be
bothered.
utanʉmʉ (der. of anʉmʉ1) 1) vr select for oneself 2) vi be or become selected Itonpa ton uya anʉnsaꞌ esiꞌpʉ tʉutanʉntoꞌ kon eseru yau. His colleagues were choosing as was their custom to be selected from among themselves. 3) vi be or become lifted up
utaperʉka vi show off
utapɨnpɨtʉ vr be or become cramped Uwiꞌsi

utapɨnpɨtʉ.. My calf is cramped.
utaꞌpokʉ vi 1) fall Mɨrɨ aꞌtai itenu si eꞌkwaꞌpʉ itenu apai moroꞌ piꞌpɨ kasa ɨꞌrɨ rɨ nawon utaꞌpokʉꞌpʉ. Something like fish scales fell from his eyes. 2) drop
utaꞌpoꞌnaka vr apply something sweet smelling on the skin
utapuiman n a skin rash and other symptoms from seeing someone returning from work; the returning person can blow on you - not taren and you will feel better
utapurɨ (der. of apurɨ1) vr 1) brag Ɨpɨꞌnokon kuru rɨ tʉutapurɨ kon pe Papa munkɨ amʉꞌ auroꞌka pɨꞌ ina esi. it is really about you all that we are bragging when we talk to God's children. 2) believe in oneself
utaranka (der. of aranka) vi be or become untied mɨrɨ tʉpo toꞌ auronpɨtoꞌ toꞌ uya ke utarankapɨtʉꞌpʉ. And so the things with which
they were tied became untied.
utaꞌreꞌtɨ (der. of aꞌreꞌtɨ) vr feed oneself opp: apʉꞌka.
utarʉka vi vomit
utaꞌsi (der. of aꞌsi) 1) vr be or become held Toꞌ tonpa ton esiꞌpʉ iyeꞌkwɨꞌpɨꞌsaꞌ ton paranka ton pɨꞌ tʉutaꞌsipɨꞌse Their partners were holding onto broken pieces of boards. 2) vi shake hands as in a greeting Ɨsemiyatʉ pɨꞌ toꞌ utaꞌsiꞌpʉ. They
shook hands.
utaꞌsiꞌkɨrɨ vi be or become crushed
utaꞌsisaꞌ n stain, something holding on to something else
utasiꞌtɨ vi form a line Toꞌ utasiꞌtɨsaꞌ. They
formed a line.
utasoka vr commit suicide, kill oneself
utaꞌsoꞌka (der. of aꞌsoꞌka) vi be or become stabbed

© 2014 SIL International®

138

Akawaio-English Dictionary

utaꞌsuꞌka (der. of aꞌsuꞌka) 1) vi be or become kissed 2) vr kiss each other Toꞌ utaꞌsuꞌkaꞌpʉ. They kissed. syn: epeisuꞌka.
utaꞌsuꞌkan (der. of utaꞌsuꞌka, see under aꞌsuꞌka) n a kiss
utatɨmuruku (var: utatumuruku) vi to experience an uncontrollable jerk or pain in one's side that is a sign that what one is thinking of will never happen utatɨmuruꞌna (der.) n jerk
utatɨmuruꞌna (der. of utatɨmuruku) n an inadvertant jerk or stab of pain in one's side
utaꞌtuꞌma2 (der. of aꞌtuꞌma1) vi 1) push off from shore Toꞌ nin si utaꞌtuꞌmakaaꞌpʉ. They pushed off again. 2) float
utaꞌtuꞌma1 (der. of aꞌtuꞌma2) vr be or become worse Uyeꞌnetʉ utaꞌtuꞌmasaꞌ man. My illness
is getting worse.
utatumuruku var. of utatɨmuruku
utaukwʉrʉka vr lose one's tail, as happens to a tadpole as he turns into a frog Ɨꞌrɨ pe ɨyeꞌsaꞌ? Autaukwʉrʉkasaꞌ! What happened to you? You
have lost your tail!
utausinpa (der. of ausin) vr be or become excited
utawasirunpa vr befriend, especially between a boy and a girl
uteramire n (non-possessed) the hue of a mountain from a distance through the haze
utereta vr blood clotting on one's skin Mʉn uteretasaꞌ man. The blood has clotted.
uꞌtɨ vi 1) come down Tʉparusi ton nuꞌtɨꞌpʉ iya non pona. He took his sisters down under the ground (into a shelter). 2) get off 3) go down 4) drift down-river
utɨ vi 1) go Shop taꞌ utɨ mɨrɨ. I will go/am going to the shop. cf: enta 1 . 2) spread, as an idiom

Sises ekareei si utɨꞌpʉ mɨ awɨrɨ rɨ Judea poro. The word (about) Jesus spread all throughout Judea. 3) fall as a tree in the woods Yʉi utɨsaꞌ.
A tree just fell.
utɨrinka vt roll
utoꞌpamʉ (der. of oꞌpamʉ) vr recover, regain one's health, feel better again after an illness Ɨmʉre utoꞌpamʉ pe peꞌ nai? Is your child recovering? syn: usepiꞌtɨ.
utuꞌ n 1) (non-possessed) a variety of wood ant 2) wood ant nest found in many tree tops
Utuꞌ nprop the name given to a creek (where?)
Utuk Awen nprop the name given to a large bay along the Upper Mazaruni river, down-river from the Kukui mouth
utunta vi go home syn: ennaꞌpo .
uturumʉ vi 1) crow or make another variety of bird noise Wairarimɨ esiꞌpʉ tʉuturunsen bell kasa. Wairarimɨ was making the sound of a bell. 2) whistle 3) sing
uꞌwi n farine
uy- var. of u-
uya postp 1) Agent marker for transitive verb phrases; acts as a postposition in a passive translation, as in, "The dishes were washed by me." Parapi ton koruka uya. I am washing wares. 2) I, as subject of a transitive sentence Pon ton utuꞌkunapɨtʉ uya. I am washing
clothes.
auya you-subj
iya he, she, it-subj
uyawasiri var. of uyawasirʉ
uyawasirʉ (var: uyawasiri) to be or become married
uyee var. of uyepʉ
uyeꞌpu vi be or become burned Apoꞌ yau

© 2014 SIL International®

139

Akawaio-English Dictionary

uyeꞌpusaꞌ. I was burned in the fire. uyepʉ (var: uyee) vi 1) come "Ɨuyeꞌtoꞌ kon

pe," taꞌpʉ Sir uya. Sir said, "You all must come." Toꞌ uyeꞌtoꞌ oton they are the ones to come Tuna uyepʉ. Rain is coming. cf: ɨsipʉ . 2) arrive

Ʉʉ

-ʉi var. of -i2

Ww

waꞌ (poss: ɨweꞌ) (cf: waꞌseꞌma) n excreta paka weꞌ cow excreta
waꞌ euta large intestine, including the anus, or "feces hole"
Wa paru nprop the name given to a creek along the path between Pipiri pai and Amoko kupai
waꞌ yen toilet, outhouse or hole for depositing human waste
waainkurai n Adam's apple
waamori var. of wayamori
wai4 n 1) ite palm tree 2) the fruit of the ite palm tree
wai3 n 1) throat syn: esen . 2) trachea; the windpipe, including the voice box
wai2 (poss: awaai1) (cf: pɨpu 2; cf: rikarika) n a musical instrument important to the Alleluia tradition
wai1 (poss: awaai2) n 1) container or any object designed to hold liquid 2) calabash
-wai (var: -wʉiꞌ) first person; I, myself; used to show emphasis Kareta yapisipɨꞌwai, Papa. It is
really me receiving the paper, God.
waika n 1) (non-possessed) coast 2) a place of a relatively middle distance away from one

Waikaꞌ var. of Waika
Waika (var: Waikaꞌ) nprop the name given to a place near Kuru'pun Waikaꞌ taꞌ utɨ serɨ. I'm
going to Waika'.
waikanaimɨ n a variety of giant deer
waikaraꞌpɨ (poss: awaikaraꞌpɨɨi) n 1) a woven basket or quake 2) the pattern of weaving used to make a basket or quake
Waikaꞌta nprop the name given to a settlement
waiken n a variety of reindeer, savannah deer Cariacus savannarum
waiku (poss: awaikuru) n traditional red cloth worn around the waist by men and older boys syn: kamiꞌsa, saro2, kareku .
waimaꞌsa2 n a variety of plant - What kind?
waimaꞌsa1 n (non-possessed) a variety of lizard Lacertilia
waime n (non-possessed) millipede
waipa n (non-possessed) a type of round house with thatched roof, indigenous to the Akawayo, usually with one central post syn: tukusipan ; cf: inpɨ 1 .
waira n bush cow syn: kuꞌyunkuꞌyun,

© 2014 SIL International®

140

Akawaio-English Dictionary

kaꞌtaipa, maipuri .
wairaꞌ n penis syn: yun .
Waira Peyakʉrʉ rʉꞌpʉ nprop the name given to a landing along the Upper Mazaruni River, above Imbaimadai, meaning 'bush cow landing'
Wairaꞌmaꞌpʉ nprop the name given to an area up the Kako River from Kako village
wairarimɨ n 1) (non-possessed) a variety of large tiger; usually in fictional stories 2) lion 3) animal with horns, bigger than a cow
wairawoꞌ (cf: akarasa; cf: maipa; cf: kuran; cf: poro1) n a variety of fruit tree, waiti
waisoro n (non-possessed) a variety of sparrow; small, black and white, river skimmer Hirundo erythrogaster
waitamera n a variety of bird, swallow puff bird Chelidoptero tenebrosa
waitoꞌ 1) the shape of a woodskin canoe Waitoꞌ pe ɨiwʉꞌ esi. Your house is the shape of a woodskin canoe. 2) inside surface of a container iwaitoꞌpan his interior
waitururu n funnel, often made from calabash
waitʉtʉ n (non-possessed) a variety of bird well-known for its song
Waitʉtʉ yen nprop the name given to a settlement where the Hunters' ancestor was raised; about six miles from Ipana'muru pai
waiyo (var: waiyoꞌpan; poss: awaiyori) (cf: ineꞌneꞌ) n salt
waiyoꞌpan var. of waiyo
waꞌka (poss: awaꞌkari) n axe
wakapu n the supporting posts of a house
waꞌkapun something made of metal, steel, or cast iron
wakaꞌta n a variety of bird, same as kuyapo', toucan syn: kuyapoꞌ .

wakau n (non-possessed) butterfly, a general term Rhopalocera
wakawaꞌ1 (poss: awakawakʉ) n 1) traditional backpack, three-sided and enclosed 2) purse
wakawaꞌ2 n 1) a variety of tree from which inner bark is peeled for use as head and shoulder straps on back packs 2) a variety of vine
wakoꞌwa n (non-possessed) a variety of bird, a dove Columba speciosa
wakʉ nom 1) someone or something good Wakʉ pe uriꞌsan esi. The girl is good. opp: ɨri 2 . 2) someone or something perfect 3) someone or something quiet 4) someone or something peaceful 5) someone or something clean opp: ɨri
1 . 6) someone or something beautiful 7) something or someone holy Wakʉ Aꞌkwarʉ the
Holy Spirit
waꞌkʉtʉ vt 1) shield Uwaꞌkʉꞌsaꞌ yʉi uya. The
tree stopped me (by falling in front of me).
Uwaꞌkʉꞌkaꞌseꞌna. I'm stopping you (to take passage on your boat). 2) stop 3) block Tuꞌkan nɨ epopɨꞌsaꞌ uya man waꞌkʉꞌpɨꞌnin. Plenty people I find who block me (from going). 4) divide eꞌwaꞌkʉtʉ (der.) vr shield
waꞌkwama (poss: awaꞌkwamai) n 1) a variety of vine 2) a variety of natural rope from the vine of the same name, used in tying down a thatch roof, also called nibi gen: nipi 2 .
wan nom someone hungry Iwan pe iyesi. He is hungry. opp: taꞌreꞌ .
wana n a variety of tree, often cut and used as a walking stick wana yeꞌ the wana tree
wanaꞌ (poss: awanapu) n 1) grass, a general term 2) weed, a general term
wanamari (var: waramari; poss: awanamarii) n 1) mirror Wanamari eꞌkwɨꞌpɨꞌsaꞌ. The glass/mirror broke. 2) glass

© 2014 SIL International®

141

Akawaio-English Dictionary

wanapu n a general term for weeds
wanapʉimɨ n (non-possessed) a variety of lemon grass Cymbogea citratus
wanawana n a variety of wasp that lives in the ground and has a reddish back Wanawana uya turʉꞌ anɨꞌpʉ. The wasp ate the fly.
Wanawon nprop 1) the name of a settlement on the Kukui river; boundary between Jawalla and Pipiri pai 2) the name given the creek near the same settlement
wanmʉra1 var. of wanpʉra
wanmʉra2 postp 1) behind someone, in back of someone iwanmʉra usauroꞌnɨ talking behind his/her back 2) ignorant, without knowing about something 3) unconsciously
wannɨ1 n abscess
wannɨ2 vi be, exist Epuru wannɨ uyepʉ, ɨurɨtɨꞌ kon, ɨurɨtɨꞌ kon. (the one who is) A leader is coming, welcome him, welcome him. syn: eꞌnɨ 2, esi .
waꞌnoꞌ (poss: awaꞌnoto) n drink, any kind of drink
wanpʉra (var: wanmʉra1) something forgotten or left behind wanpʉra rɨ iteseꞌ utɨꞌpʉ. I went
for something I'd forgotten.
wansaraimɨ n (non-possessed) preying mantis
wanteima n a type of intestinal disease; gastroenteritis; diarrhea with abdominal pains
waꞌnʉ n 1) aunt, direct address, in particular, one's father's sister or one's mother's brother's wife 2) mother-in-law, direct address indir add: ewoꞌpʉ . 3) mother's cousin, direct address
waꞌnʉpʉ (poss: anwaꞌnʉpʉ) n nephew, to a female
wanʉꞌtɨ vt bother, trouble Tɨwɨ nesii tiꞌsa kʉꞌwanʉꞌtɨpai. Don't bother the teacher any
longer.

wapiro n carrying case for carrying multiple numbers of cassava bread cakes together syn: peipan 2 .
Wapisana var. of Wapiyana
wapiya 1) conj before ina uya teporo kon wapiya before we find them 2) adv first
Wapiyana (var: Wapisana) nprop 1) a Wapishana person 2) the Wapishana tribe of amereindians in Guyana and Brasil
wapiyaroꞌ n 1) (non-possessed) first one wapiyaroꞌ kaꞌpon amʉꞌ iꞌtutoꞌ the first time people were counted 2) eldest member of a group, such as siblings
wapu (poss: awapu) (cf: ) n 1) shield 2) protector 3) covering 4) shelter 5) mediator wapuꞌtɨ (der.) vt conceal
eꞌwapuꞌtɨ (der.) 1) vr excuse 2) vi surrounded
wapuꞌtɨ (der. of wapu) vt conceal Tʉmakooi wapuꞌtɨꞌpʉ iya. He hid his wrong/sin.
wapʉrʉmʉ vi come out from a pit or depression Tʉwapʉrʉmʉ kon aꞌtai, . . .. When
they came out of a pit, . . ..
waraꞌ (cf: warakapuri) n (non-possessed) a variety of large, scaled fish, yarrau Hoplerythrimis unitaeniatus gen: tʉpiꞌpɨkenan .
wara2 n a variety of large catfish Brachyplatystoma filamente
wara1 n soup made from the drippings from squeezing the grated cassava
warai (var: waraino) postp like, resembling Kaꞌpon amʉꞌ utɨꞌpʉ bell warai si arɨꞌpʉ toꞌ uya. The people went and they took something like a bell with them. syn: kasa .
waraiꞌka vt scratch Iꞌpai waraiꞌkaꞌpʉ iya. He
scratched her head.

© 2014 SIL International®

142

Akawaio-English Dictionary

eꞌwaraiꞌka (der.) vr scratch
waraino var. of warai
waraito (poss: awaraito) (cf: eꞌse) n used by a male to refer to his female cousin and vice versa; indirect address
warakapuri (cf: waraꞌ) n 1) young yarrau fish 2) a variety of fish, yarrau Hoplerythrimis unitaeniatus
warakwa var. of warauka
warama (poss: awarama) n eyebrow
warama siꞌpoꞌ n brow hair waramari var. of wanamari
waramatan n a variety of tree with yellow flowers
warami n (non-possessed) a variety of bird, red pigeon
warami are a variety of palm tree
warapari n a variety of tree
warara n (non-possessed) a variety of turtle, possibly only found in the Rupununi area
waraꞌtɨ joker, a person rarely serious Waraꞌtɨ pe iyesi. He is a joker.
warau nom something open Warau pan iyesiꞌpʉ. It was open.
warauka (var: warakwa) vt 1) open Iwarakwaꞌpʉ uya. I opened it. syn: aꞌkoka . 2) spread out eꞌwarauka (der.) vi opened
waraꞌuri n (non-possessed) a variety of swimming caterpillar
warawoꞌ n 1) boy 2) young man 3) any male
warepan n an variety of indigenous singing and dancing
Wariꞌ nprop the name given to a creek on the

Upper Mazaruni River upriver from Jawalla village on the right bank of the Mazaruni, near the William farm landing
Wariꞌ ken nprop the name of a settlement near to Pipiri pai, near the Donald family settlement
warikɨ n a variety of sloth-like animal
Wariꞌkwaimɨ nprop the name given to a settlement in the Jawalla District; bottom-side from A'piu pai, along the Upper Mazaruni River; also a location above Inbaimadai (?); also a location above Kako on the Kako River (?)
warima n (non-possessed) a variety of tree from which roofing slats are cut
warin1 (var: warinpa) n (non-possessed) search
warin2 n a variety of vine used as a frame for back packs
warinpa (var iwa1) var. of warin1 1) vt look for or search for Iwarinpaꞌpʉ toꞌ uya. They searched for him. 2) n search
wariꞌsa (poss: awariꞌsarʉ) n traditional Akawayo backpack with three sides and a bottom; filled and tied closed with string and strapped to one's back with shoulder and/or head straps
warisimɨ n a variety of anteater
waroꞌkoꞌko n a variety of woodpecker
warokopa n a basket mostly made to hold poisoned darts
waroꞌma n (non-possessed) a variety of fine frog, edible, lives on land
waroꞌmapɨ n (non-possessed) a variety of bitter cassava
waropai n a variety of ground provision or tuber, similar to dasheen
waruwa (poss: awaruwaai) n 1) a variety of tree, candlewood tree Parinari sp. 2) incense from the candlewood tree 3) a substance from a tree used to light a fire 4) a portable torch made with the same sap

© 2014 SIL International®

143

Akawaio-English Dictionary

warʉkɨ n 1) (non-possessed) a variety of tree bearing seeds, the nut of which is sweetly edible 2) a variety of nut from the same tree
wasaꞌ vt 1) mash Suruwa wasaꞌkaꞌpʉ uya. I mashed suruwa. syn: eꞌpa 2 . 2) crush 3) crush with one's foot, stamp
wasa n large intestine
waꞌseꞌma (cf: waꞌ) n anus
waꞌseꞌnaukwa vr wipe oneself after defecating
wasiwiya n a variety of palm tree
wata n a spirit stone, used by piyai'san or shamans to discern spirits
watakon (cf: isakon) n companion; someone always near one, as a young child with his mother
waꞌtakuran n a variety of tree, the leaves of which are used to relieve cold symptoms
waꞌtana n 1) a special type of weapon used in warfare in ages past 2) club
watapu n horn Watapu turunpaꞌpʉ iya. He blew the horn. cf: retʉ 1 .
wataꞌpʉ (cf: pataꞌpʉ)
waꞌtautɨ n (non-possessed) a variety of snakeeating bird
watoꞌ n flint syn: kako .
waꞌtuwa n (non-possessed) a variety of tree that is used for wood, not a hard wood
watʉrʉiꞌtɨ vt put a wall around something
waꞌwa (cf: amai, aꞌai, noꞌnoꞌ, koꞌkoi) n aunt, in particular, one's mother's sister or one's father's brother's wife, direct reference indir add: san 2 .
wawin n a variety of duck
wayaima vt wave Ɨyemiya wayaimakɨ. Wave
your hand.

wayaka n (non-possessed) the mythological tree from which all plant seeds came Wayaka yeꞌ nakaꞌpʉ toꞌ uya. They cut down the wayaga tree.
wayakana n iguana Iguana iguana
wayamaꞌ akʉ n (non-possessed) a variety of locust, often found on blood wood trees
Wayamoꞌre nprop the name given to a famous Akawayo warrior
wayamori (var: waamori) n (non-possessed) a variety of land turtle Geochelone denticulata
wayapaimɨ n tuberculosis
wayapiro n 1) a variety of vine that grows in the bush, used to weave opa and wari'sa 2) a variety of bush 3) rope made from same 4) a variety of palm tree Desmoncus
wayara n (non-possessed) a variety of macaw Ara macas
Wayara yen nprop the name given to a village along the Apau River
Wayarare nprop Wayarare, a mythological figure, married to Sirikɨwai
wayaura n 1) (non-possessed) a variety of bird with a number of different songs 2) a variety of vine that grows on the savannah
weineꞌ (poss: ɨweinepu) n baby sling
weiꞌtɨ vt shine on something Kaatʉ winɨpaino aꞌkwa uya toꞌ weiꞌtɨꞌpʉ. light from God shone on
them.
eꞌweiꞌtɨ (der.) vi shine
wekupi (poss: ɨwekupiri) n 1) a variety of tree from which wall bark is taken, the paromali tree 2) wall made from tree of same name
Wekupi pai nprop the name given to a turn in Sawa creek on which the John family farm is located
wekupiriꞌtɨ vt put up traditional walling made from the bark of a certain tree

© 2014 SIL International®

144

Akawaio-English Dictionary

wemaimupa var. of maimupa
wen (var: wenturupaai) n stomach
wenai postp beside, with Ɨyewaꞌnomanin pen esi yau ɨwenainoꞌ pe iyesi. If he is not your
enemy, he is beside/with you.
weꞌnakan n 1) rectum 2) small intestine
Wenamu nprop 1) the name given to a river along the Guyana-Brasil border 2) the name given to the village of Kai'kan, because it lies along the Wenamu River
wenamʉꞌ (poss: ɨwenantu) (cf: wenantu) n 1) cassava bread 2) filler, something to go with meat to make a more complete meal, includes rice, potato, provision, etc.
wenantu (poss: ɨwenantu) (cf: wenamʉꞌ) n cassava bread of someone
weꞌnaꞌsi n eave of a house
weꞌnaꞌsokoi nom 1) upside down Toꞌ sinkaꞌpʉ iya weꞌnaꞌsokoi pe toꞌ arɨ rawɨrɨ. He hung
them upside down and carried them that way. 2)
inside out wenturupaai var. of wen
wenuꞌka vt disembowel, remove the guts of a living thing Usari amʉꞌ wenuꞌkaꞌpʉ toꞌ uya.
They disembowelled the deer.
wenuꞌpɨ (poss: ɨwenuꞌpɨ) n 1) gut, intestines iwenuꞌpɨ mukuꞌpɨ small intestine iwenuꞌpɨ epotorʉꞌpʉ large intestine 2) intestine wenuꞌpɨ mukuꞌpɨ / wenuꞌpɨsikʉ the small intestine wenuꞌpɨ epotorʉꞌpʉ the large intestine
werei (poss: ɨwereei) n 1) skin sore syn: ereꞌ 1 . 2) blister
wereiꞌka (der. of wereita) vt make a blister, give someone a blister
wereita (var: wʉrita) vi be or become blistered wereiꞌka (der.) vt blister

werui n (non-possessed) a variety of small sparrow bird with black body and white beak, tawa bird
werusi n a variety of ground dove Columbigallina passerini
weruwe n 1) (non-possessed) housefly Musca domestica 2) maggot, the larval stage of the housefly Mɨrɨpan yaꞌ weruwe emoikwasaꞌ erikʉꞌpʉ. And so, being infested with maggots, he
died
wetumʉ vt keep someone else awake eꞌwetumʉ (der.) vr stay awake
weuweukwa vi flash, as in lightning Kamiriꞌ weuweukwaꞌpʉ. The lightning flashed.
weyu (poss: ɨweyu) n 1) day cf: wʉi . 2) light 3) match; any stick with a light on the end of it 4) candle
winɨ postp 1) through 2) by way of Panton serɨ urɨ winon. This story (is told) by me. 3) behind, when used with e'mapʉ 4) from Goliath Gath winon tukaiꞌ. Goliath, from Gath, as it was said. winon (attrib.) n
winɨkʉiꞌ postp towards
winɨpai postp from Kaatʉ winɨpaino aꞌkwa uya toꞌ weiꞌtɨꞌpʉ. Light from God shone (on)
them.
winon (attrib. of winɨ) n
wiyɨꞌ n a variety of small insect that chirps in the mid-day heat
wiyoika vt make an object curved in shape Waya amʉꞌ wiyoikaꞌpʉ uya. I made the wires
curved.
wɨ var. of wɨnɨ
wɨnin (der. of wɨnɨ) n killer
wɨnɨ (var: wɨ) vt 1) hit eꞌwɨpɨꞌnɨsaꞌ injury 2) rap,

© 2014 SIL International®

145

Akawaio-English Dictionary

knock 3) kill Iwɨnɨꞌpʉ toꞌ uya. They killed him. 4) clap hands Toꞌ emiya ton wɨpɨtʉꞌpʉ toꞌ uya. They clapped their hands. 5) kick 6) trick Inwɨpai rɨ iyeꞌpɨtʉꞌpʉ. He was wanting to trick him. 7) filled or covered eꞌwɨnɨ (der.) 1) vr hit 2) vi hit 3) vi fight
wɨnin (der.) n killer
wɨsaꞌ (der.) n killed
wɨpʉrema var. of ɨpʉrema
wɨrɨ n (non-possessed) a variety of white-backed frog; makes a loud 'wuri' sound
wɨrɨiꞌka (var: wɨrɨiꞌma) vt stir Iꞌkwarumosaꞌ wɨrɨiꞌkaꞌpʉ uya. I stirred the porridge.
wɨrɨikaai (poss: ɨwɨrɨikaai) n stirrer for stirring porridge
wɨrɨiꞌma var. of wɨrɨiꞌka
wɨrɨiwɨrɨi (poss: ɨwɨrɨiwɨrɨɨi) (cf: kasiri wɨrɨi, sokoisokoi) n a wooden beater used to stir cassava drink as it cooks
wɨrɨiwɨrɨima vt stir Kasiri wɨrɨiwɨrɨimaꞌpʉ uya. I stirred the cassava drink.
wɨrɨkatari n a variety of ant that flies toward the end of the Tʉmon season
wɨrɨꞌmai n 1) cousin, used by a female when addressing her female cousin indir add: eruꞌ 1 . 2) sister-in-law, direct address among females, used by a husband's sister to address her husband's wife, and vicaversa indir add: eruꞌ 2 .
wɨrumɨ n (non-possessed) a variety of thick grass, sometimes used by the Arekuna or other savannah inhabitants for thatching
wɨsaꞌ (der. of wɨnɨ) n someone or something killed
wɨꞌsɨꞌ (poss: ɨwɨꞌsɨpu) n sand
wɨꞌsɨkʉ a sandy place Wɨꞌsɨkʉꞌpan iyeꞌpɨtʉꞌpʉ.

He was getting sandy.
wɨꞌsɨꞌpɨ (poss: ɨyɨꞌpɨ) n 1) any type of bone cf: ɨꞌpʉ . 2) traditional bone flute
wɨꞌtɨiꞌ n the leaf of a variety of plant, which can be applied to cure ground itch
woi var. of poi
woiwoima vt spin eꞌwoiwoima (der.) vi spin
wokouwokouma (var: okouokouma) vt shake, as in a tree, to bing down fruit
won1 (var: yon) (cf: pon1) n 1) wrapper 2) cover 3) holder eki won a traditional way of bundling a
number of cassava cakes together
won2 postp around -won nominalizer, used on verbs to form a noun
equivalent to the preceding noun phrase Serɨ kanan panton, se kasa tawon. This is another
story, this is how it is told.
wonka (der. of ewomʉ) vt open Tʉmaꞌsii wonkaꞌpʉ iya. He opened his matches.
woꞌnoro var. of oꞌno
wontɨ vt 1) wrap, surround Iwontɨꞌpʉ iya kareku ke. She wrapped him with a cloth. 2) provide with a cloth 3) dress 4) surround
woꞌpa vt offer a drink Iwoꞌpaꞌpʉ iya. He offered
him a drink.
wosi var. of osi1 wotori (poss: ɨyotorii) n animal hunted for its
meat, any type of mammal, bird, fish Uyotorii pʉra ennaꞌpopai pʉra esi pɨꞌ. I didn't want to
return without any meat.
wotoriꞌtɨ vt hunt for meat
wʉꞌ (poss: ɨwʉpu) n mountain opp: rɨmonoꞌ 2 .
wʉi n (non-possessed) day cf: weyu 1 .

© 2014 SIL International®

146

Akawaio-English Dictionary

Wʉi nprop a name given to a deserted settlement near Ataro
-wʉiꞌ var. of -wai
wʉi akʉ n locust (lit: sun bee)
wʉi enu n sun (lit: dayꞌs eye) Wʉi Mʉre var. of Kwin Mʉre
wʉi pisi n sunlight, a ray of sunlight
wʉikamaꞌtu n (non-possessed) a variety of vanilla orchid (lit: the sunꞌs fire)
wʉipiya n 1) (non-possessed) year 2) the September through November dry season cal: iwankan 1, toron kan, Tʉmon 2, wʉipiya 2 . (lit: season of the sun)
wʉkʉuwʉkʉuma vt shake something in an

up-and-down motion wʉkwa vt wave something on a stick Piyaiꞌma
noꞌsotoꞌpʉ si wʉkwaꞌpʉ iya. The old, female
giant waved it in the air on a stick.
wʉrita var. of wereita
wʉrʉiꞌ (poss: ɨwʉrʉsi) n 1) female cousin to a male, indirect address 2) male cousin to a female
wʉrʉka n a variety of snake
wʉrʉuka vt move Toꞌ apon wʉrʉukaꞌpʉ iya.
She moved their clothes.
eꞌwʉrʉukwa (der.) vr move
wʉtʉꞌ n a variety of fruit with hard purple skin and large seed with grape-like pulp between; also used as a building material Bryophyllum calycinum

Yy

yaꞌ postp 1) in Ɨtuntaꞌ apataꞌseꞌ yaꞌ. You go home in your place. sclr prop: yaꞌ 1, yau1, yapai . 2) with
-ya (var: -a) present tense Ɨutɨ peꞌ miꞌtuyan? Do you know you are going? Wakʉ pe peꞌ meꞌan?
Are you well?
yai2 n seizure
yai1 postp 1) through Yai iutɨsaꞌ. She is fainting. (?) 2) by way of, via Ɨꞌrɨ tukaiꞌ eikʉꞌpʉ iya? Panton yai eikʉꞌpʉ iya. How did he answer
him? He answered him by way of a story.
yaina n pole used with tʉrapisi, to squeeze cane for juice high stat: tʉrapisi .
yaipita vi yell, scream syn: kɨꞌpɨꞌnʉmʉ .
yakan n substitute, other, replacement Ɨkii akɨ, ki pʉra si yakan pe. Carry your key, there is no

other (key).
yako (cf: eꞌse) n 1) brother-in-law, direct address 2) cousin, direct address 3) a term used to claim relation to the hearer; a loose claim at kinship with the hope of establishing rapport
yakon2 nom second Yakon iteꞌkwa pe esi piyaꞌ kanan ennaꞌpokaꞌnʉꞌpai. The second time, they
come together again.
yakon1 n 1) a woman's daughter, direct address 2) younger brother, to a male, direct address 3) younger sister, to a female, direct address cf: asi1 .
yapai postp from in Mɨrɨpan nin si piꞌsikʉꞌpʉ toꞌ uya umɨ yapai tʉron nɨ airɨ iwɨseꞌna.
And they dragged him from in the farm to another
place to kill him. sclr prop: yaꞌ 1, yau1, yapai .
yapaima vt explore (?)
yaranta n (non-possessed) valley

© 2014 SIL International®

147

Akawaio-English Dictionary

yau2 conj if Iyeꞌsaꞌ pe iyesi yau, usakorota. If
he comes, I will be angry.
yau1 postp in Mɨrɨ pata yau, soisa amʉꞌ epuru esiꞌpʉ. In that place, there was a leader of soldiers. sclr prop: yaꞌ 1, yau1, yapai . (attrib.: yawon)
yawon n
yeꞌ2 nom 1) a large group of people Ina kʉipʉnʉ esiꞌpʉ tɨpʉremasen yeꞌ pe. Our father was (part of) the group of praying people. 2) someone or something worthy of the noun to which it is attached Tʉpikaꞌtɨsen yeꞌ pe kuru pʉse rɨ warawoꞌ esi. This man is our very great helper. kasi yeꞌ a good liar
yeꞌ1 (var: eꞌ2) n 1) plant eki yeꞌ cassava plant 2) tree kun yeꞌ the kun tree 3) stem of a plant 4) trunk
yen (var: en4; poss: ɨyen) n 1) container 2) hole syn: euta . 3) den 4) nest 5) cave 6) chorus eren yen the song's chorus iten its chorus syn: eseꞌmu2 . enpʉꞌpʉ (der.) n 1) container 2) person
yikʉnpaꞌ n a variety of bird
yoꞌ1 n hard core (of an abscess) wannɨ yoꞌ the

core of the abscess
yoꞌ2 var. of oꞌ
yoꞌkʉre n a variety of fish
Yoꞌkʉre paru nprop the name given to the creek and falls along the trail between Pipiri pai and Amoko kupai
yomari n a variety of banana
yon var. of won1
yoroꞌ n a variety of animal (?)
yuꞌ n 1) (non-possessed) a general term for forest opp: tʉi . 2) bush, a section of the rain forest that is no longer virgin
yu (poss: ɨwu) (cf: u) n any kind of food Paka amʉꞌ yu yen yau iyesi. He is in a cow's manger
(food trough).
yun (poss: ɨyun) n penis syn: wairaꞌ .
yʉi (poss: ɨyɨɨi) n 1) tree, a general term 2) stick 3) wood 4) cassava stick for planting Eki yʉi amʉꞌ pɨmɨꞌpʉ uya. I planted cassava sticks.
yʉi pana (non-possessed) general term for mushroom
yʉi piꞌpɨ n 1) the bark of a tree 2) the inner bark of a tree made into a woodskin canoe 3) the inner bark of a tree made into a trough used in the kitchen for holding grated bitter cassava

© 2014 SIL International®

148

English-Akawaio Index

Aa

abdomen meꞌnokoi n abdomen, stomach area
of a person
abduct apʉrʉnpa 2 abduct
abort enoꞌma 3 vt cause one to have an abortion; throw away one's pre-born baby; utaꞌmoꞌka 2
vi to lose a baby by spontaneous abortion, by no fault of anyone
about enaꞌ 3 postp about; naꞌneꞌ 1 adv about, similar; pɨꞌ 4 postp about
above epoi postp above; nakapu 3 n something
above
abscess aꞌmansaꞌ n abscess; wannɨ1 n abscess
absence of explicit object nʉ- absence of
explicit object
accept anʉmʉ1 5 vt accept; eꞌkwatʉ 1 vt accept; sanoma1 4 vt accept
accident eparantɨ vi to have an accident, to
experience some trouble
accustomed enupanʉ vi be or become
accustomed to something
across
added one pirikʉ1 nom something added to a
larger whole, in addition to
adjective tʉ-...-iꞌ a third-person prefix and
suffix combination that changes a verb into an adjective
adorned usipʉtʉꞌtɨ vr be or become adorned,
decorate onself
adulterate imaꞌnapa vi commit adultery, to
have sex with someone other than one's spouse
advise panaꞌtɨ 2 vt advise
adze sanpa n adze
after asamaꞌpʉ 2 after; pataꞌpʉ 2 after; pɨkɨ 2 postp after; tʉpo postp after
afterbirth mʉntʉkʉꞌpʉ n afterbirth
again kanan 1 adv again; -kapʉ to do
something as is one's daily or regular habit

against ewaꞌnoma 4 vi be or become against another person; iꞌsiꞌnaꞌ postp against, as
speaking to someone about himself/herself but not in the second person
agouti aku n agouti
Aipiripin Aipiripin nprop the name given to a
prophet in the Alleluia church
airplane kurun kanawa airplane
Akawayo person kaꞌpon 3 n an Akawayo
person
Akawayo tribe kaꞌpon 4 n the Akawayo tribe
Akuꞌpɨꞌta Akuꞌpɨꞌta nprop the name given to a
creek along the path between Pipiri pai and Amoko kupai
alcoholic one maiꞌ1 4 nom something alcoholic
and/or sweet in flavour, especially strong to make one drunk
alive one nurɨne 1 nom something or someone
alive
all tanporo n all; tanporon n all, every one
Alleluia Areruya nprop the traditional religion
of certain groups of Amerindians in the circumRoraima region, most recently embraced by the Akawaio tribe
alligator akare n alligator
also kanan 2 adv also; nɨrɨ 1 adv also
althougth tane 3 conj although, even though
amazed usewansiukwa vi be or become
amazed or surprised
ambush kanaimɨꞌtɨ vt ambush
Amen Seiso 2 interj Amen
Amerindian kaꞌpon 2 n an Amerindian person
among amʉtʉ nom among; koroꞌtapai postp from among; koroꞌtau 3 postp among; rʉtaꞌ
postp among
ancestor nonan2 n ancestor, indirect address;
referring to those ancestors already long-dead;

© 2014 SIL International®

150

English-Akawaio Index

tɨpiya 2 n ancestor
anchor peten2 n anchor
and awonsiꞌkɨ 1 conj and; ewaiꞌ 2 conj and
angel inserʉ n angel
anger sakoro n anger; sakoropa vt make angry
angry eꞌsɨꞌma vi be or become angry; ɨkɨnta 2 vi be or become angry; sakorota vi be or
become angry
animal araiꞌkwaꞌ n animal, maybe a variety of monkey; Arawewa nprop a variety of animal; arɨn n a variety of animal that eats plenty; parauwiꞌ 1 n a variety of animal that lives underwater, possibly walrus; wairarimɨ 3 n animal with horns, bigger than a cow; warikɨ n a variety of sloth-like animal; wotori n animal
hunted for its meat, any type of mammal, bird, fish; yoroꞌ n a variety of animal (?)
ankle pʉrakon 1 n ankle
annato anontɨ n a variety of tree, the fruit of
which is used to make body paint, annato; karapiyaꞌpɨ1 n a variety of tree, annato, the fruit of which produces a red paint which the Akawayo used to use on their bodies; sapa1 1 n a variety of tree, annato
anoint eꞌkɨrɨka vi anoint
another tʉron 1 another
another way mɨyawɨrɨ 1 adv another way
answer eikʉ 2 vt answer; maimukʉ 1 vt answer
ant epirikoto n a variety of ant that build cascading nests on tree trunks; iraꞌ n a variety of large, black ant; munuri ant; ɨnɨkɨiran n a
variety of ant with black and brown coloring; Kankarumɨ 2 n a variety of small, black ant that bites; kanpoꞌta n a variety of ant; kaꞌpurukoꞌ n a variety of biting ant; kirintu n a variety of flying ant, coming out in rainy times; kiyawʉꞌ n acushi ants; kokon n the variety of acushi ant (kuyawɨ') that flies during a certain time of year; caught and eaten by the Akawayo; kororoꞌ 1 n a variety of big, black ant that doesn't bite or sting; kupaꞌkarakaiꞌ n a variety of brown ant that bites hard; similar to the acushi ant; poisonous to small animals when eaten; kurakaiꞌ n a variety of small, red wood ant that stings; kurepiri n a variety of biting

ant; kuyuꞌ n a variety of black ant; moꞌsoiꞌ n a variety of black, biting ant; opara n a variety of stinging black ant; pʉrau yan n a variety of ant that steals another ants' babies; sirimɨ n a variety of brown ant, of which the larvae are edible; sirimoꞌ 2 n a variety of long, black ant; taiꞌtaiꞌ n a variety of long, black ant that stings; utuꞌ 1 n a variety of wood ant; wɨrɨkatari n a variety of ant that flies toward the end of the Tʉmon season
anteater oiwe n a variety of anteater; warisimɨ
n a variety of anteater
antler retʉ 2 n antler
anus waꞌseꞌma n anus
appreciate apiꞌ 3 vt appreciate
Arawak person Eruwakɨ 2 nprop a person of
Arawak descent
Arawak tribe Eruwakɨ 1 nprop the Arawak
tribe
area pʉroroi 2 n area
Arekuna person Arekuna 1 nprop a person
of the Arekuna tribe
Arekuna tribe Arekuna 2 nprop the name
given to the Arekuna tribe
argue eꞌseikʉ vi argue, answer back, usually with an argumentative tone; etokʉ 1 vt argue; ɨkɨnta 3 vi argue; manenpa 2 vt argue
arm emeꞌ n arm
armadillo kaiꞌkan n a variety of medium-sized armadillo; mɨura n a variety of armadillo; mɨuraimɨ n a variety of large armadillo; muꞌru1 n a variety of small armadillo
armband apɨtarɨ n decorated armbands worn in
ceremonies
armpit ewaꞌta n armpit
army kuwayau 2 n army, a collection of soldiers
around won2 postp around
arrive uyepʉ 2 vi arrive
arrow kosopʉre 2 n arrow made from same, mostly for play by young children; mapuru 2 n arrow, made from same; pɨrɨu n arrow; suparari 1 n arrow
arrow point tanpirai n arrow point, often

© 2014 SIL International®

151

English-Akawaio Index

shaped from a section of deer antler
as pe postp as ascend enuku 3 vi to ascend, as Jesus did, into
Heaven, from earth
ash urumʉrʉꞌpʉ n ash
ask aꞌtoma 2 vt ask a lot of questions, show interest in something; ekamaꞌpo vt ask, request; enna3 vt ask, request; usenna 1 vr ask
for oneself; be asking
asked usekamaꞌpo vr be asked questions assistant esen oꞌnon assistant
at piyau 2 postp at; poro2 postp at; taꞌ 3 postp at attach a tail areꞌnaꞌtɨ vt put a tail on
something like a kite
attract musunpa vt attract, use bait attribute

aunt aꞌai 4 n aunt, in particular, one's father's
brother's wife or one's mother's sister, direct address; anꞌti n aunt; more specifically the sister of one's mother; naꞌnaꞌ n aunt; more specifically, one's father's older sister; for direct address; san 2 n aunt, indirect address; in particular, one's mother's sister or one's father's brother's wife; waꞌnʉ 1 n aunt, direct address, in particular, one's father's sister or one's mother's brother's wife; waꞌwa n aunt, in particular, one's mother's sister or one's father's brother's wife, direct reference
available moro 2 available; peten1 nom
available to do a job
awake emaꞌseꞌ 2 vi stay awake all night
away from piyapai postp away from
axe waꞌka n axe
axed iꞌtʉꞌkwa vi axed, cut or squared off with an
axe

Bb

baby mʉre 1 n baby
back aꞌpoi 1 n back
backdam kawinɨ adv backdam; pakʉtan 1 n
backdam, away from any settled area
backpack pankaiꞌ n a local style of waricha in
the shape of a triangle and not open in the back like the more traditional warishi; usually also less sturdy than the other; worn in the same way; peipan 1 n a single-sided backpack used to collect clay for making pots; wakawaꞌ1 1 n traditional backpack, three-sided and enclosed; wariꞌsa n traditional Akawayo backpack with three sides and a bottom; filled and tied closed with string and strapped to one's back with shoulder and/or head straps
backslide utaꞌmoꞌka 3 vi backslide, to fall
back into sin after leaving a life of sin
bad one ɨri 2 nom someone or something bad; ɨsɨ 1 nom someone or something bad or
dangerous
bag paiki n bag, sack, pack; pakara 1 n a small

bag used to carry matches on a trip; sonkoꞌto n a small ditty bag
bail iꞌkwamʉ 1 vt bail water from a boat; paruka vt bail water
bait musun 1 n bait for fishing
bake ekiinno vt bake cassava bread
bald pekai n bald head
bamboo kamain n a variety of plant similar to bamboo; kwama n a variety of bamboo; sarara n a variety of bamboo-like tree, also
called congo pump
banana kataꞌpan2 n a variety of banana; kupaꞌkupaꞌ n a variety of banana having a
purple hue, fat and stubby in shape, buck banana; maripa n a variety of small banana, yellow in colour; mekuru n banana; general term for banana; miꞌna 1 n a variety of banana known for its yellow color; paꞌkupa n a variety of large, purple banana; seꞌkerente n a variety of banana, cayenne banana; tʉrʉꞌpʉnʉ2 n a short variety of banana; yomari n a variety of

© 2014 SIL International®

152

English-Akawaio Index

banana
band mʉꞌ n a band around something
bangs pee iꞌpoꞌ n bangs
banquet kusera 2 n banquet, a large amount of
food for a large group of people
baptise enpataukwa 1 vt baptise; euranka 1 vt baptise; korʉka 3 vt baptise, as in the Alleluia
tradition
baptised usenpataukwa2 2 vi be or become baptised; useuranka vr be or become baptised
bark ɨurɨ2 vi bark, as a dog does; yʉi piꞌpɨ 1 n
the bark of a tree
barrel pariri n barrel
base aꞌmu 4 n base
basket aꞌtʉi n a type of basket, customarily
used to hold meat over a lighted fire to prevent the meat from spoiling; waikaraꞌpɨ 1 n a woven basket or quake
bat marupaꞌ n bat
bathe ekuꞌpɨ vr bathe oneself; eꞌtukuiꞌka 3 vi bathe; kuꞌpɨ vt bathe; pʉnʉ vt bathe, give
someone a bath
battle usewaꞌnoman n battle
bay awen n a bay of water along a river; kupai
n bay
be eꞌnɨ 2 vi be, exist; wannɨ2 vi be, exist
bead kasuru n traditional trading beads, used in
weaving aprons
bean akupisi 1 n a variety of wild bean plant, bora; akupisi 2 n a variety of black-eyed beans; akupisi 3 n a variety of red or brown beans; kumaꞌtaran n a variety of bean; piriyori n a variety of short, green bean; pʉraꞌkai n a variety of vegetable bean
bear moronka vt bear something, withstand
punishment
bear children umuꞌta 1 vt bear children
bear fruit epeta vi bear fruit
beard etaꞌsiꞌpoꞌ n beard; pɨtura siꞌpoꞌ n beard
beat akonoma2 1 vt beat, hit; ariꞌpokʉ vt beat, strike; eꞌpa 3 vt beat; pantaꞌma 2 vt beat; tʉmʉ 1 vt beat, pound

beautiful one akoruwan 1 nom something
beautiful, colourful, especially referring to birds; amaꞌnon 1 nom something or someone beautiful; a nice, young woman; wakʉ 6 nom someone or something beautiful
because of uriyaꞌ 1 postp because of, for the
reason of
become eꞌkupʉ 4 vi curse someone to become something else; ena1 2 vi become
bed aꞌkwaꞌ 2 n bed
bedbug karankaran n a variety of bedbug
bee akʉ1 n bee; arukʉimɨ n a variety of large
black bee found in rotten tree stumps or other rotten wood; eꞌkan 2 n a variety of stinging bee; kankara 2 n a variety of bee; kanpara n a variety of bee with a loud, high buzz; likes to block up holes with its nests/eggs/etc.; sarowaikɨ n a variety of large bumble bee with butterfly-like tongue; tɨusan 1 n bee
beeswax moronpɨ 1 n beeswax
beetle kaikawaꞌsa 1 n rhinoceros beetle; kaikawaꞌsa 2 n a variety of large, black beetle; kuikui n a variety of long, black beetle; penputu n a variety of dung beetle, with a
cap-like head covering
before koroꞌtau 2 postp before, in front of; pɨkɨrɨ 2 postp before, in front of; rau postp before, in front of; rawɨ 1 postp before, in front of; rawɨ 2 postp before, in time; wapiya 1 conj
before
beg aꞌkwarʉka1 2 vt beg, implore, ask strongly or with strong feeling; etaꞌkwanʉmʉ 1 vi beg; pawanaꞌtɨ vt beg; ruꞌku1 adv beg, taking a
lower position in a conversation
beggar enkui 2 nom beggar
begin ewanaꞌtɨ 1 vt begin; -iwa 3 begin; piyaꞌtɨ
vt begin
begin to ewanaꞌtɨ 2 vi begin to
beginning epiyaꞌtɨ 2 vi beginning; tɨpiya 1 n
beginning
behind asamaꞌpʉ 1 behind; notau postp behind; pɨkɨ 1 postp behind; wanmʉra2 1 postp behind someone, in back of someone; winɨ 3
postp behind, when used with e'mapʉ

© 2014 SIL International®

153

English-Akawaio Index

believe apurɨ1 1 vt believe; utapurɨ 2 vr
believe in oneself
bell sanpana n bell; tenten n a big bell
belly ewan 1 n belly
belonging iwanoꞌ n belonging
belonging to
belongings apuru n belongings, personal
effects
below pupiyau 2 postp below, especially
referring to the surface of water
belt pokʉrʉ n belt
bench apon 2 n bench; mʉreei n a small bench
with head and foot, turtle-shaped
bend iꞌmʉime vt bend a young sapling tree in an arch; kɨwɨnka vt bend; seꞌme n a bend in the river; tɨmuika vt bend something
bent eꞌtɨmuika vi be or become bent over
bent back one tɨmui nom someone who walks
with a bent back
berry paꞌkʉrai 1 n a variety of berry, edible; purumapi n a variety of black berry, the bush
of which has leaves similar to sandpaper
beside piyau 1 postp beside; wenai postp
beside, with
beside water eꞌsousouma vi be beside water
betray eparanka 3 vt betray
betroth ɨwɨ vi betroth, choose a spouse
between aꞌsanau postp between
big ekatʉ 1 vi be or become big, grow up
big one eke 1 nom something big
bigger entai 2 nom bigger
biggest one kʉipʉnʉ2 n the biggest of the
fingers (thumb) or toes
bile karaꞌkwa 1 n bile; a yellow substance from
the stomach
bill putu1 5 n bill, beak of a bird bina enpukuiꞌ 2 n something put on a stick and
waved at someone to make them fall down dead
bird aiꞌtɨn n a variety of woodpecker; akami n
a variety of wild bird easily tamed, similar to powis bird, warakabura, trumpet bird; anakoꞌ n

a variety of red-bellied bird; ariya n a variety of hawk or eagle; kanarau n a variety of bird, grey and white in colour with a swallow's tail; kanpaꞌsiꞌkororo n a variety of house wren; kawanaru n a variety of bird, cock of the rock bird; kayaukayau n a variety of large, black bird; kinotori n a variety of bird that rotates around its perch as it makes a warbling call; the bow bird; kiyawɨiꞌ n a variety of water bird; kɨrɨrukʉ n a variety of bird with a metalsounding call; kɨtɨrukɨ n a variety of bird, white chest and black back, flies in flocks; cotton bird; kopawa n a variety of bird, similar in habit to the kinotori, only smaller; koroꞌkoroꞌ n a variety of bird that eats worms, similar to the pereikɨ, but living in the trees; parikari bird; koroꞌpisaꞌ n a variety of bird with a short, whistle-like call; koꞌsara n a variety of bird; kosorikɨ n a variety of black bird that flies high in the sky; kuꞌkuꞌ n a variety of bird, great horned hawk; kukui n a variety of bird; kumaraꞌ n a variety of large bird-of-prey, grey and white in colour with swallow's tail; kuruiꞌ n a variety of bird; turukwaro bird; kwipitiꞌ n a variety of bird, kiskadee; marɨ2 n a variety of bird that swings its body, small with dotted feathers, rarely found; maruꞌ n a variety of bird similar to the guinea bird, the maam bird; merumeru n a variety of small hummingbird; namai n a variety of bird, warakabura, a large, black fowl-like bush bird that is easily tamed; oꞌkʉra n a variety of turkey-like bird, marudi; oꞌkʉraimɨ n a variety of turkey-like bird; onore n a variety of bird known as tiger bird, crane, a river bird that eats fish; oroioroi n a variety of bird, also called mam suwa; otaruwa n a variety of bird; paipaiso n a variety of bird with a loud, high-pitched song; pakaꞌ n a variety of small, red bird with white on back and tail, known for its beauty; pakirau n a variety of bird similar to the swallow; parantarai 1 n a variety of bird, known as bell bird; pariꞌkiya1 n a variety of multi-coloured parrot; pawʉiꞌ n a variety of wild fowl, easily tamed, known as powis; pika1 n a variety of beautiful, burnt-red-colored bird with a long tail and distinctive call; pikonpɨꞌ n a variety of bird; piyan 1 n a variety of bat-catching bird with a night-time screech; pɨrɨꞌkiya n a variety

© 2014 SIL International®

154

English-Akawaio Index

of small bird with white beak and dark feathers, screeching call; pɨꞌsɨi n a variety of small bird with a long tail that gives short, high calls; pwiꞌpwiꞌso n a variety of bird with a loud whistle-like call; rʉi n a variety of bird; sapʉreteꞌ n a variety of woodpecker; serʉ n a variety of bird, oil bird; sirikoꞌ n a variety of yellow-bellied bird; sʉkʉi n a variety of blue-colored bird; saki; takaiꞌka n a variety of kingfisher bird; taꞌkɨpi n a variety of small bird with green head, orange and yellow back, turquoise and purple markings on breast and wings; taꞌkɨpiya n a variety of bird, similar to the blue saki, with a short chirp of a call; tapiyaꞌ n a variety of larger hummingbird; tarika n a variety of small, blue, iridescent bird with black on wings and brown breast; tɨwo n a variety of bird with a loud whistle; toron n bird, the general term; tʉwo n a variety of bird; uramiꞌ1 n a variety of bird that mocks other birds, small, yellow breast and black; urutuimɨ n a variety of bird; waisoro n a variety of sparrow; small, black and white, river skimmer; waitamera n a variety of bird, swallow puff bird; waitʉtʉ n a variety of bird well-known for its song; wakaꞌta n a variety of bird, same as kuyapo', toucan; wakoꞌwa n a variety of bird, a dove; warami n a variety of bird, red pigeon; waroꞌkoꞌko n a variety of woodpecker; waꞌtautɨ n a variety of snake-eating bird; wayaura 1 n a variety of bird with a number of different songs; werui n a variety of small sparrow bird with black body and white beak, tawa bird; yikʉnpaꞌ n a variety of bird
birth entu 2 vi give birth; umuꞌta 2 vt give birth
birthmark karutu n birthmark; maꞌkʉi 2 n
birthmark
bisect isaraꞌmo vt bisect, cut into two equal
parts
bite iꞌka 1 vt bite
bitter one iꞌkʉrakɨ nom bitter taste; used to
describe the taste of kada before it is cooked to make it edible.; iꞌneꞌ nom something bitter to the taste; maiꞌ1 2 nom something bitter in smell or taste
black one iꞌkʉrʉn 2 nom something black in
colour

blackhead piyoꞌ n blackhead, pimple
blanket aꞌsan n blanket
bleed mʉnpɨꞌtɨn vi bleed
blind enkasiꞌpanʉkʉ vt make something or someone blind; pʉtari n blind or hunting
shelter, built up in a tree to wait in for wild animals to pass
blind one tenkuꞌnan nom someone blind
blink piꞌkwa vt blink
blister soꞌkoipita 1 vt blister; werei 2 n blister; wereiꞌka vt make a blister, give someone a blister; wereita vi be or become blistered
block aꞌkoro 2 vt block; apuruꞌtɨ vt block; sanpura 2 n any item banged on as a drum during a time of sporting; waꞌkʉtʉ 3 vt block
blood mʉn n blood
bloodsucker sopai 2 n a person who wants to
suck blood
bloody one mʉnʉꞌpan nom something or
someone bloody
blotch kapi n a light-coloured blotch on the skin
blow ariꞌma 1 vt cause something to swing; ekareꞌtɨ 1 vt blow on an instrument or horn, to make a noise; etarenpa vt practice the ritual
art of blowing to determine cause of sickness in the person being blown, or some other metaphysical reality; posiꞌma 2 vt blow, like the wind; puma vt blow; usekareꞌtɨ vr blow a horn
blowing taren n the art of blowing for the
purpose of healing or harming oneself or another
blowpipe iruwa 2 n blowpipe, especially that from the iruwa tree; kuraiꞌ 3 n a long blowpipe made from the tree of same name; sanwoto 2 n
blowpipe
blue one tʉtorire something purple, blue, or
pink
blurred vision tenpuruꞌnan nom someone
having blurred vision
blush suwita vi blush; suwitanʉkʉ vt make
someone blush
boa constrictor aman n boa constrictor
boast apurɨ1 6 vt boast

© 2014 SIL International®

155

English-Akawaio Index

boat kanau 2 n general term for any boat; paraꞌwʉ n wood plank boat
boat with outboard motor paꞌto n boat
with outboard motor
body pun1 2 n body
body cavity ewan 4 n body cavity
boil eꞌkwipɨ vi boil; eꞌtokʉ 1 vt boil; iꞌtokʉ vt
boil, especially a thick substance like kata or kasiri or porridge
boiling sound tukutuku 1 nom boiling sound
of cooking soup
bolt aino3 2 n bolt
bone ɨꞌpʉ n bone; wɨꞌsɨꞌpɨ 1 n any type of bone
book kareta 3 n book
boots sapato 2 n boots
born entu 1 vi be born
bother iꞌnansiꞌka 2 vt bother; utanpokʉma vr bother or trouble oneself; wanʉꞌtɨ vt bother,
trouble
bottle poꞌtoro n bottle
bottom aꞌmu 3 n the bottom of any object
boulder tɨꞌ 2 n boulder
bow epeima vi bow down before someone; putu1 4 n bow of a boat; urapa 1 n bow
bowl arapɨ 1 n a large, oval bowl made from a calabash; kamoꞌ n bowl made from calabash; posi n a small calabash bowl; pʉsau 1 n bowl
bowstring kurayaꞌ 3 n bowstring, often made
from a plant of the same name
box eꞌkama 3 vi take on the stance of a boxer,
"square up"
boy mooi n boy; warawoꞌ 1 n boy
bra manaꞌ yen bra, brassiere
bracelet pʉraꞌmu n beaded bracelet worn
around leg between knee and ankle
brag utapurɨ 1 vr brag
brain nakaꞌseꞌ n brain
branch panakonta n the point at which a branch divides into two branches; panta 1 n branch of a tree; panta 2 n branch of a river
branch off epantaka 1 vr branch off; pantaka

1 vt branch off, leave the trail
brass karukuri n brass
brave one enariꞌmʉn nom someone brave or fearless; ɨpiyɨꞌmʉn 2 nom someone brave
bravery enariꞌmʉra n bravery, boldness
bread karaitaꞌ n bake made from corn meal; pʉreti n bread; u n cassava bread
break akitiꞌkwa vt break up; aꞌmorʉka 2 vt break; eꞌkwɨtʉ1 vr be or become broken; eꞌsakwa vr break, be or become broken; etɨ 2 vi break; iꞌkɨrɨ 2 vt break apart, break open; iꞌkwɨtʉ2 vt break something; to cause something to become broken; maꞌta 3 vi become broken; pantarʉka vt break off branches; saukwa vt break
break off karakwa vt break off
break out tʉrʉꞌkwa 1 vt break out
break up iꞌmo2 1 vt break up or burst
breakfast pʉreꞌpoꞌsi 1 n breakfast
breast manaꞌ n breast
breast milk manaꞌ eku breast milk
breath ennaꞌpisin n breath from the nose; entaꞌpisin n breath from the mouth; eruparu n breath; pʉroꞌmerɨ n heavy breathing, from
the chest
breathe ennaꞌpiꞌnʉmʉ vi breathe heavily; useꞌnetuꞌka vi breathe
bridge miyeꞌ 2 n log bridge or other crossing
over water
bright one aꞌkwa2 1 nom something bright
brighten aꞌkwaka vt brighten; utaꞌkwaka vi
be or become bright
bring eꞌmaꞌtɨ vt bring, fetch, drug; imanka vt fetch, bring; nepʉ vt bring
brittle one aꞌmoro 2 nom something brittle or
easily broken
broken eꞌturuma 4 vi be or become broken
broth paruꞌpɨ n meat broth
brother aita 1 n brother; indirect address; akon
1 n younger brother for a male; direct address and also indirect address; akon 2 n Christian brother; pi 1 n younger brother of a female; also

© 2014 SIL International®

156

English-Akawaio Index

used in direct address; pipi n older brother, for a female; also used in direct address; rui n elder brother, to a male, indirect address; yakon1 2 n younger brother, to a male, direct address
brother-in-law akonpi 1 n brother-in-law, direct address; eꞌse 1 n brother-in-law, indirect address; seꞌse 1 n brother-in-law, direct address; yako 1 n brother-in-law, direct address
brow hair warama siꞌpoꞌ n brow hair
brown isuweta 1 vi be or become brown
brown one isuweyu nom something brown, reddish brown, orange, red; ripe; tʉpɨpiren
nom the colour brown
bruise arita 2 vi bruise
bubble eꞌpuꞌkiririma vi make bubbles in the water; utaka vi be or become bubbly, as in
cassava drink as it ferments
bug kankɨꞌpan n a variety of bee-like bug,
small, black with blue stripes
build amɨ vt build; as in a house; araꞌtɨ vt build;
in particular, putting up the vertical rafters; kapʉ 3 vt build, as in a wasp building his nest; oroꞌtɨ vt build a house; in particular, putting up the horizontal slats (oro) of the roof of a thatched roofed house; usewaꞌtɨ 2 vi build, especially the tying involved in building a traditional trash roof house
bullet piroto 2 n bullet
bump tuwi n bump or lump under the skin
bumpy one motomoto nom something bumpy,
lumpy or knobby
bun amokoꞌma 2 vt put one's hair into a bun
bundle amon 1 n bundle
burlap isaꞌkaꞌsi 2 n burlap material
burn eꞌwaipaꞌma vi have a burning sensation on

the skin; kɨrɨꞌnʉkʉ vt burn to ash, burn up; pekwa vt burn; ponantɨ vt build a fire, start a fire; poꞌtɨ 2 vt burn; pu vt burn a spot on the skin; soꞌkoipita 2 vt burn; taiꞌkwa vi burn with pepper; uyeꞌpu vi be or become burned
burn incense kɨrɨiꞌnʉnpa 2 vt burn incense
burned kɨrɨtʉ 1 vi burned, as in food that cooks
too long
burning epoꞌtɨ vr burning, something in the
process of burning
burp entakɨrɨka vi burp
burst shingles iꞌmo2 2 vt burst shingles
bury anʉꞌnʉkʉ vt bury; uꞌnaꞌtɨ vt bury
bush aꞌsin n thick bush; karaꞌweru n a variety of flowering bush; karuꞌ n a variety of bush,
the fruit of which can be squeezed and used to make surface tattoo marks; also used as a bina to relieve pain; mɨnpɨꞌta n secondary bush, former farmland; paꞌkʉrai 2 n a variety of berry bush; sepan1 n small bush, brush; wayapiro 2 n a variety of bush; yuꞌ 2 n bush, a section of the rain forest that is no longer virgin
bush cow kaꞌtaipa n bush cow; kuꞌyunkuꞌyun n bush cow; maipuri n bush cow, tapir; waira n bush cow
busy aisin nom busy
but ruꞌku2 1 adv but, on the other hand
butterfly wakau n butterfly, a general term
buttocks kuiwa2 n buttocks
button enuꞌtɨ vt button; pon enu n button
buy anʉmʉ1 4 vt buy; enna2 vt buy, purchase
by piyaꞌ 1 postp by
by chance kenʉꞌ adv by chance, unplanned,
mistakenly
by way of poi 3 postp by way of; winɨ 2 postp
by way of

Cc

caiman kuratu n a variety of large, black
caiman
© 2014 SIL International®

cake itekiinno n a cake of cassava bread
157

English-Akawaio Index

calabash arapɨ 2 n calabash, the plant or the gourd; osi2 n a small variety of calabash, the plant that bears same; wai1 2 n calabash
calaloo auroꞌsa n a variety of wild calaloo; monare n a variety of wild calaloo
calf pisi n calf, the lower half of the leg
call esakʉ 2 vt call
called usesakʉ vi be or become called or named
camoudi ɨkɨɨimɨ 2 n a variety of snake known
as camoudi
camp kapaisan 3 n a temporary camp
campsite patatʉseꞌ 2 n a campsite, a temporary
place to live
candle weyu 4 n candle
cane mapuru 1 n a variety of wild plant often
called cane, used for fishing rods and hunting arrows
cane squeezer tʉrapisi n sugar cane squeezer;
used together with a yaina
canoe kanau 1 n dugout canoe; kuriyara 1 n dugout canoe; yʉi piꞌpɨ 2 n the inner bark of a
tree made into a woodskin canoe
capsize eꞌrawoika vi capsize
capybara parauwiꞌ 2 n capybara; paruwena 2
n capybara
care eꞌseꞌtɨ 1 vt take care of something; keep something from falling or spilling; paꞌsima 3 vt
care
caretaker esaꞌ 1 n caretaker
Carib person Kariꞌna 2 nprop a person of
Carib heritage
Carib tribe Kariꞌna 1 nprop the Carib tribe
carry anʉmʉ1 6 vt carry; areꞌka1 vt carry leaves in bundles; arɨ vt carry; manpika 2 vt carry away; pininpa vt carry, walk with something or
someone
carry out enpaꞌka 2 vt carry out
carry up ekainʉnpa vt carry up
carve ewakʉ 2 vt carve
case peipan 2 n case for holding and transporting
multiple numbers of cassava bread cakes

cashew aroiꞌ n a variety of red cashew tree
casreep kasiriꞌpɨ n a variety of casreep, mostly
in use today, sweeter than the more sour kumasi; kumasi 1 n soup flavouring, made from kata, the drippings from the grated, squeezed cassava, boiled down to eliminate the poisonous qualities and to preserve it
cassava aꞌyaupɨ n a variety of bitter cassava; eki 1 n bitter cassava; kotonpimaꞌ n a variety
of cassava, mostly used for making kasiri, sometimes used for making cassava bread; kusanokopɨ n a variety of cassava, used mainly for making eki; with a thin leaf, purple in colour; makaꞌsira n a variety of sweet cassava; sakura 1 n variety of cassava; tʉrʉpʉpɨ n a variety of cassava with red skin under the peel of the tuber; waroꞌmapɨ n a variety of bitter cassava
cassava bread akuse n a soft type of cassava
bread, made from cassava grated the same day; fresh cassava bread; eki 2 n cassava bread; pɨyɨ n cassava bread made hard, to last a long time; wenamʉꞌ 1 n cassava bread; wenantu n cassava bread of someone
cassava dregs aꞌsokoꞌpɨ n the remains of the
sifted cassava flour, not used as a food source
cassava drink kasiri n cassava drink; paiwa
n a relatively strong form of the traditional cassava drink; paraꞌkari n a variety of cassava drink, stronger than normal; payawaru n a variety of 'burnt' cassava drink
cassava water kata1 2 n cassava water
cast out aꞌtuꞌma1 2 vt cast out
cat puꞌsi n cat
catch amma vt catch; ewonʉkʉ vt catch fish
using a maswa or dam and trap
caterpillar arauta 2 n a variety of reddish
brown caterpillar, so named because of its similar color to the howler monkey; ɨrʉkɨ 1 n caterpillar, a general term; kata2 n a variety of poisonous caterpillar, hairy and green in colour; waraꞌuri n a variety of swimming caterpillar
cause eꞌ- to cause to be; detransitivizer, changing a transitive verb into an intransitive one; pɨkɨrɨ
3 cause
cause to bear fruit epetanʉkʉ vt cause a

© 2014 SIL International®

158

English-Akawaio Index

plant to bear fruit, fertilize
cause trouble enmiꞌpo vt cause someone else
to get into trouble
cave yen 5 n cave
centipede ɨkʉi paꞌse centipede; mɨnɨiraꞌ n a
variety of lethally poisonous centipede
certainty -iꞌ2 certainty
chafe emontaꞌkwa vi chafe the inner thighs
from much walking
chalky one kopiriꞌnɨ nom something chalky in
taste, tawny
change ensima vt change; eraꞌtɨ 1 vi change; usensima 1 vr change oneself; usensima 2 vr
change for oneself
character eseru 5 n character
characterised by kenan 3 postp characterised
by
charcoal kamarʉkaꞌ n charcoal
chariot tararan 2 n chariot, especially as in the
Alleluia tradition
charm anoꞌma 2 vt charm, make someone lose their senses; kumi 1 n a charm used by hunters
to be successful in hunting wild cow, deer; muran n a general term for any charm or bina, something used to get someone else to do what you want them to; muranpa vt charm
charm oneself emuranpa vi charm oneself
chase ainʉnpa vt chase, cause to run or escape; apʉrʉnpa 1 vt chase, cause to run; iꞌtapa 1 vt chase; tʉrʉnka vt chase
cheek eꞌpeta n cheek; kuwasi n cheek
cheeky katata someone cheeky, precocious
cherish eꞌwanpa vt cherish
chest pɨtɨ n chest; poropo 1 n chest, breast
chew apɨ2 1 vi chew
chicken kɨrɨtɨkɨ n chicken
chigger sikɨ n chigger; actually, a variety of
burrowing flea
chigger-infested ayannʉꞌ nom chigger-
infested; to have plenty chiggers
child mansiꞌ n child; mʉre 2 n child; mʉreꞌ n
child

children munkɨ 1 n children
chimpanzee kwata 3 n chimpanzee
chin pɨtura n chin
chinked eꞌpiꞌmo vi be or become chinked
chip iꞌtɨꞌkwa vt chip
choke eꞌmʉꞌkʉrʉtʉ vi choke on food; usennasiriꞌmo vi choke on fluid going down
into the trachea
choose anʉmʉ1 7 vt choose
chop iꞌkɨrɨ 1 vt chop, as in cutting wood for
firewood
Christ Kʉrai nprop Christ, the title for Jesus
church soꞌsi n church
cigarette sikiriꞌ n cigarette; tamʉ 2 n cigarette
clap wɨnɨ 4 vt clap hands
claw iꞌta piꞌpɨ n claw, for birds and jaguar
clay iꞌkoro 2 n clay, especially along a path, during rainy season; tawa 1 n clay soil; tawa 2
n clay
clay pot samaku n a specially-shaped clay pot,
a large clay pot
clean ekayu 1 n a place without bush, a clean place; eꞌkɨtɨtɨiꞌka 1 vi be or become clean by rubbing dirt off one's skin; eꞌtanaꞌpɨ n a clean
spot, something clean or having been cleaned; kaima vt clean; korʉka 2 vt cleaning, as in wounds; poꞌtɨ 3 vt clean, as in cleaning one's farm by burning up the cut-down jungle on it
clean one wakʉ 5 nom someone or something
clean
clear aika vt clear a plot of land of underbush, the start of cutting for farming; akoroka 2 vt clear land of grass or trees; awaiꞌnan nom
something clear or transparent
climb ekainʉmʉ 1 vi climb
clitoris arʉ1 n clitoris
clock kʉraꞌ n clock
closer sarɨparɨ 2 adv closer
cloth kareku n cloth, material
clothe wontɨ 2 vt provide with a cloth
clothes eꞌnɨpon n clothes; pon ton clothes,

© 2014 SIL International®

159

English-Akawaio Index

multiple items of clothes; pon1 2 n clothes
cloud kapuruꞌ 2 n cloud
clouds roma1 n dark clouds
coast waika 1 n coast
coastlander ene1 9 n coastlander or civilized
person
cockroach korori n cockroach, the general term;; masarawe n a variety of smaller
cockroach
coil amon 2 n coil
cold arautaimɨ 2 n cold, cold symptoms; aton n
cold, the symptoms related to having a cold
coldness komiꞌ nom coldness
collect amuku 1 vt collect; amʉranʉkʉ vt collect; anuku 1 vt collect
collector amʉreꞌ 2 nom someone who collects
things, often for himself
colour akuꞌnɨ 1 vt colour; uteramire n the hue
of a mountain from a distance through the haze
comb eꞌsaraika vi comb one's own hair; parekoꞌso n a chicken's comb; parʉra n a
fine-toothed comb used for removing nits from hair; saraika vt comb someone else's hair; saraisarai 1 n comb
combed one saraipan 1 nom something or
someone combed
come ɨsipʉ vi come; uyepʉ 1 vi come
come down uꞌtɨ 1 vi come down
come out emoꞌka vi come out; wapʉrʉmʉ vi
come out from a pit or depression
comet apotoimɨ n comet
comfort poken2 n comfort
command apiyon vt command; eꞌpakaꞌnʉkʉ vt command; ɨn- a polite way of commanding a peer; -ta2 command verb suffix
command/plural -tɨꞌ command suffix for more
than one hearer
command/single -kɨ command suffix for a
single hearer (reduced to apostrophe in fast speech)
companion watakon n companion; someone
always near one, as a young child with his

mother
comparative -iwa 1 comparative, more or better; iwa2 adv more or less, approximately
compete entaka3 2 vi show one's competency in
a subject
complain etarerumʉ 2 vi complain, grumble
complete enukaꞌnʉkʉ vt complete
completed past -saꞌ 3 completed past tense
completely esuken adv completely
compress kwinɨ n a hot compress, used to treat
common illnesses
conceal wapuꞌtɨ vt conceal
conch shell kuruꞌ 1 n conch shell, sometimes
used for calling a meeting or other gathering
concurrent tɨrɨrɨ nom concurrent, at the same
time
confess ape vi confess; usekama 1 vi confess
conflict ɨꞌseyaton n conflict
confuse anoꞌma 3 vt confuse someone, cause
someone to stray from what they know is right
confused utakaꞌma vi be or become confused
consecrated pʉremasaꞌ n something or
someone consecrated, prayed over or otherwise set aside for religious purposes
consistent fashion inke 2 adv consistently,
regularly
constipation eꞌnaꞌkʉrʉtʉ 1 n constipation
consummate ena3 vi consummate, to become
as one, to be together as husband and wife
container enpʉꞌpʉ 1 n empty container, a container that used to hold something; kiti n
container used to store small quantities of gold; a kitty; kupi n a container for holding drink or other liquid; wai1 1 n container or any object designed to hold liquid; yen 1 n container
cook eꞌkuꞌkuma vr be or become cooked; iꞌnɨꞌtɨ vt cook fish by wrapping it in leaves and roasting it; kuꞌkuma vt cook; kuwinɨ 4 vt cook
food by warming it in nearly boiling water; maꞌpisiꞌtɨ vt cook fish in leaves; ukwipɨ vt cook by boiling
cooked fish maꞌpiꞌ 2 n a way to prepare fish

© 2014 SIL International®

160

English-Akawaio Index

by wrapping in certain tree leaves and roasting over the fire
cookhouse ɨutɨ 2 n cookhouse
cool down iꞌnɨꞌpanʉkʉ 1 vt cool down
something that is hot
cool one iꞌnɨꞌkenan cool; a temperature or
feeling between hot and cold
core yoꞌ1 n hard core (of an abscess)
corn aꞌnaiꞌ n corn
corner kaꞌta 3 n corner
corpse ekepu n corpse
cotton kɨtɨꞌkwaꞌ 1 n cotton; cotton tree
cough eꞌnaiꞌka vt make someone cough; eꞌsantɨ vi cough; choke when eating or drinking; eꞌtoretorema vi cough; useꞌnaiꞌka 1 vr cough; useꞌnaiꞌka 2 vt cough
cousin akonpi 2 n cousin, direct address; eruꞌ 1
n cousin, the female cousin of a female, indirect address; eꞌse 2 n cousin, a male speaking about a male cousin, indirect address; miꞌmiꞌ 1 n a female cousin of a female, direct address; papaꞌtan 1 n cousin; poito 3 n a male cousin of another male; rusi n male cousin of a female, indirect address; seꞌse 2 n cousin, male addressing a male cousin, direct address; waraito n used by a male to refer to his female cousin and vice versa; indirect address; wɨrɨꞌmai 1 n cousin, used by a female when addressing her female cousin; wʉrʉiꞌ 1 n female cousin to a male, indirect address; wʉrʉiꞌ 2 n male cousin to a female; yako 2 n cousin, direct address; yako 3 n a term used to claim relation to the hearer; a loose claim at kinship with the hope of establishing rapport
cover eꞌnɨpontɨ vr be covered, cover oneself; nɨpontɨ vt cover something; pontɨ 1 vt cover; won1 2 n cover
covering nɨpon 1 n covering; pon1 1 n covering; wapu 3 n covering
covetous one enkui 1 nom someone covetous
of another's possessions
cow paka n domesticated cow or bull
cowfly turɨꞌ 1 n cowfly
crab maꞌkwai 1 n a variety of river crab

crab oil karapa 3 n crab oil
crack iꞌmo2 4 vt crack
cracked ekɨrɨnka vi be or become cracked
cracked feet karaipɨ n cracked skin,
particularly on the heels
craving tarui nom craving, especially meat,
fish, or something of substance to go with cassava bread
crawl eꞌtaraika vi crawl, as a baby
creature ene1 6 n an imaginary creature invoked
to scare children
creek paru1 n creek
cricket kiriꞌsaraꞌ n cricket
cripple tɨmuipan n a person bent over without
being able to straighten up
crippled useꞌme 2 vi crippled, unable to walk
criticise sapema 2 vt criticise
cross eꞌkwɨrɨtʉ vi cross over, go across from
where one is, especially crossing on water; inɨꞌkwɨrɨꞌnʉkʉ vt go across, traverse; kurusuꞌ n cross
cross one ɨkɨneꞌ 2 nom someone cross or vexed
crow mʉreꞌnʉmʉ vi crow, in particular, the crow of the powis at a certain time of year; uturumʉ
1 vi crow or make another variety of bird noise
crowd anpisin 2 n a crowd of people
crowded place tuꞌke 3 nom crowded place, as
in many trees crowded together
crown nakaꞌta n the crown of the head
crumbs punuꞌpɨ 1 n crumbs
crumple kosoꞌkosoꞌma vt crumple; torouma
vt crumple
crush wasaꞌ 2 vt crush
cry entaime vi cry; etaꞌkwanʉmʉ 2 vi cry to be fed, like a dog; karanpa vt make someone cry; ukaramʉ1 vi cry
cup koꞌ2 n cup; pʉsau 2 n cup
curly one kisiꞌpan nom something curly,
usually referring to hair
current apʉꞌneꞌ 2 n current of a river or flow of
water

© 2014 SIL International®

161

English-Akawaio Index

curse paꞌnʉkʉ 1 vt curse
curve wiyoika vt make an object curved in
shape
curved kɨwɨu nom something curved
cut akʉtʉ 1 vt cut; aꞌtɨ 1 vt cut; iꞌtaꞌka vt cut, as in grass or second bush; kɨꞌtɨ vt cut bush while

walking; naka vt cut down; siꞌkwa vt cut cut down ennoko1 2 vt cut down a tree cut up sausauma vt cut up, make little cuts cutlass mariya 2 n cutlass, machete; supara 1
n cutlass, machete
cutting sopera nom cutting a path

Dd

dam aꞌkoro 1 vt dam, usually damming a stream
to catch fish
dance manunpa vt dance with someone; umanumɨ vi dance; umanunpa vt dance with
someone; referring to the western style dancing and not the Alleluia tradition
dandruff uꞌpiꞌ n dandruff
danger ekamʉn 1 n danger
dark ewarumamʉ 2 vi be or become dark
dark one ɨri 4 nom someone or something dark
darkness ewarupɨ 2 n darkness
dart kunwa 2 n a dart made from the plant of
same name
dasheen kʉrʉꞌkʉ 2 n dasheen; tasin n dasheen
daughter ensi1 n daughter to a father; used for indirect reference; yakon1 1 n a woman's
daughter, direct address
daughter-in-law paꞌse 2 n daughter-in-law; a
man's son's wife
dawn emakʉ 1 n dawn
day weyu 1 n day; wʉi n day
day after emaꞌsaꞌ 1 n the next day
day after tomorrow awanapairɨ eꞌmaꞌpʉ
day after tomorrow
day before yesterday mʉꞌkuꞌ koꞌmamiyau
day before yesterday
dead one ekeꞌ 1 someone or something dead
decapitate iꞌmʉrʉkʉtʉ vt decapitate, cut off
the head
decorate ipʉrʉꞌtɨ vt decorate

decoration rɨwʉn n any kind of decoration
deep ekeꞌ 2 in a deep manner, as in sleeping
deeply
deer kariyakwʉ n a variety of small, grey deer; usari n a variety of large bush deer; waikanaimɨ n a variety of giant deer; waiken
n a variety of reindeer, savannah deer
defecate ekapʉtʉ vi defecate; eꞌpisiꞌka vi defecate uncontrollably; eꞌwasuꞌ 1 vi defecate; eꞌwasuꞌ 2 vi to pass diarrhea
deflate api 2 vi deflate, as in a balloon or rising
bread dough
delay ɨnka 3 vt delay, put off one's plan
delicious one kaꞌnɨ 1 nom delicious food; po2 nom something delicious or tasty; posin 1 nom
something delicious, usually referring to the taste of meat or local soup
demolish aranka 3 vt demolish, break down
den yen 3 n den
dent ekiyoꞌka vi be or become dented; kiyoꞌka
vt dent
depend enu pɨkɨrɨ 1 vt depend
depress aꞌkwarʉka1 1 vt depress; utaꞌkwarʉka 1 vr be or become depressed
depth iꞌnaꞌ 1 n its depth
desert rɨmonoꞌ 1 n desert-like environment, a
place devoid of plant and animal life
deserted tʉꞌkenan 1 n desert, a place where not
many people live
deserve emapuꞌtɨ 1 vi deserve, cause to start,
cause to experience

© 2014 SIL International®

162

English-Akawaio Index

destroy akama 2 vt destroy the use of
something, make something so that the intended user is unable to enjoy the intended benefits of it; ɨrʉka vi be or become destroyed
detritus menetewe n floating detritus such as
leaves and sticks and seeds on the river's surface and gathered in one place
deviate epantaka 2 vi deviate
devil makoi 3 n devil, Satan, the originator of all
things against God, the father of lies, etc.
diarrhea kuwasuꞌ n diarrhea
die erikʉ vi die; itɨꞌmooi n die, one of a pair of dice; maꞌta 1 vi die
difficult panaꞌ 2 nom difficult to correct or adjust; saꞌman 1 nom something difficult
dig aka1 1 vt dig
dig out aꞌpo 1 vt dig out
dilate enu poꞌtɨ one's own eyes to be or become
dilated
dilute paruꞌtɨ2 vt dilute
dirt non2 3 n dirt
dirty eꞌkɨꞌpa vi be or become dirty; kɨꞌpa vt
make dirty
dirty one ɨri 1 nom someone or something dirty; oiꞌma nom something or someone dirty, filthy
dirty-faced one tenpataikuꞌnan nom
someone with a dirty face
disagree eꞌsapema vr disagree with each other, be against each other; sʉkʉsʉkʉma 2 vt
disagree, as in shaking one's head to say 'no'
disappear apa1 2 vi disappear; eꞌweukwa vi
disappear, disappear suddenly
disbelieve kasima2 vt disbelieve, to believe
something is a lie
disciple poito 5 n disciple
discover eporo 2 vt discover; uꞌnaika vt
discover, uncover
disease enkuꞌ 2 n the infection that causes pink eye disease, conjunctivitis; ereꞌ 1 n a skin
disease or rash, the cause of which is unknown
disembark ekanwaka vr get out of the boat; kanawaka vt take something out of a boat

disembowel wenuꞌka vt disembowel, remove
the guts of a living thing
disgust etaꞌka 2 vt cause someone to be disgusted with something; usetaꞌka 2 vi be or
become weary or tired
dishonour maꞌnapa 2 vi dishonour the rules of
bina use, such as talking to a girl between using a bina and going hunting
disobedient main entaino someone who is
disobedient
disobey pʉremekʉ 2 vt disobey
distribute ekamʉ 1 vt distribute, give out
disturb anpokʉma vt disturb, trouble
dive eꞌtukuiꞌka 1 vi dive; usemʉꞌnʉkʉ vr dive
underwater
diver tʉusemʉꞌsen n diver, one who goes
underwater for the purpose of mining
divide iꞌmʉꞌkʉ vt divide, partition; pantaka 2 vt divide; ratoika vt divide; waꞌkʉtʉ 4 vt
divide
dizzy kapiyawaiꞌ nom having a dizzy feeling; usewansiriukwa 2 vi be or become dizzy
do kupʉ 1 vt do
do not kʉs- do not
do wrong makuna 3 vt do something wrong or
wicked
dog aiꞌ n a variety of wild dog; iyoꞌneꞌ n a good hunting dog; pero n dog
doll santo n doll
done eꞌkupʉ 1 vr be or become done
donkey isaꞌkaꞌsi 1 n donkey
door mʉraꞌta 1 n door
dove erʉwo n a variety of ground dove; werusi
n a variety of ground dove
drag piꞌsikʉ 1 vt drag
dragon urupere 1 n dragon; urupere 2 n a man
in a mythical story who dresses up as a dragon
dragonfly pirimoꞌ n dragonfly
drawing menu 2 n drawing
dream eꞌneꞌ2 vi dream
dress emoꞌsaꞌtɨ vi dress oneself; pon1 3 n dress;

© 2014 SIL International®

163

English-Akawaio Index

pontɨ 2 vt dress; wontɨ 3 vt dress dress oneself epontɨ vr dress oneself
dried aipʉta 2 vi be or become dried
drift uꞌtɨ 4 vi drift down-river
drill kowekowe n drill
drink enensi 1 vt drink, sip; enensi 2 vt help to drink; ensi2 vt drink; euku n drink; sakura 3 n
a thick drink made to mix with water and drink; waꞌnoꞌ n drink, any kind of drink
drip eꞌtokoiꞌma vi drip
drizzle eꞌpisinpisinma vi drizzle, as in a light
rain falling
drop ena4 1 vi drop, as in fruit ripening; maꞌkɨrɨ 1 vt drop; utaꞌpokʉ 2 vi drop
drop leaves areꞌka2 vi for a tree to drop leaves
drought iwankan 2 n drought, and the
subsequent famine
drown aputa vi drown
druel etaꞌkɨrɨ vi drool
drum akuꞌsaꞌ n half a metal drum used to set
the cassava drink pot on to cook the cassava drink; sanpura 1 n drum
drunk one eꞌtari n someone drunk
drunkard eꞌtari yeꞌ n drunkard; teꞌtaripasen
n drunkard
drunken event eꞌtaripan n a party for getting

drunk
dry aꞌmuna 1 vi be or become dried up; aꞌmunaka vt dry; enpopo vt set a cassava bread cake on the roof to dry; samururun 1
nom dry
dry land aꞌmun n dry land
dry one aipʉ nom something dry; something
dead, as in grass or trees
dryness akiꞌnɨ 1 nom a dry quality, especially
referring to grass when it is hard to cut, after the dew has evaporated
duck maiꞌkwaꞌ n a variety of water fowl; pereikɨ n a variety of large duck with a long beak; wawin n a variety of duck
dumb eꞌmaimuꞌka vr be or become dumb,
unable to speak
dumb one epe 2 nom someone dumb, a person
who cannot speak or cannot hear
dunce Serekon nprop a person without
knowledge or ability, someone dumb or stupid
during awɨrɨ 1 postp during, with
dust amuru n dust; kurupara 2 n dust; punuꞌpɨ 3 n dust; tɨutɨ vt brush off dust
dwarfed one muꞌru2 nom someone who is
dwarfed
dysentery karara n a type of intestinal disease;
diarrhea with cramps; could be cholera

Ee

each other ɨsi- each other eagle kwanore n Harpy eagle; misimɨ n a
variety of large eagle, known to eat baboon; piyan 2 n eagle
ear epuꞌpɨ 2 n ear of corn; pana n ear early one penanne nom an early time earth non2 4 n earth earthquake kaꞌneꞌtai n earthquake;
tʉrʉꞌpʉnʉ1 n earthquake eat anɨ vt eat fish or other meat; apurɨ2 1 vt eat
© 2014 SIL International®

with a spoon and plate; eme 1 vt eat as in a way to finish; eme 2 vt eat pepperpot or pepper sauce; entaiꞌkwa vt eat, in particular, eating cassava bread and pepper pot; entaꞌna vi eat, in particular, eating foods other than the usual tuma and eki; ɨku vt eat brittle foods, such as cassava bread, nuts, etc.; napʉ vt eat sweet things
eaten emoikwa vi be or become eaten,
especially by maggots
eave imeꞌya n eave of a house or building; weꞌnaꞌsi n eave of a house
164

English-Akawaio Index

echo eꞌkwaꞌtɨ vt echo edge eꞌpi 2 n edge, rim; eꞌpiꞌtɨ vt put an edge on
something, used of making a backpack or of making cassava.; iꞌkwɨtʉ1 vt make an edge on a cake of cassava bread; kaꞌta 2 n edge, as in the river's edge
edoe eto n edoe; kʉrʉꞌkʉ 1 n edoe eel karimura n a variety of electric eel, more
common along the Lower Mazaruni River
egg iꞌmoi n egg eight tonpaꞌ eight things elastic one ropa 2 n something elastic in nature elbow pereiꞌ n elbow eldest wapiyaroꞌ 2 n eldest member of a group,
such as siblings
elicitation pawanatoꞌ nom a call for help from
someone
embark kanawaꞌtɨ vt put into a boat embarrassed epiyɨtʉ vi be or become
embarrassed
embers apoꞌ ren embers, coals of a spent fire emphasis rɨ emphasises the preceding word or
phrase; tɨ emphasises the preceding phrase emphatic pan 2 n emphatic enclose entɨ 1 vt enclose end pʉꞌkʉ1 1 n end; uꞌmatʉ 1 vi end endure aꞌkʉreꞌtɨ 1 vt endure enemy eyaton 2 n enemy enlarge pirikʉ2 1 vt enlarge, make more enslave apiyoꞌma 2 vt enslave enter utamuku vi enter epidemic paran 2 n epidemic erase kuka vt erase

erupt eꞌtoiꞌkwa 2 vi erupt escape ainʉmʉ vi escape; apʉrʉmʉ 2 vt
escape; apʉrʉmʉ 3 n escape; epaꞌka 3 vr escape; eꞌtwarika 1 vi escape from home especially naꞌneꞌ 2 adv especially; saꞌne adv especially everlasting tɨwɨrɨ 1 adv everlasting, always every kaisa postp every everywhere mɨyawɨrɨ 3 adv everywhere evil ene1 1 n evil; makoi 2 n evil evil one ɨri 3 nom someone or something evil exactly airɨ1 adv exactly; aꞌkɨ adv a form of agreement with what has just been said excited utausinpa vr be or become excited excited one ausin 2 nom someone excited exclamation ke2 interj sound made when experiencing extreme pain; oso adv a word of surprise at the beauty of something excreta waꞌ n excreta excuse eꞌwapuꞌtɨ 1 vr make an excuse for oneself exhausted rɨmo vi be or become exhausted, very tired experience iꞌtu 4 vt experience expert esaꞌ 4 n expert explode eꞌtoiꞌkwa 1 vi explode extinguish enkʉꞌnʉkʉ vt extinguish, put out a fire extra potawa n extra, left-over, reserve eye enu1 n eye eyeball enu enaꞌpɨ eyeball eyebrow warama n eyebrow eyelash enu siꞌpoꞌ eyelash eyelid enu piꞌpɨ eyelid

Ff

face emʉꞌ 1 n face
© 2014 SIL International®

fade eꞌtɨꞌkwa 2 vi fade
165

English-Akawaio Index

fail eꞌtɨꞌkwa 1 vi fail, be or become unlucky
fair mara n a fair feeling, not too good
fall api 1 vi fall, in a figurative sense; ennaꞌmo
vt make someone fall so as to injure his nose; etɨ 1 vi fall; eꞌtʉrʉꞌkwa 2 vi fall; usennaꞌmo vi fall down so as to injure one's nose; usennasika 1 vr fall into water; useremuku vi fall; utaꞌmoꞌka 1 vi fall; utaꞌpokʉ 1 vi fall
fall off eꞌkwa1 1 vt fall off
false enekuꞌtɨ 3 vt act in a false way
false one akono n someone false in his behaviour, a hypocrite, a liar; kasi 1 something
false
family tonpa1 4 n family
famine iwan 2 n famine
fan posiꞌma 1 vt fan a fire, to make it burn brighter or hotter; roma2 vi fan, make a breeze
far siya 1 adv far, over there
far place ɨnnɨ nom far place; sunwa nom a
place far away from the speaker
farine uꞌwi n farine
farm eꞌkwa2 2 n farm; mainarʉ n someone's farm; umɨ n farm
farm area pakʉtan 3 n farm area away from
the village
farmer mainakeꞌ n farmer; tapiyara1 n a
person well-provided-for by his farming acumen
fast eruma vt cause another person to fast; useruma vr fast for oneself
fast one aituneꞌ nom one who is fast or quick
fat ekaꞌnʉꞌsaꞌ fat one; ekatʉ 2 vi be or become fat; kaiwan n the fat of an animal; kasiꞌ 1 n fat; puneꞌ n fat
fat one kasiꞌ 3 nom someone or something thick
or fat
father aita 2 n father; indirect address; kʉipʉnʉ1 1 n father, indirect address; papai 1
n father, direct address, term used by children with the equivalent of 'Daddy'; umʉi 1 n father, direct address
father-in-law tamo 1 n father-in-law, indirect address; umʉi 3 n father-in-law, direct address

fatherꞌs brother inton 1 n uncle; in particular, one's father's brother, direct address; kʉipʉnʉ1
2 n father's brother; one's uncle, indirect address; any avuncular relative whose children are not of marriagable status to the speaker; papai 3 n uncle, one's father's brother, direct address
fear iꞌnansiꞌka 1 vt fear
feather iꞌpoꞌ 1 n feather
fed one taꞌreꞌ nom someone or something fed
feed aꞌreꞌtɨ vt feed; ewekʉ vt feed someone else; intaꞌnapa vt serve someone food, in
particular, cassava bread, pepperpot and cassava drink
feed oneself utaꞌreꞌtɨ vr feed oneself
female uriꞌsan 3 n any female
ferment eukuꞌtɨ vt set drink aside to allow it to ferment; usakarata vi be or become fermented
fern kanpaiꞌ n a variety of fern found in sandy
areas
fertile one miꞌna 3 nom a fertile place; muꞌtan
2 nom fertile
feverish eꞌkɨiꞌma vi be or become feverish
few ones esikiri 2 nom a small group of
something
fierce ɨkɨneꞌ 3 nom fierce
fight eꞌkaaiꞌma vr fight each other; wrestle each other; epantaꞌma vi fight, physical contact fighting; etokʉ 2 vt fight, scramble; ewaꞌnoma 1 vt fight; eꞌwɨnɨ 3 vi fight each other; kaaiꞌma vt fight, wrestle; pantaꞌma 1 vt fight
file kʉrʉkʉrʉ n file, used to sharpen a cutlass,
tools
fill aꞌkwarʉꞌtɨ vt fill; arʉꞌtɨ 1 vt fill; entɨ 2 vt fill a container; peiꞌtɨ vt fill
filled utakaruꞌtɨ vi be or become filled
filler etapu 2 n something to go with meat to
make a more complete meal, potato, rice, provision, etc.; wenamʉꞌ 2 n filler, something to go with meat to make a more complete meal, includes rice, potato, provision, etc.
fin apiri 2 n the fin of a fish
finally -nʉkʉ 1 finally; tikinanpa 1 adv for the

© 2014 SIL International®

166

English-Akawaio Index

last time, never to be repeated
find eporo 1 vt find; eꞌseporo 2 vi find each
other
finger miyaꞌ mukuꞌpɨ 1 n finger; mukuꞌpɨ1 1 n
finger
fingernail miyaꞌ piꞌpɨ n fingernail
fingers miyaꞌ mukuꞌpɨ 2 n the three largest
fingers of each hand
finish eꞌnonka 2 vr finish; enu2 vi be or become finished, completed; iꞌmaꞌka vt finish; tunka
vt finish, complete
fire apoꞌ n fire
fire wood apoꞌ keme fire wood, wood used in a
cook fire
firefly kanpiyuꞌpiyuꞌ n a variety of large firefly, candlefly; mateu n a variety of large
firefly
first eꞌwapiyaꞌka vi being or becoming first; wapiya 2 adv first; wapiyaroꞌ 1 n first one
firstborn ɨmʉrewatoꞌ firstborn
fish aimara n a variety of large, river fish, good
for eating, found in Lower Mazaruni River region; akaruwa n a variety of small, colourful fish, often caught in traps; arosimɨ n a variety of logo-logo-like fish; aruwai n a variety of scaled fish, hassar; aꞌsi 4 vt catch fish, using a net; eu n a variety of small, silver-coloured fish, resembling a sardine; ikaramenu n a variety of fish with stripes; edible; ɨkɨn n a variety of long, small snake-like fish; kairan 2 n a variety of fish; kairau1 n a variety of fish; kamoroniꞌ n a variety of edible fish; kamuꞌtɨ 2 vi not able to fish well; karaꞌ n a variety of small fish; karoiꞌ1 n a variety of fish; koniya n a variety of small, flat, silver fish; korʉwaꞌ 1 n a variety of fish, commonly known as patwa; korʉwaꞌ 2 n a variety of fish, grey patwa; kuraꞌ n a small variety of fish; kurupasaꞌkwa n a variety of larger silver fish; kuyaramenu n a variety of fish; maka vt fish, catch fish; maꞌpiꞌ 1 n a variety of small fish, found mostly near the A'taro River mouth, along the Kukui River, a tributary of the Upper Mazaruni River; maraiꞌ n a variety of small fish; moꞌrau n a variety of scaled fish edible, similar to the wara; yarrau; moroꞌ n general term for fish; moroꞌma vt

catch fish with a hook and line; panaꞌpiyoꞌ n a variety of small, creek fish, known as patwa; peꞌrupeꞌru n a variety of catfish; edible; piꞌnaꞌ n a variety of fish with a skinny nose; reꞌkɨ n a variety of edible catfish, skinfish; saꞌma 2 vt the practice of fishing with a pole put into the ground near the river and checked periodically; saꞌpotoꞌ n a variety of creek fish; sikiꞌsikiꞌ n a variety of yarrow fish, especially in its young stage of development; tenmaꞌsa n a variety of fish; tennankɨꞌ n a variety of small fish, often caught in a trap; tɨriye n a variety of fish, morocot; also called tari fish; found in the Lower Mazaruni; uri n a variety of fish, hourie fish; waraꞌ n a variety of large, scaled fish, yarrau; wara2 n a variety of large catfish; warakapuri 2 n a variety of fish, yarrau; yoꞌkʉre n a variety of fish
fish trap maꞌ n a structure built across a creek
to block and catch the fish in the creek as they try to swim back into the river; the fish trap used in same (sometimes called maswa); maꞌswa the fish trap used in a structure built across a creek to block and catch the fish in the creek as they try to swim back into the river; moroiꞌ n fish trap made of woven sticks and nipi and then set into a ma'
fishing line konoiꞌ ewa fishing line
fishing rod konoiꞌ epu fishing rod
fist mokoro n fist
fix koneka 4 vt fix
flash eꞌweuweuma vi flash, as in lightning; weuweukwa vi flash, as in lightning
flat peꞌpaꞌ n a flat place; a flat thing
flat one tapiyu something flat, especially
relating to canoes going flat as they age
flavor eneiꞌma vt flavor; specifically, make
salty
flea siꞌpɨn n flea
flesh pun1 1 n flesh
flint kako n flint stone; waruwa 3 n a substance from a tree used to light a fire; watoꞌ n flint
float enpo vt float something, bring it to the surface; eꞌpokwa vi float; usenpo 1 vi be or become floating; utaꞌtuꞌma2 2 vi float

© 2014 SIL International®

167

English-Akawaio Index

floating down iwʉꞌtɨ vi floating down, going
down-river
flood emʉꞌnʉkʉ 1 n flood; iꞌmʉnpʉ 1 flood; parau 2 n flood; usemʉkʉ 1 vi flood
flour pʉrowa n flour; sururu 1 n flour
flower ariꞌku n flower; ipʉrʉ n wild flowers; kʉiꞌ n a variety of flower; big, red in colour,
blooming near Christmastime; similar to lilly; the plant of same; uramiꞌ2 n a variety of plant with flowers that put out little orange petals in a ball shape, edible
flush enpatapita vr be or become flushed, get a
red face
flute sarauka n indigenous bone flute; wɨꞌsɨꞌpɨ
2 n traditional bone flute
fly apirinta vt cause to fly, make a bird fly; arinta1 vi fly, as a bird does; ariwomʉ vi fly, as a bird flies; enkarai n a variety of black, biting fly; kankara 1 n a variety of fly; kankɨꞌ 1 n a variety of fly; kansiꞌ 1 n a variety of fly; nunkɨ n a variety of biting fly, troublesome during the day; siꞌsiꞌ n a variety of biting fly,
no-see-um, sandfly, troublesome during the night; turɨꞌ 2 n a green biting fly
foam aꞌkoron n foam on the surface of the river, due to rapids or falls in the vicinity; aꞌkoronta
vi foam, especially foaming at the mouth
fold kototoꞌka vt fold
follow eꞌmaꞌpʉka vt follow
food kiyari n food; kusera 1 n food, any food; pʉreri n food, any food; yu n any kind of food
fool enekuꞌtɨ 1 vt fool, deceive
foolish one epe 1 nom someone foolish or dumb; se2 nom someone or something foolish
foot pʉta n foot
footprint pʉtaꞌpʉ n footprint
footwear sapato 3 n footwear
for enaꞌ 1 postp for; enaka 2 postp for; kan postp for, designating purpose; pɨꞌ 7 postp for
force aꞌkwarʉka2 1 vt force, compel
forehead peeꞌpɨ n forehead
foreigner ene1 8 n foreigner

forest annoꞌta n a small, forested area surrounded by savannah; yuꞌ 1 n a general term
for forest
forever inke 3 adv forever, eternal; pena 2 adv
forever
forget puꞌtɨkaꞌnʉpʉ 1 vt forget; upuꞌtɨkaꞌnʉkʉ vt forget something; upuꞌtɨkapʉ vi forget
forgetting puꞌ pʉra 2 n forgetting, not
remembering
forgotten one wanpʉra something forgotten or
left behind
form eꞌ1 n form, shape
fornicate ekuma 2 vi fornicate, to have sex before marriage; ekumanka vt make someone
fornicate; have illicit sex with someone
four asakɨrɨꞌne n the number four, 4
fox maikan n a variety of fox
fracture eꞌkwɨtʉ2 vt fracture, especially an arm
or leg
fragile kororou nom something fragile, easily
broken
fragrant one aꞌpoꞌnan 1 nom something
sweet-smelling or fragrant
frame sura 2 n frame for tarpaulin
fresh one aserʉ 2 nom something fresh; ekeꞌnan 2 nom something fresh; isenan 2 nom
something fresh
friend maiꞌpʉremu n friend; tonpa1 2 n friend
fright enariꞌkeꞌ nom fright
frighten nariꞌ1 vt frighten or scare someone
frightened enariꞌnʉmʉ vr be or become frightened; etʉi vi be or become frightened; pamʉ vi be or become frightened
frog anpaꞌ n a variety of frog good for eating, Krapo; karanakaiꞌ n a variety of frog; karuwaꞌmi n a variety of small frog; kopaiꞌkopaiꞌ n a variety of frog; kumaꞌpakarai n a variety of frog; kunawa n a variety of frog; kuwi n a variety of small frog; pɨrɨtuku 1 n a variety of large, poisonous frog that lives underwater; sinau1 n a variety of large
frog, also called 'mountain chicken';

© 2014 SIL International®

168

English-Akawaio Index

suruwatiꞌtiꞌ n a variety of frog, living in the suruwa tree; waroꞌma n a variety of fine frog, edible, lives on land; wɨrɨ n a variety of whitebacked frog; makes a loud 'wuri' sound
from entaꞌ postp from, with regard to time, as in, from then on; ko postp from; poi 2 postp from, from off of; ponsiꞌkɨ postp from; siꞌkɨ 1 postp from; winɨ 4 postp from; winɨpai postp from
from in apai1 postp from in; kapai postp from in; napai postp from in; rapai postp from in front of; tapai postp from in; yapai postp from
in
from now on kɨrɨpai adv from now on
fruit aitaraku n a variety of fruit that has a bumpy, yellow skin; sour flavour; akarasa n a
variety of fruit tree, waiti (brown pods); akorʉka n a variety of grape-like fruit, green in colour, turning purple when ripe; eperu n general term for the fruit of any plant; ipa 1 n fruit; isakari n a variety of fruit, ping-pong ball-sized round fruits; kaisarako n a variety of fruit with a hard, yellow skin with bumps; kasima1 n a variety of fruit, star apple; artichoke-looking, soursop-tasting fruit; kayaꞌraꞌpɨ 1 n the fruit of the kaya'ra'pɨ tree, used to make face paint; kɨwɨꞌ 1 n a variety of fruit grown on a vine similar to the sumutu vine; makarin 1 n a variety of grape-like fruit, green turning to purple when ripe; mataꞌ n a variety of fruit tree bearing small grape-like fruit with

large seeds; muꞌkuru n a variety of plant that bears a hard tomato-like fruit; oꞌpan 2 n fruit of the same tree; pirimokon n a variety of fruit; piyɨꞌ 2 n a variety of wild fruit from the same tree; saparaꞌwʉ 2 n fruit of the same tree; saraurai n a variety of small, round fruit; uꞌma1 n a variety of fruit similar to but smaller than the sapadilla; also smelly, but sweet; wʉtʉꞌ n a variety of fruit with hard purple skin and large seed with grape-like pulp between; also used as a building material
fruitfly kankɨꞌ 2 n a variety of fruitfly
fry aino1 vt fry, parch
fulfilled utaꞌkuꞌtɨ vr be or become fulfilled
full aꞌweta 1 vi be or become full
full one mu2 nom something full or whole,
especially the moon
fungus kainaku 2 n the fungus associated with
the childhood sickness
funnel waitururu n funnel, often made from
calabash
fur iꞌpoꞌ 4 n fur of an animal
further mɨnwinɨkʉiꞌ adv further
future mɨrɨ2 1 adv (future tense); siya 2 adv far
into the future, forever
future possession oton what is to be
(mine/yours/his)
future tense -nʉkʉ 2 future tense

Gg

gas anʉkʉ 2 vt make a gas, as in the cassava
drink becoming alcoholic
gate mʉraꞌta 2 n gate
gather amʉra vi gather, collect, crowd together; eꞌnɨ 1 vi gather, come together
gecko kankasa 2 n gecko
gentle one tʉn 1 n someone gentle
get ena1 1 vi get; eporo 5 vt get, as in birthing children, becoming a mother; kamota 2 vt get

get bigger utaꞌmo vi get bigger get into a boat ekanwaꞌtɨ vr get into a boat get off uꞌtɨ 2 vi get off giant piyaiꞌma n giant gill aniꞌkura 1 n gill of a fish ginger kwaroꞌna n ginger girl manaꞌ akan pre-pubescent girl; maꞌnon n
girl, a young female, direct address; uriꞌsan 1 n girl

© 2014 SIL International®

169

English-Akawaio Index

give eꞌrepa 1 vr give of oneself; tʉrʉ2 1 vt give give blood mʉnʉꞌtɨ vt give blood given eꞌtʉrʉ vr given, given by oneself, given
for oneself
glass wanamari 2 n glass glory kʉrore 1 n glory, supernatural brightness glowing ren nom glowing, something like a fire glue aꞌsipʉ vt glue glutton mentaino 2 someone who is a glutton gnash kɨtɨtɨiꞌma 2 vt gnash one's teeth go enta 1 vi go; tunta vi go; utɨ 1 vi go go ahead enta 3 vi go ahead Go away enta 2 vi go away; niyarɨ interj Go
away!; sare Go away! go down uꞌtɨ 3 vi go down go fast aituma vt make something or someone
go fast
go home utunta vi go home go in ewomʉ vi go in, especially into a building go out epaꞌka 1 vr go out; usenkʉtʉ vi go out,
become extinguished, as in a fire
go outside epaꞌka 2 vr go outside as through a
door
go up enuku 1 vi go up, move in an upward
direction
go up-river enuku 2 vi go up-river goal enpaꞌka 3 vt make a goal goat kapirita n goat goatee mʉta siꞌpoꞌ 2 n goatee God Kaatʉ nprop God; Papa 1 nprop the name
given to God; Father God; the Creator God, God of the universe, infinite in Being and transcending time, etc.
gold korʉ n gold good one wakʉ 1 nom someone or something
good
goods imamin 2 n goods gorilla kwata 2 n gorilla gourd kasaꞌkʉra 1 n a variety of gourd,

calabash; kasiyoꞌ n a variety of small gourd; pʉsau 3 n drinking gourd
grab aꞌsi 1 vt grab
grace meruntɨ 3 n grace
grandchild pa1 n grandchild, both male and female, indirect address; paꞌri n grandchild,
direct address
grandfather Papa 2 n grandfather, for direct address; papai 2 n grandfather, direct address; papaꞌtan 2 n grandfather, direct address; tamokori n grandfather, indirect address
grandmother aꞌai 3 n grandmother, direct address; amai 1 n grandmother, direct reference (?); koꞌkoi n grandmother; direct address; noꞌ n grandmother; noꞌnoꞌ n grandmother, direct address; Noꞌsoto 3 n grandmother
granulated one samururun 2 nom something
granulated
grass akiꞌnɨ 2 n hard-to-cut grasses and weeds; kosopʉre 1 n a variety of tall grass with fuzzy white top; manare 1 n a variety of grass used in weaving warishi; masaꞌpʉre n a variety of short, savannah grass with fuzzy white top; pɨpu
1 n a large variety of grass, sectioned like bamboo; grass from which boys make short blow pipe; sara n a variety of grass or weed, razor grass; sarani 1 n a variety of grass with seeds that children like to eat; sarani 2 n a variety of creek grass that lives underwater; urin n a variety of underwater grass; wanaꞌ 1 n grass, a general term; wanapʉimɨ n a variety of lemon grass; wɨrumɨ n a variety of thick grass, sometimes used by the Arekuna or other savannah inhabitants for thatching
grasshopper karai n a variety of grasshopper; karapisa n a variety of large, green grasshopper; kitata n a variety of small, green grasshopper; kopaꞌpa 1 n a variety of
grasshopper known for its swimming ability; soiꞌsoiꞌ n a variety of hump-backed grasshopper, the sound of which aids in keeping time, chirping fast in evening, slow in morning
grate kʉnʉ vt grate cassava
grater simari n cassava grater
grave uruwaiꞌ 1 n grave

© 2014 SIL International®

170

English-Akawaio Index

gravel tɨꞌ mukuꞌsan n gravel, a stony place
gray hair muꞌmuꞌ n gray hair
greedy one amʉreꞌ 1 nom someone acting greedily; mentaino 1 someone greedy for more
of something s/he has tasted or experienced
green one aꞌkʉra 1 nom fruit that is green, unripe; isenan 1 nom something green; the
colour of leaves
greeting miyarɨ1 interj traditional greeting
griddle eimaꞌ n griddle used for baking cassava
bread
grill sura 1 n a frame of sticks put over a fire to
lay meat on for smoking
grind eꞌkɨtɨtɨiꞌka 2 vi grind, especially grind one's teeth; eꞌpa 1 vt grind, as in provision for porridge; kɨtɨtɨiꞌma 1 vt grind
groan aꞌnʉmʉ vi groan
groin monta 2 n groin
ground non2 2 n ground; teꞌka vt bring ashore
ground itch pareta n ground itch

group yeꞌ2 1 nom a large group of people grove eꞌkwa2 1 n grove grow aꞌta1 2 vi grow; usemoꞌka vr grow,
referring to people or plants
grow arms usemiyaꞌtɨ vr grow arms or hands,
as a tadpole turning into a frog
grow legs eꞌtaꞌtɨ vi grow legs, like a tadpole
growing into a frog
growing poorly usitanʉkʉ vi growing poorly growl ukururumʉ vi growl, as in that of a dog g-string waiku n traditional red cloth worn
around the waist by men and older boys
guard paꞌsima 2 vt guard guava araꞌya n a variety of wild guava tree or
fruit
guitar kaikara1 n guitar gun arakapʉꞌsa n gun gunpowder kurupara 1 n gunpowder gut wenuꞌpɨ 1 n gut, intestines

Hh

habit eseru 1 n habit, way of doing things hail tuna tɨꞌmooi n hail hair inseꞌ n long hair, appropriate for girls and
women; iꞌpoꞌ 2 n hair; moi n pubic hair; mʉta siꞌpoꞌ 1 n facial hair; pɨtɨ siꞌpoꞌ n chest hair; puꞌpɨ 2 n hair; putuꞌsiꞌpoꞌ n moustache haircut puꞌkuima 1 vt get a short haircut half aꞌsaꞌmʉyai half; -iwa 4 half of something, half the quality mentioned half-skirt moꞌsa1 2 n beaded half-skirt worn by Akawayo women before western clothes were introduced hammer ama2 n hammer hammock aꞌkwaꞌ 1 n hammock hand miyaꞌ n hand handle epu 1 n handle
© 2014 SIL International®

handsome one moine 2 nom a handsome
young man
hang eꞌsaꞌma 1 vr hang oneself in order to commit suicide; sinka vt hang, tie up
happiness ewakʉma n happiness happy eporiꞌma vr make oneself happy; be or
become happy; poriꞌma vt make happy happy one poriꞌ n someone happy hard one saꞌman 2 nom something hard as in
texture
harden saꞌmantanʉkʉ 1 vt harden by drying,
as in setting cassava bread out in the sun to dry; saꞌmantanʉkʉ 2 vt make someone a hardened person
hardship ekamʉn 2 n hardship harvest akuruꞌta1 2 vt harvest; akʉtʉ 2 vt
harvest; aꞌtɨ 2 vt harvest; iꞌkwɨ vt harvest,
171

English-Akawaio Index

gather, pick; moꞌka 2 vt take out from the ground; harvest
hat aroꞌ n hat
hatch eꞌmoita 2 vt hatch; eꞌmonsiriꞌka vr be or become hatched; monsiriꞌka vt hatch eggs,
as a hen does
hate ekamʉra 1 nom having hateful feelings toward another; ewaꞌnoma 3 vi hate; ewaruma n hate; ewarumaꞌtɨ 1 vt hate
have faith apurɨ1 4 vt have faith
he, she, it-subj iya he, she, it, as subject of a
transitive sentence
he/she/it i- 1 he/she/it, third person verb prefix; kʉrɨ rɨ 1 pron he, she or it
head puꞌpɨ 1 n head
headache maiꞌ1 1 nom headache, something
giving one a headache
heal epiꞌtɨ 1 vi be or become healed; piꞌtɨ vt heal
someone
healed usepiꞌtɨ vr be or become healed
healer epiꞌtɨnin 2 n healer, in the traditional
sense
health care worker epiꞌtɨnin 1 n health care
worker
healthy one kaꞌnɨ 3 nom someone healthy
heap kaꞌpu n heap, pile
hear eta2 1 vt hear
heart ewan enaꞌpɨ n heart; ewantɨpu n heart;
the organ for pumping blood
heat aꞌmintanʉkʉ 1 vt heat, make something hot; pika2 vt heat, as in the effect of the sun on
the earth
heated aꞌminta 1 vi be or become heated
Heaven Epʉn nprop heaven; kaꞌ2 2 n the heavens, Heaven; pata 2 n the Holy City,
Heaven
heavy one eꞌtamɨꞌneꞌ nom something heavy
heed sanoma1 5 vt pay attention
heel pɨpiyaꞌmu n heel; pɨpiyaꞌsa n heel
held utaꞌsi 1 vr be or become held
held back utakʉꞌma vr be or become held

back
Hell iꞌnaꞌ 3 n Hell
help pikaꞌtɨ 1 vt help
help each other epikaꞌtɨ 2 vr help each other
help oneself epikaꞌtɨ 1 vr help oneself
help oneself to something epikaꞌtɨ 3 vr
help oneself to something
hiccough eꞌtɨkɨiꞌma vi hiccough
hidden eꞌsonamʉ vr be or become hidden
hidden one tonan nom something hidden
hide ipiꞌpɨ rʉꞌpʉ n hide of a dead animal; onamʉ vt hide
hill iꞌkʉrʉ n hill, an area with small hills
him/her/it i- 2 him/her/it, third person verb prefix; kʉrɨ rɨ 2 pron him, her or it
hip ekunari n hip
his/her/its i- 3 his/her/its, third person noun prefix; kʉrɨ rɨ 3 pron his, her or its
hit ewantɨꞌmo vi hit someone in the abdomen or belly; eꞌwɨnɨ 1 vr hit oneself; eꞌwɨnɨ 2 vi be or become hit; tinka 1 vt hit; wɨnɨ 1 vt hit
hoard amʉreꞌnʉmʉ 1 vi hoard, keep to oneself; amʉreꞌnʉnpa vt make someone hoard
something
hoarse maimuꞌka vt make one hoarse, cause
one to lose one's voice, make one not able to talk
hold apiꞌ 1 vt hold; aꞌsi 2 vt hold; ekʉtʉtʉka vi hold tightly; enamʉ vt hold
holder won1 3 n holder
hole aꞌ 2 n hole in wooden trunk, used for pounding corn or other grain; euta n hole; yen 2
n hole
Holy Spirit orekoꞌ n Holy Spirit; Holy Ghost; Papa Aꞌkwarʉ nprop Holy Spirit, the Spirit of
God, the manifestation of God at work in and through his believers
home pataꞌseꞌ n home
honest iꞌnai 3 nom honest
honey kotoko n a type of sweet-sour honey; tɨusan 2 n honey

© 2014 SIL International®

172

English-Akawaio Index

honeycomb moronpɨ 2 n honeycomb
hook konoiꞌ n fish hook; panasika n a type of
hook made from wire
horizon kaꞌpʉrakon n horizon
horn retʉ 1 n horn of a cow, often used as an
instrument to call others to a meeting or other event; watapu n horn
horse kaware n horse
hot one aꞌneꞌ nom something hot, as in
temperature or intensity of the sun
house ɨutɨ 1 n house; tapuruka n house with rectangular thatched roof; tukusipan a style of
round house
housefly weruwe 1 n housefly
how
human kaꞌpon 1 n human, person, male or
female
humble one sapeꞌ n someone humble; tʉn 2 n
someone humble
hummingbird tukuiꞌ2 n hummingbird
hunger iwan 1 n hunger
hungry one wan nom someone hungry

hunt aponka1 vt hunt; eꞌotoka vr hunt for oneself; iꞌtapa 2 vt hunt; kamuꞌtɨ 1 vi not able to hunt well; oꞌ pokon hunt for meat with hunting dogs; otoka vt hunt for several days; wotoriꞌtɨ vt hunt for meat
hunt for oneself eꞌsaponka vr hunt for
oneself; fish for oneself
hunter akamana nom hunter; mʉtaꞌna pen
someone who is not good at hunting or fishing; mʉtaꞌna yeꞌ n a good hunter or fisherman; ontʉman n hunter
hunterq sapa2 n hunter
hunting otori 1 nom hunting
hurricane kuranau 2 n hurricane
hurry usenuꞌtɨ vi hurry
hurt pʉrasokoꞌme vt hurt or injure another's
ankle
hurt one eꞌneꞌ1 2 nom someone experiencing
hurt or pain
hurt oneꞌs own ankle epʉrasokoꞌme vr
hurt one's own ankle
husband tamoꞌpʉ n husband
hymn eren n hymn, song

Ii

I si- 1 I; u- 1 I, first person verb prefix; urɨ 1 pron
I
idol ikaꞌsaꞌ n idol, image; tɨꞌ 4 n idol if yau2 conj if ignorant puꞌ pʉra 1 ignorant ignorant one puꞌ pʉn nom someone without
knowledge or insight, ignorant, senseless
iguana wayakana n iguana ill etanʉkʉ vt cause someone to become ill by
making them eat forbidden food; usetanʉkʉ vr be or become ill by eating something forbidden illegitimate pɨrau n illegitimate, a child born without his mother being legally married illness imoronʉꞌpʉ n an illness caused by
© 2014 SIL International®

excessive mining or burning of the bush; paran 1 n illness, sickness, a general term; takuruꞌ n illness; urupɨ2 n an illness with indications of burning skin and insides imitate maimukʉ 3 vt imitate, answer with a similar call; pataka 1 vt imitate immediate toꞌsarɨ nom immediate, straight away immediately mɨrɨ2 2 adv immediately impatient usapiyeꞌkwa vi be or become impatient impregnate monoꞌta vt make pregnant; impregnate imprison aꞌsi 5 vt hold someone captive or in prison; enoꞌma 2 vt imprison, put into prison
173

English-Akawaio Index

in awon n leader; kaꞌ1 postp in; naꞌ2 postp in, through; nau postp in; pona 2 postp in; raꞌ postp in; taꞌ 1 postp in; tau postp in; yaꞌ 1 postp in; yau1 postp in
in groups of paꞌne postp in groups of
in order to pɨꞌ 3 postp in order to
in place of uriyaꞌ 2 postp in place of
in the direction of pona 3 postp in the
direction of
incense aꞌpoꞌnan 3 n incense; waruwa 2 n
incense from the candlewood tree
included nɨrɨ 2 adv included
increase epamʉ 1 vi increase in number or strength; epiripʉ vi increase; pan 1 n increase, either for the worse or for the better; pirikʉ2 2
vt make something to increase
industrious one ariꞌkeꞌ nom something or someone industrious; emiyaꞌpokeꞌ 2 someone
industrious
infested one sikɨꞌpan nom someone or
something infested with chiggers or burrowing fleas
inhale kuꞌka 2 vt inhale; uꞌna vt inhale, but only
in reference to smoking tobacco
inject aꞌtʉꞌka 2 vt inject, give an injection
inland kaꞌtakʉiꞌ 2 adv inland, away from the water, usually up-hill; kawinɨkʉiꞌ 3 adv inland
from the river, in the direction of a higher elevation going away from the river
inland area pakʉtan 2 n inland area
inquire pɨrɨꞌka 1 vt inquire, ask about
insect kiriꞌsa n insect; manaiꞌmanaiꞌ n a
variety of small, burrowing insect that digs a conical hole in the sand to trap other bugs for its food; moromoro n a variety of insect that bears a white substance on its back; nonan1 2 n a variety of insect; kabora; a large variety of biting fly, mostly found on the savannah; sirikare n a variety of insect that lives in a hole in the ground (bee; wasp; millipede?); sitiꞌsitiꞌ n a variety of insect - but what?; wiyɨꞌ

n a variety of small insect that chirps in the mid-day heat
inside arʉ2 postp inside; waitoꞌ 2 inside surface
of a container
inside out weꞌnaꞌsokoi 2 nom inside out
instrument arawera n a musical instrument of questionable origin and makeup; rikarika n a
variety of musical instrument important in Alleluia tradition, of unknown origin and quality; wai2 n a musical instrument important to the Alleluia tradition
insufficient one aꞌkʉre keꞌ something
insufficient to meet the need
interrogate aꞌtoma 1 vt interrogate
intestine wenuꞌpɨ 2 n intestine
into aꞌsanaꞌ postp into the midst of; kau postp into; taꞌ 2 postp into
inviting -tanʉꞌ inviting the hearer to 'Come and
V'
irritate irikwa vi irritate, especially a sore or
wound
is esi vi is, to be, are
island opaꞌwʉ n island; paꞌwʉ n island
I-subj uya 2 postp I, as subject of a transitive
sentence
itch eꞌsiꞌsiꞌma vi itch; eꞌweꞌpɨꞌma vi itch; utaimerunpa 2 vi itch
itch-producing on something, usually a plant
with hairy skin, that makes a person's skin itch when touched
itchy usiꞌka vr be or become itchy
item otori 2 n what you get or obtain from any
experience
item of fact man1 the aforementioned verbal
phrase is an item of fact
Iꞌm here sarɨ1 interj I'm here. a common
response to the common greeting, Miyarɨ.
Iꞌm not sure ewaiꞌ nawon I'm not sure; I don't
know; the unsure response to a yes-no question

© 2014 SIL International®

174

English-Akawaio Index

Jj

jaguar tʉmenen n jaguar
jaw intatoi n jaw; ɨ apon the upper jaw
jealous ɨkɨneꞌ 4 nom jealous; ɨkɨnta 1 vi be or
become jealous
jerk utatɨmuruku vi to experience an
uncontrollable jerk or pain in one's side that is a sign that what one is thinking of will never happen; utatɨmuruꞌna n an inadvertant jerk or stab of pain in one's side
Jesus Seiso 1 nprop Jesus; Sises nprop Jesus
join pʉꞌkʉnaꞌtɨ vt join together inanimate

objects; tonpaꞌtɨ vt join, become part of a larger group joined eꞌtonpaꞌtɨ vr be or become joined joker waraꞌtɨ joker, a person rarely serious jombie kuruꞌ 2 n jombie, bogeyman judge menka 1 vt judge judged eꞌmenka vi be or become judged juice kuꞌmɨ n juice jump eꞌsanʉmʉ vi jump onto

Kk

kanaima itoto n kanaima, evil spirit; kanaimɨ
n kanaima; an evil spirit;
Kareta Kareta nprop the name given to a
prophet in the Alleluia church; teacher of Tarikiran
keep enkurunpa vt keep something to oneself; have no trouble concerning; iꞌnʉma vt keep
something to oneself
keep awake wetumʉ vt keep someone else
awake
keeping watch emaꞌkwa 1 vt keeping watch,
stay awake
kibihee kwasi n a variety of small mammal with
a long snout, similar in marking to a raccoon
kick wɨnɨ 5 vt kick
kidney apa2 n kidney; the kidney of larger animals and humans; kuima2 n kidney; the
kidney of smaller animals
kill tʉꞌka vt kill; wɨnɨ 3 vt kill
killed wɨsaꞌ n someone or something killed
killer wɨnin n killer

kind eꞌkwa3 1 n kind king kin n king, ruler
king vulture anwana n king vulture
kiss aꞌsuꞌka 2 vt kiss; kuꞌtiꞌma vt kiss, suck on; peisuꞌka vt kiss; utaꞌsuꞌkan n a kiss
kissed utaꞌsuꞌka 1 vi be or become kissed
knead kiꞌma vt knead
knee eseꞌmu1 n knee kneel eꞌsekunka 2 vi kneel
knife mariya 1 n a small knife; mariyamʉreꞌpʉ n small knife; supara 2 n
any knife
knock tinka 2 vt knock
know iꞌtu 1 vt know; toꞌkaꞌnʉkʉ 1 vt know; usiꞌtu 1 vr know for oneself
know oneself eꞌtoꞌkaꞌnʉkʉ vr know oneself;
understand oneself
known usenpoika vi be or become known
Konoꞌ paru Konoꞌ paru nprop the name given
to a creek along the path between Pipiri pai and Amoko kupai

© 2014 SIL International®

175

English-Akawaio Index

Ll

labba urana n labba labia pare1 2 n labia, the outer portion of a
woman's sex organ
labour eꞌtinka vi a woman in labour, about to
deliver a baby
lack appetite entaka2 vi lack appetite lamp raanꞌpu n lamp lance ransa n lance land makʉiꞌ n land, someplace dry; non2 1 n
land
landing peyaꞌ n landing; tunaꞌkwa 2 n landing,
one's place for getting to the water or river
lap eꞌmata 2 n lap
large river kupaiꞌ n a large river larger entai 3 nom a larger job than a person can
handle
larva iꞌkɨ 1 n mosquito larva; iꞌkɨ 2 n a variety
of larva that grows in wounds on the skin
last uꞌmatʉ 2 vi last late epiyaꞌtɨ 1 vi late; ewarumamʉ 1 vi be or
become late in the day
late one koꞌma nom something or someone late; ukoꞌmamʉ 3 nom late in the day; a late time
late time emenʉꞌpʉ nom a late time laugh ɨꞌkɨrɨpa vt make someone laugh; utaꞌkɨrɨ
1 vi laugh
lay eꞌmoita 1 vt lay, as in chickens laying eggs lay down suraika vi lay down in a hammock lay eggs eꞌmoika vi lay eggs, as a hen does lazy emiyaꞌnʉmʉ 1 vi being or becoming lazy
lazy one emiyaꞌneꞌ nom something or someone
lazy
lead piroto 1 n lead, used for fishing weights and
bullets
leader epoto n leader, champion; epuru 2 n leader; esaꞌ 3 n leader
leaf areta vi be or become leafy, for a tree to

grow new leaves; eta1 n leaf; muna n a type of leaf used in tuma; similar to the tania leaf; tekiꞌ 2 n a long leaf, the juice of which is sometimes added to the cassava drink; wɨꞌtɨiꞌ n the leaf of a variety of plant, which can be applied to cure ground itch
leak sekwa n leak; useeꞌkwa vr leak of its own
accord
leak out eeꞌkwa vi leak out of something for
which the fluid should stay in
lean eꞌtɨnka vi lean against something
lean one karawaꞌ 2 nom lean, without much fat
leap eꞌtataukwa vi leap, jump
leave inonka vt leave something; nɨmɨ vt leave
behind
leave alone nonka 2 vt leave alone
left eꞌnɨmɨ 1 vr be or become left behind; kaamiꞌ 2 the left direction; kamiꞌ n left-hand
side
left one kaamiꞌ 1 the left hand
leftovers tonpaꞌpʉ n small scraps left over
from a meal
leg eꞌmata 1 n leg
lend tʉrʉ2 2 vt lend
lengthen ɨnka 2 vt lengthen
leprosy ereꞌ 2 n leprosy
lest namaiꞌ postp lest; prevent from doing
something, disallow
let out paꞌkanʉkʉ vt let someone out from a
building
Letꞌs go. ɨisirɨ interj Let's go.
liar kasiyeꞌ n liar
lid peꞌtapuru n lid for a cooking pot
lie eꞌpɨrinka 2 vi lie, be in a lying position; kasi
2 n lie
lie down eꞌpɨrinka 1 vi lie down; eꞌsuraika 2 vi lie down; iseꞌme 3 vi lie down, as a dog does
life aꞌkwa1 3 n life, the essence of a person;

© 2014 SIL International®

176

English-Akawaio Index

emaꞌnɨ n life, living
lift aꞌrunpa 1 vt lift up
light aꞌkwa2 2 n light; poꞌtɨ 1 vt light; weyu 2 n
light
light one asiꞌono something light, not heavy
lighten weiꞌtɨ vt shine on something
lightning kamiriꞌ n lightning
like ewakiri nom like, preference; kasa postp like, as; warai postp like, resembling
line ewa 1 n fishing line; utasiꞌtɨ vi form a line
lion wairarimɨ 2 n lion
lip eꞌpi 1 n lip, the lower lip; putu piꞌpɨ n the upper lip; putu1 3 n upper lip
lipstick entapima vi put on lipstick
little rʉꞌkwɨ 2 little
live ukoꞌmamʉ 2 vi live
live again oꞌpamʉ vi come back to life, be
resurrected
liver ere n liver
living at home ewɨ 2 vi living at home
lizard enwaraꞌ n a variety of small, green, lizard; kankasa 1 n a variety of wall lizard; okopi n a variety of small lizard with read throat; sakasaꞌ 2 n a variety of wall lizard; waimaꞌsa1 n a variety of lizard
load arʉꞌtɨ 2 vt load a gun
lock aino3 1 n lock; ainoꞌtɨ vt lock, bolt
locust kairan 1 n a variety of locust; kairau2 n a variety of locust; kaꞌtarara n a variety of locust; kotorinsai n a variety of locust; saꞌsaꞌ n a variety of locust; wayamaꞌ akʉ n a variety of locust, often found on blood wood trees; wʉi akʉ n locust
loin cloth kamiꞌsa n loin cloth, a long, narrow
strip of red cloth worn long ago by men around the waist and hanging down in front
lonely place tʉꞌkenan 2 n a lonely place
long ago pena 1 adv long ago; tɨwɨrɨ 2 adv long
ago
long hair insewairen long hair, but not as long
as inse'

long one kusan 2 nom someone or something long; oko 1 nom long in time spent doing
something
long time oko 2 nom something taking a long
time to complete
look enu pɨkɨrɨ 2 vt look for, anticipate, hope for
look for warinpa 1 vt look for or search for
look for food usemo vi look for food, as
hummingbirds and pigs do, with their snouts; not referring to people looking for food
loose aranka 1 vi be or become loosed; eukwa 2 vt loose; tɨu 2 nom loose, not tied up
loose one tokotoko1 nom something loose or
slack
lord epuru 1 n lord, master, ruler; epuru wannɨ
our lord
lose eꞌtoꞌkwa vi lose to a winner in a game
lose oneꞌs tail utaukwʉrʉka vr lose one's
tail, as happens to a tadpole as he turns into a frog
lost utanoꞌma 1 vr lose oneself; utanoꞌma 2 vi
be or become lost
lost one kwentai nom something lost
louse ayan n louse; kanami 1 n grass louse; misikiri n a variety of bug that grows on
people's hair, similar to lice
love etupa vt love, show affection toward
another, especially as a dog to his master; iꞌnʉnka vt love, show affection
love each other usiꞌnʉnka 2 vr love each
other
love oneself usiꞌnʉnka 3 vr love oneself
loved usiꞌnʉnka 1 vi be or become loved
loved one iꞌnʉn nom someone loved by another
low apa1 1 vi be or become lower, as in the water
level of a river
lower back epiyaꞌ 2 n the lower part of the
back
lowly sepan2 nom lowly
lucky usemiyawa vi be or become lucky when
trying something for the first time
lumber oro 2 n the wood of the oro tree, cut up

© 2014 SIL International®

177

English-Akawaio Index

into slats for roofing on which shingles or tin are nailed; paranka n lumber, boards
lump soꞌkoro 2 n a lump or growth under the
skin

lunatic itayaupasaꞌ lunatic lunch pʉreꞌpoꞌsi 2 n lunch lung toro1 n lung

Mm

macaw wayara n a variety of macaw
Macushi person makusi 1 n a Macushi
person, the macushi tribe of Amerindians
Macushi tribe makusi 2 n the Macushi tribe
mad eꞌsakoropa vi be or become mad or angry
madness sopai 1 n a madness that affects
kanaima
maggot weruwe 2 n maggot, the larval stage of
the housefly
mail kareta 2 n mail
make emapuꞌtɨ 2 vt make, cause; kupʉ 4 vt make something; -ma to make (a noun a particular state); to become (as a noun); -pa a
denominalizing suffix, meaning to make whatever noun it is attached to
make cassava drink ekuꞌtɨ vt make cassava
drink
make drunk taripa vt make someone else
drunk
make peace iꞌnɨꞌpanʉkʉ 2 vt make peace
male akonpi 3 n male; warawoꞌ 3 n any male
malnutrition karawarimɨ n dry malnutrition,
or Marasmus, when one doesn't get enough of every kind of food; usually associated with tareng or cursing; katʉimɨ n wet malnutrition, or Kwashiorkor, due to not enough protein in one's diet; usually associated with taren or a curse
man kɨɨiꞌ 1 n an old man; moineriꞌpɨ n young man; warawoꞌ 2 n young man
mango mankurun 1 n mango tree; mankurun
2 n mango fruit
many anpisin 1 nom many items, especially people; -pun having many of something

mark maꞌkʉi 1 n mark
marry ewɨ 1 vi marry
mash eꞌnokʉ vr be or become mashed; eꞌpa 2 vt mash; iꞌnokʉ vt mash, usually cassava bread, to make porridge; kisisikwa 1 vt mash, usually between one's thumb and forefinger; kisisikwa
2 vt mash grated cassava with one's hands to make cassava bread or paiwari; soꞌsoꞌma vt mash, usually yam, pumpkin or banana, to make it edible; takiꞌka vt mash; wasaꞌ 1 vt mash
mash together kitaꞌka vt mash together
mashed eꞌturuma 3 vi be or become mashed
match maꞌsi n match; weyu 3 n match; any
stick with a light on the end of it
me si- 2 me; u- 2 me, first person verb prefix; urɨ
2 pron me
means -toꞌ 1 the means to (verb)
meat kanaꞌna n ground meat or fish; kanpʉ n smoked meat; smoked fish; oꞌ n meat
mediator aporoꞌ 2 n mediator; kaꞌsanawon n mediator; wapu 5 n mediator
medicine tepiꞌ 2 n any kind of medicine in pill
form
meet anʉmʉ2 vt meet; eꞌseporo 1 vr meet each
other
melt awaiꞌna vi be or become melted or turned
into a liquid state
mermaid paima n mermaid; tʉwenkaron n
mermaid
metal waꞌkapun something made of metal,
steel, or cast iron
middle one aporoꞌ 1 nom the middle of
something as in the length of river known as the Middle Mazaruni River; mukuꞌpɨ2 nom middle

© 2014 SIL International®

178

English-Akawaio Index

one
midnight anomʉraꞌ n midnight midst mildew aꞌsaꞌnota vi be or become mildewed millipede waime n millipede mind mainanpa 2 vt mind mirror wanamari 1 n mirror mischevious one maminiꞌtɨ nom someone
mischevious
mischievous one patantɨ nom someone
mischievous or wild
miserable ekamʉra 3 nom miserable,
uncomfortable, feeling bad
misplace anoꞌma 1 vt misplace, lose miss pʉremekʉ 1 vt miss mist kapuruꞌ 1 n mist, fog mock eꞌneima vt mock, make fun of someone mode -ꞌne2 using a mode described by the
attached noun; when used with the number two, it means 'two by two'
molar ɨ epotorʉ molar mole kapʉimʉntʉkʉ n mole money pʉrata n money monkey arauta 1 n a variety of howler monkey;
ipoꞌsoꞌ n a variety of monkey; iwaruwana 1 n a variety of monkey that eats cane; iwarʉka 1 n monkey, the general term; kwata 1 n a variety of large monkey monster mora n a variety of monster month kapʉi 2 n month moody koroiꞌma vi be or become moody moon kapʉi 1 n moon Mora euta Mora euta nprop the name given to the place chosen for the most recent Kako village more parɨ adv more; sarɨparɨ 1 adv more morning awanakʉiꞌ adv in the morning; emaꞌsaꞌ 2 n morning, the next morning mortar aꞌ 1 n mortar mosquito mapi n a variety of mosquito,

troublesome during the day; masaꞌ n a variety of savannah mosquito, troublesome at night
moth sepe n nothing, something stupid or
meaningless
mother aꞌai 1 n mother, direct address; aꞌai 2 n
mother, direct address to a woman who serves the role of one's mother or grandmother; amai 2 n mother, direct address; Noꞌsoto 2 n mother; san 1 n mother, Indirect address
mother-in-law ewoꞌpʉ n mother-in-law, indirect address; waꞌnʉ 2 n mother-in-law,
direct address
motherꞌs brother tamo 2 n uncle, one's
mother's brother; one whose children are of marriagable status to the speaker, indirect address; umʉi 2 n one's mother's brother, direct address
motherꞌs cousin waꞌnʉ 3 n mother's cousin,
direct address
motherꞌs male cousin inton 3 n mother's
male cousin, direct address
motherꞌs sisterꞌs husband kʉipʉnʉ1 3 n
uncle; more specifically, one's mother's sister's husband; papai 4 n uncle; more specifically one's mother's sister's husband, direct address
motion
mountain tɨꞌ 3 n mountain; wʉꞌ n mountain
mouse unpɨ n a variety of mouse or rat
mouth mʉta n mouth
move ama1 vt move; eꞌwʉrʉukwa vr move
oneself, especially when going to live in another place; pɨrinka 1 vt move; utama vr move oneself; move something for one's own benefit; wʉrʉuka vt move
much miyarɨ2 much
mud ball piroto 3 n mud ball
muddy ekutuma vi be or become muddy; kururuꞌ nom muddy, soft mud after a rain
muddy one ikuꞌ nom a muddy place
mukuru manare 2 n mukuru, used to make
baskets, warichis, etc.
muscle kara1 2 n muscle
mushroom aku pana a variety of mushroom,

© 2014 SIL International®

179

English-Akawaio Index

similar in shape to an agouti's ear; ene wariꞌsa n a variety of mushroom, has a woven look and nasty smell; ewako n a variety of mushroom; itoto pana n a variety of mushroom; kapiyaꞌkwa n a variety of edible mushroom; karakara n a variety of white mushroom; kɨmʉrʉꞌse n a variety of orange-coloured mushroom; korʉkopiꞌso n a variety of mushroom; kwaran pana a variety of dark brown mushroom, "sloth ear" (because of the

shape? colour?); yʉi pana general term for mushroom
mussel pɨtɨne n a variety of mussel, bivalve; rato 2 n mussel, a bivalve
must have naꞌkɨ2 adv must have; showing
certainty
mustache etapoꞌ n mustache
my u- 3 my, first person noun prefix; urɨ 3 pron
my

Nn

nail kaiwaꞌtɨ vt nail; poka 3 vt nail; tuiꞌ n nail
name esakʉ 3 vt name; eseꞌ 1 n name; eseꞌtɨ vt give a name to someone or something; useseꞌtɨ
vr name oneself
navel poni n navel, belly button
near airɨ2 postp near; -i1 near in time
near the edge kaꞌtaporo postp near the edge
nearby poirɨ1 postp nearby
nearly -iwa 5 nearly
neck pʉmʉ n neck
necklace apɨkamʉꞌ n a traditional variety of necklace; awoino n a traditional variety of necklace; emekamʉꞌ n a variety of traditional necklace; mokon n a traditional variety of necklace; moꞌmo n beaded necklace; pʉmʉkamʉꞌ n a traditional variety of necklace
needle akusa 1 n sewing needle; akusa 2 n
syringe
negative -pʉn negative
neglect puꞌtɨkaꞌnʉpʉ 2 vt neglect
negro mekoro n negro, a black person, a person
of African descent
neighbour akonoꞌ n neighbour
nephew poito 1 n nephew; waꞌnʉpʉ n nephew,
to a female
nest kɨntu n the nest of a ground-dwelling ant; pon2 1 n a bird's nest; pon2 2 n a wasp's nest; tɨusan 3 n bees' nest; utuꞌ 2 n wood ant nest

found in many tree tops; yen 4 n nest
net pentɨ n fish net, closely knit; punwe n a
cord-type fish net
new one emennaꞌ 1 something new
news ekare n news, information, a retelling of recent events; kareta 1 n news
next tʉron 2 next
niece paꞌse 1 n niece; a man's sister's daughter
night ewarupɨ 1 n night; temaꞌkwaiꞌ n night
nipple manaꞌ putu the nipple of the breast
no kane adv no, the negative answer to a yes/no
question
noisy one panaꞌkaꞌ nom something or someone
noisy
nominal -won nominalizer, used on verbs to
form a noun equivalent to the preceding noun phrase
nominalizer -nɨ nominalizer suffix; -toꞌ 3 a
suffix to make the verb a noun
nose enna1 n nose
not pen adv not; pʉra 1 adv not
nut ennaꞌpʉꞌkʉ n a variety of nut; eroi 2 n the variety of nut from the same tree; inpɨ 2 n a variety of nut with an oval shape; kapawi n a
variety of nut, also with some edible fruit on it; koꞌkonoꞌta 2 n the nut of the coconut tree; kumeiwarai 2 n a variety of nut from the same tree, edible, an unusual seed pod from the same tree; moꞌpa n the common peanut; parepʉ n a

© 2014 SIL International®

180

English-Akawaio Index

variety of nut small, oblong, yellow-orange, from a palm tree with very bitter flavour; warʉkɨ 2 n a variety of nut from the same tree

nutritious one posin 2 nom something
nutritious

Oo

obedient main aworon someone who is
obedient
obey apurɨ1 3 vt obey ocean parau 1 n ocean, sea ocelot kaikusi 1 n ocelot odor kɨ n the smell of a thing, its odour odour isarakɨ nom the odour of underarm
perspiration, body odour
offer akonoma1 vt offer, as in an item of food or
drink, to a visitor
offer a drink woꞌpa vt offer a drink Oh! ain interj Oh!; expressing regret; sɨ interj
Oh!, sharing hopeless feelings
Oh, no! ɨsɨꞌkwɨ interj an exclamation of surprise
or accident
oil ekarapaima 1 vr put oil on oneself; karapa
1 n oil, usually referring to oil for hair; karapaima vt oil, put on hair oil; kasiꞌ 2 n oil
old kɨɨiꞌ 2 n old age; -ꞌpʉ 2 old; previous; previously used as a (stem); -rʉꞌpʉ old, an
action or relationship that happened in the distant past and/or is no longer in effect; ukɨiꞌpamʉ vi be or become old
old man inton 2 n old man; papaꞌtan 3 n old
man, direct address
old one pooiꞌpɨ nom something old old place pataꞌpʉ 1 n old place, former place,
abandoned settlement
on oꞌkoiꞌ postp on; pɨꞌ 5 postp on; po1 1 postp on once tikinanpa 2 adv once one having fits amariwakʉꞌpan 2 nom
someone having seizures or fits, someone suffering from the bite of an amariwa' snake
one thing tikin n one thing
© 2014 SIL International®

one who -nin one who (verb)s, changing a verb into a noun; -sen one who does V
oneꞌs childꞌs spouseꞌs parents niꞌkiti n the
parents of one's child's spouse in relation to the child's parents, indirect address
onion aiyunu n onion only rɨken adv only; sarɨ2 adv only onto po1 2 postp onto; pona 4 postp onto open aꞌkoka vt open; ekariꞌma vi open;
eꞌwarauka vi be or become opened; kariꞌma 2 vt open, specifically a farm that a person cuts bigger and bigger over time; kɨpoꞌ 1 n an open place; utaꞌkoka vr be in an open state or to become open; warau nom something open; warauka 1 vt open; wonka vt open opening mʉraꞌta 3 n opening; nɨpon 2 n opening opossum aware n opossum
opposite ratoi 3 n opposite or katɨ conj or orange one tʉkotonpiren nom the colour
orange
orchid wʉikamaꞌtu n a variety of vanilla orchid
order apiyoꞌma 1 vt give orders to work; koneka 3 vt order
organ pare1 1 n an abdominal organ, likely the
spleen, or the pancreas
orphan piyapaino n orphan; pʉrau 1 n orphan orphaned epiyapainoma 2 vr be or become
orphaned
Osi Osi nprop the name given to a waterfall near
Paruima
other side ratoi 4 n the other side, opposite
from where one is
otherwise mɨyawɨrɨ 2 adv otherwise, in the
181

English-Akawaio Index

other sense
otter kʉrakʉra n a variety of otter, water dog; maparuwa n a variety of black otter, water dog, a larger variety than the saro; saro1 n a
variety of otter, water dog, a smaller variety than the maparuwa
Ouch! aka2 interj an expression of experiencing
unexpected pain
our ina1 3 pron our
outside kɨpoꞌ 2 n the outside surface of an
object

oval shape inpɨ 1 nom used to describe the
shape of a traditional Akawayo structure or building with two center posts; used to describe the shape of a sour nut (poss. parepu)
over entai 1 postp over
overcome itepoikanse n overcome
overflow anʉkʉ 1 vi overflow
owe koꞌmanʉkʉ vt owe
owl arawo n owl; tɨpoiꞌ n general term for owl; tokotoko2 n owl, the general term
owner esaꞌ 2 n owner

Pp

pack enʉꞌtɨ vt pack; usiꞌtɨ2 vi pack
pack up amuku 2 vt pack up; usemaika vt
pack up one's things
paddle iꞌkura vt paddle a canoe; kuwire n a small paddle; naire n paddle; sawaisawai n double paddle, as is used in kayaking; turupe vi paddle; uꞌkɨrɨtʉ vi paddle; usiꞌkura vr
paddle
pain aimerunpa vt cause someone to be in pain; araikʉ vi feel sudden pain in one's side; eꞌkʉuma vi experience pain, not physically, but in mind or spirit; iꞌninpayan vt cause pain; kiriꞌka vi a pain in one's cheek that signals
future fever
pained utaimerunpa 4 vr be or become pained
paint emenu n paint; emenuꞌtɨ vt paint; paramari 1 n paint; usemenuꞌtɨ vr paint
oneself with annato dye, a traditional practice of the Akawayo Amerindians
pale one tenparaꞌsaimuꞌnan nom someone or
something pale
palm aꞌkiyau n a variety of spiny-trunked palm tree with small nuts for fruit; karana 1 n a
variety of palm tree common to the savannah areas, the leaves of which are used as a roofing material; koꞌkonoꞌta 1 n the coconut tree; kunwa 1 n a type of palm tree; kwai1 n a variety of palm tree; miniꞌa n a variety of palm

tree; patawa 1 n a variety of palm tree; takapiya n a variety of palm tree from which thatch material is taken; similar to a blow pipe tree frond, making good-quality upper thatching; warami are a variety of palm tree; wasiwiya n a variety of palm tree; wayapiro 4 n a variety of palm tree
palm nut kwai2 n a variety of palm nut, found
mostly on savannah areas
pan siꞌparari n roti baking pan
pants puruꞌku 1 n pants
papaya kapaya n papaya, the fruit or the plant
paper kareta 4 n paper
parakeet maran n parakeet
parasite mapɨꞌ n any intestinal or other internal
parasite
parents sanon n parents
parrot anaikaꞌ n a variety of fan-headed parrot; karaikarai n a variety of parrot; kawaꞌ n a variety of green parrot; kayakaya n a variety of parrot; kɨyɨi n a variety of parrot; kurewakʉi n a variety of parrot; kuriꞌwai n a variety of blue-headed parrot; oroꞌwe n a variety of small parrot; sakui n a variety of parrot; saresare n a variety of purple parrot; siriꞌkan n a variety of parrot that flies together in large numbers; soroma n a variety of large,

© 2014 SIL International®

182

English-Akawaio Index

green parrot
part akapʉ n a part of something; eꞌwokʉnka
vi part, as in clouds parting in the sky to let the sun shine through; pʉꞌkʉ1 2 n a part of something
partner etapu 1 n partner; isakon n partner; ratoi 2 n partner; tonpa1 3 n partner
pass entaka1 1 vi pass, pass by; entaka3 1 vi pass a test; usentaka vi be or become passed
up, passed by
pass wind eꞌkwata vi pass wind, fart
passed emakʉ 2 vi after night has passed,
through the night
passionfruit sukusuku n passionfruit
past tense -ꞌpʉ 1 past tense; -ta3 past tense
path asanta n path, trail, line; eꞌma2 n path, line; eꞌmaꞌpʉ 1 n a path or track someone has
travelled through; emphasis is on the past usage of the path; raiꞌpa n a less-travelled path through the bush
pattern kamariya 2 n a pattern or design
representing the swallow bird, used in paintings or designs on pots, etc.; kapʉiya n a variety of pattern used in weaving; waikaraꞌpɨ 2 n the pattern of weaving used to make a basket or quake
patty sipipa 2 n a cooked, starch patty
pause eꞌpaka 1 vi pause
pay back entakanoma vt pay back, return
pay for eꞌma1 vt pay for; buy; purchase
payment epeꞌ 2 n payment for work done,
reward
peace ereuta 3 vi be at peace, have peace; usewankonoꞌma 1 vi be or become worried,
troubled
peaceful one wakʉ 4 nom someone or
something peaceful
pear apaꞌ n pear, avocado
peel iꞌkwa 1 vt peel, as in a fruit or vegetable; iꞌpo 2 vt peel
pelt ipiꞌkwa vt pelt, hit, as with an arrow; piriukwa vt pelt
penis wairaꞌ n penis; yun n penis

people Iremukoꞌ nprop a person or people from around the Iren River; Kakorʉkoꞌ nprop the
name given to Akawayo Amerindians living along the Kako river; Kamʉranikoꞌ nprop the name given to Akawayo Amerindians living along the Kamʉran River; Karawʉkoꞌ nprop a group of people living in a place called Karawʉ'ta; koꞌ1 n people, tribe, the people indigenous to a partiicular area; Kukuikoꞌ nprop the name given to the Akawayo Amerindians who live along the Kukui River; Kuwaꞌtimukoꞌ nprop a person or people from the area around the Kuwa'ti River, near Brazil; Kwaꞌtin 2 nprop a person or people of mixed Akawayo/Brazilian heritage; Masurimukoꞌ nprop the group of Akawayo Amerindians living along the Mazaruni River; Orosikoꞌ 1 n the name given to a group of 'wild people' living between Akawayo area and the Venezuela border without any outside contact who are trying to maintain their hidden lifestyle; Poitoꞌma 1 nprop the name given to a group of people living between the Upper Mazaruni and Venezuela, having no outside contact; Poitoꞌma 2 n people who live in the bush and shun contact with other humans; tunayana n a group of people, exceptionally large Amerindians, living in Brazil
pepper ineꞌ 1 n a variety of hot pepper; karoiꞌ2
n a variety of hot pepper, shaped like the fish of the same name; koropakaiꞌ n a variety of long, yellow hot pepper; piyaiꞌma pʉmʉi giant pepper; pʉmʉi1 n a variety of hot pepper with small gourd-shaped fruits on a bush; siriꞌmɨ n a variety of hot pepper; toroꞌtoroimɨ n a variety of yellow, sweet pepper, a variety of large red pepper; tuneren n salted hot pepper
pepper bush ineꞌ 2 n a variety of hot pepper
bush
pepperpot akʉ2 1 n contents of pepperpot; fish,
meat, etc.
perceptive one enwoꞌneꞌ 2 nom someone
perceptive
perfect one wakʉ 2 nom someone or something
perfect
perfective -saꞌ 1 perfective tense
period emaseꞌ n a woman's monthly period,

© 2014 SIL International®

183

English-Akawaio Index

menstruation
person enpʉꞌpʉ 2 n a person no longer possessed by an evil spirit; kaꞌponokoꞌ n
person, especially as addressed by a giant or other mythical character; -n1 a suffix to say the item being mentioned is a person
pestle aino2 1 n pestle, as for grinding corn
pet ikʉn n pet
petal pʉrʉ n flower petal
pick aka1 2 vt pick; akuruꞌta1 1 vt pick; aꞌrunpa 2 vt pick up; pɨtʉ vt pick; pʉika vt
pick a fruit
pick up amuku 3 vt pick up; anʉmʉ1 3 vt pick
up
piece piyaꞌpɨ n piece, section
pierce aꞌtʉꞌka 1 vt bore, prick, pierce, stick into
one's skin
pig pakira n a variety of small, wild bush pig; peiruku n pig, a domesticated pig; pɨinkɨ n a
variety of wild pig
pinch punuꞌka vt pinch
pineapple kaiwaraꞌ n pineapple
pink eye enkuꞌ 1 n pink eye; sore or infected
eyes
pink one tʉtorire something purple, blue, or
pink
pinky miyaꞌ aꞌmiꞌpɨ the smallest finger
pipe kuraiꞌ 2 n pipe
Piroi Ken Piroi Ken nprop the name given to
the settlement located at the mouth of the Piroi creek, along the Upper Mazaruni River, down-river from Jawalla
pit iꞌnaꞌ 2 n a pit
pity usentuꞌma vi have pity, show pity
Piꞌsiwon Piꞌsiwon nprop the Alleluia prophet
place emaika 1 vi place, put; pai 3 n place along a river; pata 1 n place; patatʉseꞌ 1 n a place of temporary residence, a campsite; tʉrʉ1 2 vt place; waika 2 n a place of a relatively middle
distance away from one
place outside enpaꞌkanʉkʉ vt place outside,
put someone or something outside of a house

plain rɨmonoꞌ 2 n a flat place or area, a plain
plait kapʉ 1 vt plait, braid
plan eꞌkama 2 vi plan for oneself
plant eꞌpɨmɨ vi plant; ɨmɨꞌnɨ 2 n a thorny plant; kansiꞌ 2 n a variety of weed or grass that
produces seeds that stick to skin or clothes; karuwaꞌsa n a variety of orchid with striped leaves; kasaꞌkʉra 2 n a variety of gourd plant; kayaꞌraꞌpɨ 2 n a plant from which fruit is taken to make face paint; konopiya n a variety of plant with large, red berries and banana-leaf-like leaves; kunami n plant with broad leaf and black seeds; the poison from same, mashed and used to poison fish; kurayaꞌ 1 n a variety of plant similar to the pine, from which a medicine is made to cure cervical cancer; kuruwe n a variety of plant that produces a fruit; man2 n a variety of plant with gum; moꞌsa2 n a variety of plant from which leaves are taken to make a thatch roof; paꞌreura n a variety of lily; patama vt plant; pɨmɨ vt plant; sirikɨ2 n a variety of plant; tanwaya n a variety of bush plant (bird's nest fern) from which leaves are taken to make thatch roofing, philodendron plant; urumaꞌ 2 n a variety of plant with broad leaves and big fruit that birds eat; waimaꞌsa2 n a variety of plant - What kind?; yeꞌ1 1 n plant
plantain isan n a variety of plantain; kuratana n a variety of small plantain; manowara n a variety of plantain; oꞌmere n a variety of small, rounded plantain; paruru n a variety of large plantain; pʉrantin n plantain; toꞌpoiꞌso n a
variety of plantain
planted ekuruꞌka vi be or become planted
plate parapi n plate, something to hold food
while one eats it
play enkarumʉ vi play, as in what children do together during their free time; turunpa vt play an instrument; usennaka 1 vi play; usiꞌminamʉ vi play
plenty aitawaiꞌnan nom plenty; eke 2 nom plenty; tuꞌke 1 nom plenty, so many
plow anʉ 2 vt plow
pluck apiriꞌka vt pluck feathers from a bird or fowl; iꞌpoka vt pluck the feathers from a bird or fowl; kanka 1 vt pluck

© 2014 SIL International®

184

English-Akawaio Index

plural amʉꞌ more than one; kon quant plural; -ꞌne1 plural suffix on postpositions, referring to
the plurality of the object of the postposition; ton quant plural suffix for the noun to which it is attached
plural person -ꞌnokon plural person, for either
first or second person
plural-person nan nom ones who are, those
which are, the plural portion of the personalizer suffix -nin
point enusima vi point in the direction of something using one's lips; epuika vt make a point on an arrow or fishing hook; pai 1 n point; putu1 1 n the point of a pencil, stick or other object; putu1 2 n point of an arrow; putuꞌsiꞌtɨ
vt make pointed
pointed putuꞌsiꞌ pan nom something pointed
poison aya n root used to poison fish; emaiꞌpa vi poison oneself; eparan n poison; paisin n poison; tʉmʉ 2 vt poison, using haiya root in
river water to float fish to catch with a net; urari 2 n a type of poison made from the urari vine, used on dart tips for hunting; urupɨ1 2 n a type of poison from the red seeds of the urubɨ tree
poisonous one maiꞌ1 3 nom something
poisonous
poke aiꞌma vt poke, as a stick into a hole
pole yaina n pole used with tʉrapisi, to squeeze
cane for juice
policeman pʉresiman n policeman
pond ikuꞌpɨ n pond, lake
poor one entuꞌma nom someone who is poor,
someone deserving of pity
poor person iwannɨkoꞌ poor person
porcupine aru n porcupine
porridge iꞌkwarʉmo vi make porridge; sapuru
n a variety of sweet cassava bread porridge
portion tonpa2 n a portion
possessed of kenan 2 postp possessed of,
having
possessed one ene1 3 n someone possessed by
an evil spirit

possession -i2 possession; used to show that the
stem is possessed
possessions imamin 1 n possessions
possible poken1 adv might be, likely, possible
post wakapu n the supporting posts of a house
pot eripoi n pot, a shallow clay pot for frying or parching; ɨinɨ n a large cooking pot
potato iꞌkʉrʉn 1 n purple potato; karanpisaku n a variety of potato; kwaiso n a type of orange
potato, used in preparing cassava drink; maꞌkwaiwaraꞌna n a variety of potato; saꞌ 1 n a variety of purple potato; saꞌ 2 n a variety of sweet potato; sakura 2 n a variety of potato; sikɨꞌmoi n a variety of potato
pour anuku 2 vt pour; entɨ 3 vt pour; ma2 vt pour, especially of a liquid; parʉka vt pour,
empty casiri from the cooking pot into a barrel
poured eparʉka vi poured
powder pouta n powder
power kʉrore 2 n supernatural power; meruntɨ
1 n power
praise apurɨ1 5 vt praise; poitoma vt praise
pray emaimupa vi pray; eꞌsekunka 1 vi pray; ɨpʉrema vi pray; maimupa 2 vt pray for someone; pʉrema vt pray for; pray regarding
preach ekama 2 vt preach; usenpataukwa1 vi
preach
pregnant one monoꞌ n one who is pregnant
prepare eꞌkama 1 vr get oneself ready; prepare oneself; koneka 1 vt prepare
prepared ekoneka vr be or become prepared
present tense -ya present tense
present/continuous -pɨtʉ 1 present
continuous tense
pretend usennaka 4 vi pretend
pretense iteseꞌ n pretense
pretty one amaꞌnon 2 nom someone or
something pretty
prevent growth sitanʉkʉ vt prevent
something from growing
prevented utakama 4 vr be or become
prevented from doing something

© 2014 SIL International®

185

English-Akawaio Index

preying mantis parantarai 2 n preying mantis; wansaraimɨ n preying mantis
price epeꞌ 1 n price
prick siriꞌka vt prick a wound or sore to relieve
pressure underneath
prison parikiꞌsi n prison
procreate umuꞌta 3 vt procreate
projectile piroto 4 n projectile
prolific usema vi prolific, having many babies
in short succession
prolific one muꞌtan 1 nom something or
someone prolific, bearing many children
prophecy
prophesy ekama 3 vt prophesy
prophet epuꞌkenaꞌ n prophet; puꞌkenaꞌ n
prophet, usually from the Bible or from Aleluia traditions and history
prostrate eꞌsuraika 1 vi lay prostrate or face
down on the ground before somebody or something
protector wapu 2 n protector
protruding one mosaire something protruding
from something else
proud emotaika vr be or become proud; ɨkɨneꞌ 5 nom proud; mɨpe eꞌkuꞌna proud, great in one's own eyes; umotaika vt make proud
proud one mɨ2 nom someone who is proud or
satisfied with him/herself
provision imun 2 n ground provision, general term for potato, yam, cassava, etc.; waropai n
a variety of ground provision or tuber, similar to

dasheen
publicly annaꞌ adv publicly
pull kɨꞌka vt pull; piꞌsikʉ 2 vt pull
pumpkin kauyama n pumpkin
punish akonoma2 2 vt punish; eponiꞌsima vi
punish, suffer, do poorly without the aid of something; kotaꞌma vt punish; make someone suffer
purify piyaꞌpaꞌpɨ vt purify a house from illness
using smoke and ritual
purple one tʉtorire something purple, blue, or
pink
purpose -iꞌ1 purpose, intention; -toꞌ 2 the
purpose of (verb)ing
purse wakawaꞌ1 2 n purse
pus ikumuru n pus
push kataꞌ vt push a wheelbarrow or drive one; situꞌka vt push
push off aꞌtuꞌma1 1 vt push off, leave shore in a boat; utaꞌtuꞌma2 1 vi push off from shore
put kama vt put, place; pataꞌtɨ vt put; tʉrʉ1 1 vt
put
put away emaika 2 vt put away, put up, put
aside
put on -ka put on (whatever noun is attached to
it)
put over entaka1 2 vt put someone over
someone else, as in having authority over him; give authority
puzzle enuminka 2 vt puzzle over, try to figure
out

Qq

queen arin 1 n a queen bee; kororoꞌ 2 n a
queen ant or bee or other insect
question word peꞌ question word in questions
requiring a yes-no answer

quiet one eꞌpana nom someone or something quiet; tʉtʉi 2 nom someone quiet; wakʉ 3 nom
someone or something quiet
quill iꞌpoꞌ 3 n the quill of the porcupine; kʉ 1 n
quill of a porcupine

© 2014 SIL International®

186

English-Akawaio Index

Rr

rabbit koneꞌo n a general term for rabbit
rack pari n rack, shelf
rafters ara 1 n horizontal rafters in a roof to
support shingles or tin roofing
rain tuna 3 n rain
rainbow ɨkɨɨimɨ 1 n rainbow; meremeꞌ 1 n
rainbow
rainy aiꞌku 1 nom rainy weather
raise aꞌsarutanʉkʉ vt make something rise, as
in adding yeast to bread dough
raise up eꞌmʉꞌsaꞌka 2 vi raise up from the dead
rake saraisarai 2 n rake
rancid ikuꞌnɨ rancid, the smell of fish meat gone
bad
rap wɨnɨ 2 vt rap, knock
rapids marari n rapids; marariꞌta n a long
stretch of rapids
rash onpiꞌ n rash
rat sarʉkɨu n a variety of small rat that eats cockroaches; tokotoimɨ n a variety of rat; urariꞌ n a variety of large rat with a white
belly, edible
ration rasin n ration
raw one isenan 3 nom raw, something not fully
cooked
razor blade mawasa n razor blade
read ekama 4 vt read; ene2 2 vt read
ready eꞌkama 4 vi ready oneself, be or become
ready for something
realize eporo 4 vt realize; eꞌseporo 3 vi be
realized
really nin adv really, very
rebuke eseremekʉ 1 vt rebuke; pɨrɨꞌka 2 vt
rebuke
receive anʉmʉ1 1 vt receive; eporo 3 vt receive; sanoma1 2 vt receive
recent one emennaꞌ 2 something recent

recent past -saꞌ 2 recent past recognize sanoma1 3 vt recognize; toꞌkaꞌnʉkʉ
3 vt recognize
recover utoꞌpamʉ vr recover, regain one's
health, feel better again after an illness
rectum weꞌnakan 1 n rectum reduce kawata vt reduce in size; make smaller reflexive tʉ- his own refuse ewarumaꞌtɨ 2 vi refuse refute maimukʉ 2 vt refute regret aiko 2 interj expression of regret reheat aꞌminta 2 vi reheat, as in warming up
leftover food for the next meal
rejected one makuꞌpɨ 2 something rejected relative tonpa1 1 n a relative relieve iꞌnɨꞌpanʉkʉ 3 vt relieve remaining epiyapainoma 1 vi be the only one
remaining
remind emiyapontɨ vt remind remove paꞌka vt remove, take out remove hair kuwinɨ 3 vt remove hair or
feathers using hot water
repeat inaꞌpo 2 vt repeat, as in saying something
a second time
repeated action sense -pɨtʉ 2 repeated action
sense
repent eraꞌtɨ 3 vi repent; maimupa 1 vt
encourage someone to repent, pray to change someone
reported speech main 3 n recorded or
reported speech
reproduce epamʉ 2 vi reproduce, procreate resemblance emʉꞌ 2 n resemblance residence apon 4 n place of residence, home respect nama vt respect, honour rest enkurumʉ 2 vi rest; ereuta 4 vi rest;

© 2014 SIL International®

187

English-Akawaio Index

eꞌturuma 2 vi be or become resting; umoronkapʉ vr rest, relax
restless utaimerunpa 1 vi be or become
restless
return ennaꞌpo vr return, go to or come back from where one came; inaꞌpo 1 vt return something; naꞌpo vt cause to return; usually to
home
reveal enpoika 2 vt reveal
revenge useꞌma 1 vr take revenge
reward epeꞌpʉ n reward, payment
rib ara 2 n the ribs of the inside of a boat; arata
n rib
rice eriꞌsi n rice
rid nonka 3 vt get rid of
right-hand side enwoꞌneꞌ 1 n right-hand side
rigid one apɨru nom something rigid or firm
rip kara2 1 vt rip, tear
ripe isaramenu nom partially ripe; isuweta 2 vi
be or become ripe, even overripe
ripening akʉꞌpʉ nom something nearly ripe,
soon to be ready to eat, as in fruit
ripped ekaraka vr be or become ripped; be torn
ripple sipaꞌsipaꞌ 1 n ripples on the water's
surface caused by wind
rise uꞌma2 vi rise, as in the level of a river
ritual ennaiꞌpɨꞌnɨ vt cause someone to undergo
a ritual application of bina or herbal medicine; epiꞌkoma vt undergo a ritual usually designed to give success in hunting; usennaiꞌpɨꞌnɨ vr perform a ritual on oneself, to apply a bina or traditional herbal medicine; usepiꞌkoma vr to give oneself a ritual to be a better hunter, for example
rival eyaton 1 n rival
river tuna 2 n river
river bottom aꞌmu 2 n river bottom
river mouth ken1 n river mouth
riverside tunaꞌkwa 1 n riverside
roast eꞌpu vr roast, dry; kanpʉꞌtɨ vt roast meat over a fire to dry it; putu2 vt roast

rock muꞌpɨꞌ n rock; tɨꞌ 1 n rock, stone
rocked rawoirawoima vi be or become rocking
back and forth
rod epu 2 n fishing rod
roll amokoꞌma 1 vt roll into a ball, coil; eꞌpɨrinpɨrinma vi roll; eꞌtɨrinka 1 vi roll; pɨrinka 2 vt roll; utɨrinka vt roll
roll up eꞌme 1 vt put into a bun or roll;
especially with hair or twine or rope
roof tinin 2 n a tin roof
roof in iꞌmo2 3 vt make a roof from shingles
root imun 1 n root; kara1 3 n a tree root; miꞌ n root, the root of any plant; mɨꞌ 2 n general
reference to any tree root
rope aꞌseta n a variety of rope; eꞌseꞌkwa n rope; ewa 2 n rope, string; kami n a rope used in
tying down a thatched roof, taken from a vine; kapuya n a variety of thick bush rope; karapiꞌpɨ 2 n rope made from the skin of same; kiririꞌpan n a variety of rope; maikanmoꞌ n a variety of rope; nipi 2 n a natural rope made from the nipi vine; siꞌnaꞌ 2 n rope or strap made from the bark of the same tree; waꞌkwama 2 n a variety of natural rope from the vine of the same name, used in tying down a thatch roof, also called nibi; wayapiro 3 n rope made from same
rot aꞌmota vi be or become rotten
rotten one aꞌmoro 1 nom something rotten
round house waipa n a type of round house
with thatched roof, indigenous to the Akawayo, usually with one central post
round one tɨririn nom something round
row asiꞌtɨ1 2 vt arrange things in rows
rubber ropa 1 n rubber
rumble eꞌtʉrʉmʉ vi rumble, the sound of
thunder
run apʉrʉmʉ 1 vi run; ekaꞌtumʉ vi run
run after someone ekaꞌtunpa vt chase, run
after someone
runaway tuwari n a runaway, a person running
away from home
ruptured tikitiki nom ruptured, pushed out

© 2014 SIL International®

188

English-Akawaio Index

rushing one apʉꞌneꞌ 1 nom rushing as in the
swiftness of a rising river

rust ukaramʉ2 vi be or become rusty

Ss

sack saꞌki n sack, bag
sacrifice useꞌma 2 vi sacrifice
sad pokoita 1 vi be or become sad
sadden pokoitanʉkʉ vt make someone sad; upokoita vi make sad
sadness pokoi n sadness
salivate entaiꞌkurɨ vi salivate
salt ineꞌneꞌ 2 n salt; taꞌrau n large salt crystals, found in Brasil; waiyo n salt
salted hot pepper sikiriꞌma n salted hot
pepper; mostly made to be portable to take on extended trips
salty one ineꞌneꞌ 1 nom something salty
same marɨ1 2 postp same as
sand wɨꞌsɨꞌ n sand
sandal monsa 1 n a type of sandal, made from
the palm kuwai or sʉre'pa
sandals pʉrai n indigenous sandals made from a
palm leaf stalk (no longer made), also known as kuwaimonta (is this an Akawayo word?)
sandfly nonan1 1 n a variety of sandfly
sandy one wɨꞌsɨkʉ a sandy place
sap eꞌku n sap; kureꞌkʉ 2 n sap from same tree,
which can be used to seal cracks in boats
satisfied aꞌweta 2 vi satisfied
Saturday sapaꞌ 1 n Saturday, the Jewish
Sabbath
savannah tʉi n savannah
save koneka 5 vt save, rescue; pikaꞌtɨ 2 vt save
in a physical sense, from a burning house or from drowning in the river; pikaꞌtɨ 3 vt save, especially God saving mankind from their sins by sending Jesus; tʉkuꞌse vt save, reserve
saw saka n saw

sawn sakaꞌma vi sawn, cut with a saw
say esakʉ 1 vt say; eseremekʉ 2 vt say something in a serious manner; ka vt say
scabies kɨrɨpɨiꞌ1 n scabies
scaled tʉpiꞌpɨkenan nom with scales, referring
to a group of fishes
scaleless piꞌpɨpʉn without scales, referring to
skin fish
scales piꞌpɨ 2 n fish scales
scare enariꞌpa vt scare
scared usenariꞌpa vr be or become scared
scary one ene1 5 n something or someone scary
scatter eꞌtʉrʉꞌkwa 1 vi be or become scattered; paꞌkaraka vt scatter
scattered eꞌtaꞌnʉkʉ 2 vi be or become
scattered
scent kɨtun n scent; kwɨꞌnʉmʉ n scent
school sikuru n school
scissors arʉkɨꞌ n scissors
scoop kasaꞌkʉra 3 n the same, dried and carved
to be used as a utensil; a spoon, cup or bowl; koreꞌwa 1 n scoop made from calabash
scorn makunapa 1 vt treat with scorn, treat badly, joke about something serious; maꞌnapa
1 vt scorn, treat badly
scornful one nuirapaꞌ someone or something
scornful
scorpion eke yapɨ n a variety of scorpion, non-stinging; maritɨ n a variety of very poisonous scorpion, without claws; mɨnɨꞌ n a general term for scorpion; mʉremoꞌmo n a
variety of poisonous scorpion
scrape ewakʉ 1 vt scrape; iꞌkwa 3 vt scrape
scraping sururu 2 n the scraping from the
cooked sides of cassava bread

© 2014 SIL International®

189

English-Akawaio Index

scraps irʉꞌpan n scraps, mostly food
scratch anʉ 1 vt scratch; eꞌkaꞌnɨpa vr scratch oneself; eꞌwaraiꞌka vr scratch oneself; iꞌka 3 vt scratch; make itch; kaꞌnɨma1 vt scratch; waraiꞌka vt scratch
scream aipita vi scream; kɨꞌpɨꞌnʉmʉ vi scream; kɨꞌpɨꞌnʉnpa vt make or cause to scream; pirorʉnpa vt make someone scream; upirorʉmʉ vi scream
search warin1 n search; warinpa 2 n search
season iꞌmʉnpʉ 2 n the season from June to August; usually rainy; iwankan 1 n the season
from December to February; usually dry; kaꞌnɨma2 vt season food; kurun pan n a time of year, from December to February; usually dry; menkanin nom season, a time of year (?); toron kan n the season from March to May; usually more rainy; Tʉmon 2 n the season from June to August; usually dry; wʉipiya 2 n the September through November dry season
seat apon 3 n seat
seatedness sisiu nom seatedness
second yakon2 nom second
second-born child ipɨkɨroꞌ nom second-born
child
see ene2 1 vt see; eraꞌma vt see
seed enaꞌpɨ n seed, the seed of any plant; eꞌpiꞌkɨriꞌ n a variety of seed used to make beads; parakwa 2 n mora tree seed; paru2 2 n the seed from the same tree; paruwe 2 n the seed of the same tree; simaꞌna 2 n the seed of the same tree; suruwa 2 n the seed from the same tree; tatan 2 n the seed from the same tree; toro2 2 n the seed of the same tree, edible; urumaꞌ 1 n seed, the size of a cricket ball, that
opens up like a tulip flower
seen usene vr be or become seen
select utanʉmʉ 1 vr select for oneself
selected utanʉmʉ 2 vi be or become selected
sell kʉrʉpoꞌpoma vt sell
send ennoko1 1 vt send, send forth
sense aꞌkwa1 2 n sense; good sense or wisdom; eseru 2 n sense

separate anɨnpa vt separate; enaꞌpɨkaꞌ vt
remove seeds from cotton
serious ɨꞌseꞌneꞌ nom serious, with far-reaching
consequences
serious one ɨkɨneꞌ 1 nom someone serious or someone being serious in their presentation; ɨsɨ yeꞌ someone serious
servant apiyoꞌ 2 n servant; poito 4 n servant,
helper
serve ekamʉ 2 vt serve
served useka vr be or become served
set tʉrʉ1 3 vt set, as in setting fishing poles for
catching fish
set aside eꞌnonka 1 vr be or become set aside; nonka 1 vt set aside
settle koneka 2 vt settle
settlement pata 3 n settlement
sever rʉka vt sever, cut off
sew aima vt sew
sex ekuma 1 vi have sex, make love; usɨꞌnɨ vi
engage in sexual intercourse
shadow aꞌkwarʉꞌpʉ 1 n shadow; nariꞌ2 n
shadow
shake eꞌtɨtɨtɨma vr shake, tremble; iꞌkiꞌma vt shake; okouokouma vt shake, as in a tree, back and forth; sokouꞌsokouꞌma vt shake, as a liquid in a bottle; takautakauma vt shake someone in a hammock; tɨtɨtɨma 1 vt shake; tʉkʉiꞌma vt shake, as in liquids; tʉkʉuka 1 vt shake; tʉkʉuka 2 vt shake a tree to harvest fruit; tʉmʉ 3 vt make one shake; usiꞌnʉkʉ vi shake with fright; wʉkʉuwʉkʉuma vt shake
something in an up-and-down motion
shakey
shaky takataka nom shaky
shallow apai2 nom shallow, low water level, so
that boats can't pass
shallow one apaiꞌpɨ shallow, especially as
refers to water
shaman enewokeꞌ n a shaman or traditional healer; piyaiꞌsan 1 n shaman, a person who
deals with spirits and the spirit world

© 2014 SIL International®

190

English-Akawaio Index

shame piyɨꞌnʉkʉ vt make someone feel shame shamed ɨpiyɨꞌkeꞌ 2 nom someone shamed shameless one ɨpiyɨꞌmʉn 1 nom a shameless
person
shape waitoꞌ 1 the shape of a woodskin canoe share ekamʉ 3 vt share; eꞌrepa 2 vi share; ɨnɨ vt
share; usekamʉ vr share among each other sharp one ɨkenaꞌ 2 nom something sharp sharpen ɨꞌtɨ vt sharpen, give teeth; putuꞌtɨ vt
sharpen, to make something have a sharp point
shave ekiririꞌka vt shave shavings punuꞌpɨ 2 n shavings shear akʉtʉ 3 vt shear shed eꞌkwa1 2 vi shed skin sheep karimeru n sheep shelf apon 1 n shelf shell kuita n a piece of turtle shell attached at
the bottom of a stick used to spin cotton; piꞌpɨ 3 n turtle shell shelter wapu 4 n shelter shield eꞌwaꞌkʉtʉ vr shield oneself, defend oneself; waꞌkʉtʉ 1 vt shield; wapu 1 n shield shine eꞌweiꞌtɨ vi shine shingle sinkiri n shingle shirt pon nakaꞌtawon n shirt; pon1 4 n shirt shiver tɨtɨtɨma 2 vi shiver shocked paꞌnʉkʉ 2 vi be or become shocked; usewansiriukwa 1 vi be or become shocked or dismayed shoe eꞌsapatoiꞌtɨ vi wear shoes, shod oneself shoes sapato 1 n shoes shoot kamota 1 vt shoot an animal for meat; pɨ vt shoot (with a dart and blow pipe; poka 2 vt shoot any other animal for food shop usena vr shop shore tuna eꞌpi n shore, bank short one akaꞌneꞌ n a short time or visit short-cut intaka n a high-water short-cut or bypass

shorts puruꞌku 2 n shorts
shoulder mota n shoulder
shout ukɨꞌpɨꞌnʉmʉ vi shout, cry out
show ekama 5 vt show; ɨnka 1 vt show someone
something that one has
shrimp osi1 n a variety of fresh-water shrimp
shy one ɨpiyɨꞌkeꞌ 1 nom someone shy
sick akuruꞌta2 vi be or become sick or ill
sick one eꞌneꞌ1 1 nom one who is sick; takuruꞌkenan nom someone who is sick or ill
sickness eꞌnetʉ n sickness, illness; kainaku 1 n a childhood sickness; tapiyara2 n sickness
sieve panka n sieve, used to sift grated cassava
before baking cassava bread
sift eisika vt sift
sign maꞌkʉi 4 n sign of something to happen; menuka 2 vt sign, as in write one's name
silence eꞌpanaroꞌ n silence
silent emaimuꞌka vr silent, unable to speak; umainta vi be or become silent because you
are sad
silent one tʉtʉi 1 nom someone or something silent; tʉtʉipan nom someone silent
similar eꞌkwa3 2 nom similar in meaning
similar one rupɨ n something similar or akin to
something else
sin ekamʉra 4 nom sin, a moral offense against someone else; eꞌmakoima vi sin; makoi 1 n sin; makuna 1 vt sin
Sinaꞌai Sinaꞌai nprop the name given to a creek
along the Kukui River, below I'moi ken
since siꞌkɨ 2 postp since
sincere iꞌnai 2 nom sincere
sing erenka vt sing; etannɨmɨ 2 vi sing, as a bird; userenka vr sing; uturumʉ 3 vi sing
singing imawari 1 n an indigenous style of singing and dancing; parisara1 n a style of indigenous singing and dancing; tukuiꞌ1 n a
style of indigenous singing and dancing; warepan n an variety of indigenous singing and dancing

© 2014 SIL International®

191

English-Akawaio Index

sink eꞌsʉnka vi sink
sip koroiꞌtoꞌka vt sip
sir tamo 3 n sir, a term of respect for the older
age of the hearer over the speaker
sister akon 3 n sister, for a woman, direct address and also indirect address; asi1 n older sister, direct address; miꞌmiꞌ 3 n older sister, direct address; paruiꞌ n younger sister of a male; pasi n older sister, indirect address; pasiꞌwa n older sister to a male; yakon1 3 n
younger sister, to a female, direct address
sister-in-law eruꞌ 2 n sister-in-law, indirect address; maiꞌwɨ n sister-in-law, direct address; mama n sister-in-law; more specifically, one's
younger brother's wife; for direct address; miꞌmiꞌ 2 n sister-in-law; more specifically, one's husband's sister; wɨrɨꞌmai 2 n sisterin-law, direct address among females, used by a husband's sister to address her husband's wife, and vicaversa
sisters pasiko n younger sisters, a term of
mutual identification among members of the Alleluia Church
sit ereutanʉkʉ 1 vt cause someone to sit down
sit down ereuta 1 vi sit down
six miyaꞌ ratoi six
skin iꞌkwa 2 vt skin, as in removing the skin of an animal; piꞌpɨ 1 n skin
skull puꞌpɨ ɨꞌpʉ n skull
sky kaꞌ2 1 n sky
slap enpataꞌmo vt slap, hit on the face
slave apiyoꞌ 1 n slave
sleep eꞌnʉmʉ vr sleep; eꞌsapontɨ vi sleep; get
into a hammock or onto a bed, prepare for sleep; nʉmʉ vt to put someone to sleep
sleepy one eꞌmoronʉ someone sleepy
slimy eꞌkereuta vi be or become slimy, so as to
be nonconsumable, spoiled
slimy one eꞌkerewe 1 nom something slimy
sling ropa 3 n sling, slingshot; weineꞌ n baby
sling
slingshot kʉꞌpan n slingshot

slippery one eꞌkerewe 2 nom something
slippery
sloth kwaran n a variety of two-toed sloth
slowness tɨnɨn n slowness
slug pare2 n slug
small aiko 1 nom something small; rʉꞌkwɨ 1
small, little
small one esikiri 1 nom something small; mʉreꞌpʉ nom something small; paꞌko1 nom
something small
smallest one aꞌmiꞌpɨ 1 nom the smallest one of
a group
smart person Sikɨ 2 n a smart person
smell ennaaikʉ 2 vt smell an odor; eta2 2 vt smell; kɨꞌnʉmʉ vr smell, sniff the air; kɨꞌnʉnpa vt smell; kɨtunpa vt smell
smelling aꞌpoꞌnan 2 smelling as it should,
especially as it refers to cassava drink, after it has fermented for a time
smile eꞌkupiꞌka vi smile; utaꞌkɨrɨ 2 vi smile
smoke aipo vt smoke out wasps or other pests from one's house or other building; eꞌkawaiꞌtɨ vi smoke tobacco, cigarettes, etc.; eꞌtamiriꞌtɨ
vi smoke cigarettes or some other form of tobacco; ikapisin n smoke from a fire; kɨrɨiꞌnʉmʉ vi smoke; kɨrɨiꞌnʉnpa 1 vt make smoke, burn something so that it gives off smoke; kɨrɨsin n smoke; puru2 1 vt smoke a thatch roof in order to cure it for a long life
smoothing stone kuima1 n a stone used to
smooth clay pots before firing them
snail apɨta2 n a variety of snail; kuiwa1 n a variety of snail; sikʉꞌ n a variety of small snail
snake amariwaꞌ 1 n a variety of snake; amariwaꞌ 2 n a folkloric snake; awarimɨ n a
variety of poisonous, colourful snake that lives in the bush; eimarare n a variety of snake; ene1 7 n a variety of snake; etaamon n a small, green variety of snake; ipaꞌkwa n a variety of snake; ɨkʉi n snake, the general term; kaiꞌkamaimɨ n a variety of snake; kwasekoiꞌ n the variety of snake the wa'tautɨ bird prefers to eat; meremeꞌ 2 n a variety of snake; mʉnwarimɨ n a variety of poisonous snake; paaraipu n a variety of snake; pararaipu n a

© 2014 SIL International®

192

English-Akawaio Index

variety of snake that can jump, bushmaster snake; pun2 n a variety of snake that is slow-moving, black and white and moves more like a worm; sakasaꞌ 1 n a variety of small, poisonous snake, rattle snake; sarɨimɨ n a variety of large snake, bushmaster snake; saroroimɨ n a variety of large snake; turen n a variety of water snake; wʉrʉka n a variety of snake
sneak eꞌsereka vi sneak, to be sneaky or act
sneakily
sneeze ennaꞌsiꞌka vt make someone sneeze; usennaꞌsiꞌka vi sneeze
sniff ennaaikʉ 1 vt sniff; usennaaikʉ vr sniff
snore ennamorʉmʉ vi snore
soak amanka vt soak; iꞌkurinsaꞌ 2 vt soak, as in dried meat, to make it soft again; iꞌkʉrimʉ vt soak something; kiꞌ vt soak,make wet; kipʉ vt soak, to make wet; kuwinɨ 2 vi soak in hot water to relieve pain; suꞌpa vt soak
soaked
sober eꞌtakʉꞌma vr be or become sober, not drunk; sakoroꞌ nom sober, not drunk
sober one nurɨne 2 nom someone sober
soft one ekeꞌnan 1 nom something soft; ɨntʉ
nom soft, referring to the quality of grass with dew on it; the condition which makes it easy to cut; soft, as with the skin of ripe fruit; kwekwepan nom something soft; miꞌna 2 nom something soft
soften eꞌtokʉ 2 vi be or become soft or mushy; ɨntʉnʉkʉ vt soften, make soft, usually by
making it wet
softness kwekweꞌpan nom softness, especially of something to sit on; sirinsirin n softness,
often used to describe hair
soldier kuwayau 1 n soldier; soisa n soldier
solution tepiꞌ 3 n solution, the answer to a
problem
something iꞌsa n something people use to make life better; naꞌkɨ1 n something; used when
speaker is inquiring of hearer
something closed aꞌko 2 nom something
closed

something near aꞌko 1 nom something near
son mu1 n son, indirect reference; pi 2 n son;
more specifically, a woman's son; for direct address
son-in-law payunu n son-in-law; poito 2 n
son-in-law
sore werei 1 n skin sore
sorry pokoita 2 vi be or become sorry
sort aranka 4 vt sort a group of things
sound aꞌmerumɨ vi make a sound, like rain in the distance as it approaches; sɨꞌ interj the
sound made in sharpening an axe or machete; useta n sound
sound word soroiꞌ interj sound word, the sound
of something piercing something else
soup kata1 1 n a variety of soup made from the
juice taken from the squeezed, grated cassava, boiled down to eliminate the poisonous qualities; tuma n soup in which to dip cassava bread; wara1 n soup made from the drippings from squeezing the grated cassava
sour kara2 2 nom sour; strong, as in the flavour
of kaziri after a longer period of waiting; kataꞌpan1 sour taste, as in the flavour of cassava drink after it has been left to sit for a few days, becoming more alcoholic in content
sour casreep kumasi 2 n an old-time variety of
casreep, more sour than kasiri'pɨ
sour one
source aꞌmu 1 n source, head
soursop sawasaꞌ n soursop fruit; the same tree
Spanish language speaker Siꞌpaniyoro
nprop the name given to people from Venezuela; more generally, anyone who speaks Spanish
spatula oriꞌori n a square, woven spatula used
to flip cassava bread on the griddle and fan the flame of the fire; sei n a spatula-like tool used to round off the edges of cassava bread as it bakes on the griddle
speak auroko vt speak to someone; eikʉ 1 vt speak; ta vt speak, say something; uka speak; usauroko vr speak
speak against sapema 1 vt speak against

© 2014 SIL International®

193

English-Akawaio Index

spear suparari 2 n spear
spear fish poka 1 vt spear fish with bow and
arrow
speech main 2 n speech
spicy one ineꞌ 3 nom something spicy;
something having a strong pepper flavour
spider arai n spider, general term; iwarʉka 2 n
a variety of biting spider similar in colour to the monkey of the same name; maꞌkwai 2 n a variety of large, mildly poisonous spider; similar to a tarantula; moyoiꞌ 1 n a variety of small, house spider; moyoiꞌ 2 n a variety of spider that commonly blocks a pathway with its web
spill akanʉkʉ vt spill out
spin eꞌme 2 vt spin; eꞌwoiwoima vi spin; iseꞌme 1 vi spin; turn around; ɨꞌ vt spin cotton; woiwoima vt spin
spine aꞌpoi 2 n backbone, spine; epiyaꞌ 1 n
spine, backbone
spirit aꞌkwa1 1 n spirit; aꞌkwarʉꞌpʉ 2 n spirit of a dead person; amariwakʉꞌpan 1 nom an evil spirit; ene1 2 n an evil spirit; ewan 2 n
spirit, the center of one's emotions or spirit; kuꞌta n an evil spirit; maikoꞌ n an evil spirit of the forest; mawari 1 n an evil spirit; oiꞌmane n an evil spirit; Orosikoꞌ 2 n spirits who are active people in relating to the piaichang.; pʉreka n an evil spirit that possesses people temporarily and deceives them; rato 1 n water spirit; tuwenkaron n female water spirit
spirits Poitoꞌma 3 n evil spirits
spit etaku n spit, saliva; etaꞌtɨ vi spit
splash
spleen are n spleen
spoil akama 1 vt spoil; makuna 2 vt spoil something; maꞌta 2 vi spoil, rot, decay; usuꞌwaikɨta vi be or become spoiled,
especially meat or stew
spoon koreꞌwa 2 n spoon
sport usɨurɨ vi sport, be more active, look for
sexual partners
sprain eꞌkoroika vi be or become sprained in
one's ankle
spread akuꞌnɨ 2 vt spread, cover; eꞌtaꞌnʉkʉ 1

vi be or become spread, cover an increasingly larger area; kariꞌ vt spread; utɨ 2 vi spread, as an idiom
sprout aꞌta1 1 vi sprout
squeeze kaꞌkɨrɨ vt squeeze; kasuꞌka vt
squeeze, usually a kind of fruit, to make juice; kʉtʉtʉꞌka 1 vt squeeze a person, with the intent to kill or scare children
squeeze cassava muruku vt squeeze cassava,
usually in a tenki'
squeezer tekiꞌ 1 n the long tubular container
used to squeeze the poison juice from the grated cassava
squirrel kari n squirrel
stab apuruka 1 vt stab; aꞌsoꞌka vt stab
stabbed utaꞌsoꞌka vi be or become stabbed
staggerer sonson 1 nom someone staggering, as
if drunk
staggering kɨtɨkɨtɨ nom staggering
stamp wasaꞌ 3 vt crush with one's foot, stamp
stand eꞌmʉꞌsaꞌka 1 vi stand; eꞌsotoꞌka vi be in a standing position; eꞌtakʉꞌka vi stand still; iꞌmʉꞌsaꞌka 1 vt stand, set in an upright position; sotoꞌka vt make something or
someone to stand upright
standing satiꞌ nom standing; useꞌseꞌtɨ 2 vr able
to stand up
standing behind eꞌtorupaꞌtɨ vi standing
behind
star kayonoꞌ 1 n the morning star (the north star?); kayonoꞌ 2 n any bright star; sirikɨ1 n
star
starch peꞌtoꞌkoroꞌmaꞌpʉ n the starch that
settles out from the water squeezed from grated cassava when a tenki' is used; can be rubbed onto cassava bread as it is baking; sipipa 1 n cassava starch fried into small eki-like patties
start eꞌsaraꞌtɨ vi start out; begin to go; saraꞌtɨ vt
start something
starve apʉꞌka vi starve, be or become hungry; apʉꞌkaꞌnʉkʉ vt make someone starve
stay emaꞌseꞌ 1 vi stay, remain; emaꞌseꞌ 3 vi stay overnight; eꞌnɨmɨ 2 vr stay behind, remain;

© 2014 SIL International®

194

English-Akawaio Index

ereutanʉkʉ 2 vt cause someone to stay; ukoꞌmamʉ 1 vi stay, remain
stay awake emaꞌkwa 2 vt stay awake through the night; eꞌwetumʉ vr stay awake, keep
oneself awake
stay overnight patarʉ vi stay overnight
steady inke 1 adv in a steady fashion, continuously; useꞌseꞌtɨ 1 vi steady
steal amaꞌma vt steal, take something belonging to someone else; kanka 3 vt take forcefully
steam-dry kapʉreꞌtɨ vt steam-dry, as in holding
one's clothes over a fire
stem yeꞌ1 3 n stem of a plant
step eꞌpiꞌpo 3 vi step on each other's toes; miyeꞌ
1 n step
sterilize kuwinɨ 1 vt sterilize, boil in water to
clean from germs
stern aure n the stern of a boat
stew isu n stew, the soup that contains the meat
making it a more complete meal
stick aino2 2 n a long stick used to stretch the matapi when squeezing grated cassava; amara
n stick with forked end, used to pick fruit; enpukuiꞌ 1 n a stick used to hit someone or punish a child; kiraraukwa vt make stuck; yʉi 2 n stick; yʉi 4 n cassava stick for planting
sticky kitaꞌ sticky; kɨrɨtʉ 2 vi sticking to the pot
that it is boiling in
sticky one kiꞌnɨ nom something sticky
stiff apɨta1 vi be or become stiff
still enkurumʉ 1 vi be or become still, not
moving
stilled eꞌtʉꞌnɨ 1 vi be or become still
sting iꞌka 2 vt sting
sting oneself eꞌsiꞌpo vr sting oneself using
ants, as a potion or charm for good luck in hunting, etc.
stinger isiꞌponin n the stinger of a bee or wasp
stink ukɨta vi be or become stinky
stir iꞌkʉra vt stir, particularly stir cassava drink; wɨrɨiꞌka vt stir; wɨrɨiwɨrɨima vt stir
stirrer kasiri wɨrɨi n a stick or paddle-like

instrument used to stir cassava drink; sokoisokoi n stick or paddle-like instrument used to stir cassava drink before it is poured for drinking; wɨrɨikaai n stirrer for stirring porridge; wɨrɨiwɨrɨi n a wooden beater used to stir cassava drink as it cooks
stomach ewan 3 n stomach; wen n stomach
stone kapiriꞌ n stone, rock, a stone one can break up; wata n a spirit stone, used by
piyai'san or shamans to discern spirits
stoop eꞌmuruika vt stoop over
stop eꞌpaka 2 vi stop; ereuta 2 vi stop; ereutanʉkʉ 4 vt stop someone, stop someone from doing something; waꞌkʉtʉ 2 vt stop
story panton n story; tunaruntɨ n an old-time
story
stout one tʉpʉreꞌporon nom someone stout in
stature, a short person
straight ewanayuru n a long, straight section
of river
straight one saraipan 2 something straight; sararanpan nom hair standing straight out; sereiꞌpan nom straight hair, smooth hair
stranger kaꞌkʉran 2 n stranger
strangle erupatuꞌka vt strangle
stream apɨrʉ n creek, stream
strength apʉiꞌkeꞌ n strength; meruntɨ 2 n
strength
strengthen meruntɨtanʉkʉ vt strengthen, make strong; panaꞌpantanʉkʉ vt strengthen,
make strong
stretch eꞌkʉꞌka vi be or become stretched; ɨnka 4 vt stretch, extend; kʉꞌka vt stretch; pai 2 n
stretch along a river
stretched usɨnka vi be or become stretched or
elongated
string asiꞌtɨ1 1 vt string, thread as in beads; ewaꞌtɨ 1 vt string
strip iꞌpo 1 vt strip
striped one sararaikapan nom something
striped
strips tereka n strips of vine material used to
plait panka, etc.

© 2014 SIL International®

195

English-Akawaio Index

strong one panaꞌ 1 nom someone or something strong; panaꞌ pan 1 nom someone or something
strong
struggle ekotaꞌma 2 vr be or become
struggling, striving
stub eꞌpiꞌpo 1 vi stub one's toe
stubborn one panaꞌ pan 2 nom someone
stubborn
student tenupasen n student
stump inakaꞌpɨ n a hollowed out stump; nakaꞌpɨ n stump
stung usiꞌpo vi be stung
subj uya 1 postp Agent marker for transitive verb
phrases; acts as a postposition in a passive translation, as in, "The dishes were washed by me."
submerge usemʉkʉ 2 vi be or become
submerged, to go underwater, after already being partly in the water
substitute yakan n substitute, other,
replacement
succeed entaka3 3 vi succeed
suck aꞌsuꞌka 1 vt suck on a sweet or something similar; kuꞌka 1 vt suck something through something like a straw; kuꞌtiꞌma vt kiss, suck
on
sudden suwa nom sudden
suffer ekotaꞌma 1 vr be or become suffering; eꞌtwariꞌma vi suffer
sugar cane sikaru n sugar cane
summon kɨꞌma vt call for, summon
sun wʉi enu n sun
Sunday sapaꞌ 2 n Sunday, the Christian Sabbath; suntaaka 1 n Sunday
sunlight wʉi pisi n sunlight, a ray of sunlight
superlative -iwa 2 superlative, most or best
supply repa vt supply

surely ewaiꞌ naꞌkɨ Yes, surely.
surface pʉroꞌ 1 n surface
surprise aiko 3 interj expression of surprise
surround wontɨ 4 vt surround
surrounded eꞌwapuꞌtɨ 2 vi be or becoming
surrounded or shielded
swallow enkoꞌma vt swallow something whole,
without chewing, as in a tablet or other medicine; ennoko2 vt swallow; kamariya 1 n a variety of small sky swallow; kɨisiꞌ n a variety of large swallow; norʉkɨ n a variety of small swallow
swamp emʉꞌnʉkʉ 2 vt swamp, have a canoe filled with water; iꞌkoro 1 n a small, swampy area particularly along a path; iꞌkororimɨꞌta n a large swampy area; kurukwa n swamp, an
area that fills with water during rainy season
sway tʉkʉutʉkʉu vt make something sway or
swing back and forth
sweat eramuꞌta vi sweat, perspiration
sweep akoroka 1 vt sweep; iseꞌka vt sweep; manpika 1 vt sweep away
sweet pa3 1 n a sweet, a candy
sweet cassava kaꞌnari n a general term for all
sweet cassava varieties
sweet one aꞌseꞌku n something sweet; ipa 2 nom anything sweet; kaꞌnɨ 2 nom something sweet; pa3 2 n anything sweet to eat
swell aꞌmamʉ vi swell up, as an abcess; aꞌsaruta vi be or become swollen, swell up,
inflate, rise
swim eꞌtukuiꞌka 2 vi swim; upɨnʉmʉ vi swim
swing sinkokoiꞌ n swing; a rope or vine hanging from a tree used for same; sinsinka vi swing
swinging tɨkɨtɨ n a motion of something
swinging back and forth
sympathizing one esentuꞌkenaꞌ nom
someone showing sympathy

Tt

© 2014 SIL International®

196

English-Akawaio Index

table taꞌpuru n table
tablet tepiꞌ 1 n tablet
tackle sererema n fishing supplies, most often
the pole, line and hook used to catch fish by putting a pole in the ground near the river and coming back to check the hook periodically
tail areꞌna 2 n tail; aukwʉ n tail
tail tip areꞌna 1 n tip of an animal's tail
take aꞌkwarʉka2 2 vt take something by force; anʉmʉ1 2 vt take; kanka 2 vt take off, take away from; utakama 2 vi take the lesser one,
the less perfect one, the rotten piece
take away moꞌka 1 vt take away
take blood mʉnʉꞌka vt take blood
take out enpaꞌka 1 vt take out
taken utaꞌkwarʉka 2 vr taken by force
talented one emiyaꞌpokeꞌ 3 someone talented
talk etannɨmɨ 1 vi talk
tall one kusan 1 nom someone or something tall
tame esepanka vt tame
tan eꞌkɨrɨnta vi tan, get darker by the sun
tangle siꞌkoroꞌtɨ vt tangle, entangle
tangled usiꞌtɨ1 vi be or become tangled
tannia naꞌ1 n tannia, a variety of root crop
tar maitaken 1 n a tar-like substance from a tree
used for making grater boards and rubbing onto arrow points and fishing rods; paramari 2 n tar
Tarikiran Tarikiran nprop the name given to
John Charlie, a prophet in the Alleluia church
taste onpa vt taste something
tasteless koꞌtʉmʉn nom tasteless
tattle eparanka 1 vt tattle, tell someone of
another's bad actions or qualities
tattoo kansuꞌ n traditional tattoo made on the
face or forearms, to signify the wearer makes a specific kind of cassava drink; maꞌkʉi 3 n tattoo, the result of an indigenous practice, given to young women near or around the mouth, the design of which is based onthe taste of casiri she makes by chewing and spitting the casiri back into the pot

teach enupa vt teach
teacher enupanin n teacher; tiꞌsa n teacher
tear karaka vt tear, rip
tear down tʉrʉꞌkwa 2 vt tear down
tears enu paru tears
tease usennaka 3 vi tease
tell auroꞌka vt tell; ekama 1 vt tell; ekareꞌtɨ 2 vt tell, announce; maimuꞌtɨ vt tell someone what to say; panaꞌtɨ 1 vt tell; usekama 2 vr
tell about oneself
tempt enekuꞌtɨ 2 vt tempt; iꞌtu 5 vt tempt, test
tense eꞌsamɨkɨꞌtɨ vi make tense the muscles of
one's body
termite kiriꞌsoroꞌ n a variety of termite; kunwaiꞌ 2 n a variety of termite; sirimoꞌ 1 n a
variety of termite
test iꞌtu 3 vt test; try
testicle emu n testicle
Thank you tenki interj Thank you.
that kʉrɨ rɨ 4 pron that, referring to a person or living thing nearby; mɨ1 1 pron that; mɨn pron that; mɨrɨ1 1 pron that
thatch kapaisan 1 n a wide-leafed palm
thatching material used as the top layer in a roof; karana 2 n thatch; patawa 2 n thatch roofing from the padawa tree, a medium-quality thatch
the widow at Zarephath Aꞌpasi nprop the
widow at Zarephath, the woman in the Bible whose flour and oil never ran out, found in 1 Kings 17
their toꞌ 3 pron their
them kamo 2 pron them (farther); kamoro 2 pron them (nearer); toꞌ 2 pron them
then pa2 conj then, in order to, so that
there mairɨ pron there, not too far away; mɨ1 2 adv there; mɨrɨ1 2 adv there; moro 1 pron there
these pʉsamo pron these, referring to people or
living things nearby the speaker
they kamo 1 pron they (farther); kamoro 1 pron they (nearer); toꞌ 1 pron they
thick iꞌsin nom thick, as in solid material; pun3

© 2014 SIL International®

197

English-Akawaio Index

nom thick, as smoke is thick
thick one eꞌpiꞌnan nom a thick liquid
thief amaꞌ nom thief
thigh eꞌmata 3 n thigh, the upper part of the leg; monta 1 n the upper portion of thigh
thin ataiwaꞌnan nom thin, as in liquid quality
thin one apiꞌtɨmɨn 1 nom something or someone thin; karawaꞌ 1 nom something or someone thin or skinny; soreꞌwaꞌpan nom
someone or something thin
think enuminka 1 vt think; isenuminka vt think; kupʉ 3 vt think, especially in relation to
getting ready to do something, prepare to do; usenuminka vr think for oneself, study
third osorʉwau 2 third
thirst tunaꞌkiriꞌ n thirst
this pʉse pron this; referring to a person or other living thing nearby; se1 pron this
thorn ɨmɨꞌnɨ 1 n thorn; kʉ 2 n the thorn of some
plants
those kamo 3 pron those (farther); kamoro 3 pron those (nearer); pʉsamoro pron those
though tane 2 conj though, nevertheless
thread katin n thread, used in sewing
three osorʉwau 1 n three
three by three osorʉwauꞌne adv three by
three
three things
throat esen n throat; wai3 1 n throat
throne pʉrataru 1 n throne, Alleluia word
through winɨ 1 postp through; yai1 1 postp
through
throw enoꞌma 1 vt throw away; maꞌkɨrɨ 3 vt
throw
throw down aꞌmorʉka 1 vt throw down
throw into water ennasika vt throw someone
or something into water
throw out iꞌkwamʉ 2 vt throw out a fluid; maꞌkɨrɨ 2 vt throw out
thrown down utaꞌmorʉka vr be thrown down
thumb miyaꞌ epotorʉ n thumb

thunder korʉme n thunder
tick kopari1 n a variety of tick
tickle sakaiꞌsakaiꞌma vt tickle
tide apʉꞌneꞌ 3 n tide of the ocean
tie auromʉ vt tie, bind
tie up ewaꞌtɨ 2 vt tie up
tied up usewaꞌtɨ 1 vi be or become tied up,
usually referring to tying up one's hammock
tiger arimaraka n a variety of tiger, (what type?
size? colouring? Real or mythological?); kaikusi 2 n tiger; any other wild feline species; usariwara n a variety of tiger that is brown like a deer but with black stripes down its back; wairarimɨ 1 n a variety of large tiger; usually in fictional stories
tigers akamisarai n a group of tigers, bad ones,
that eat people
tight one kʉtʉtʉꞌ nom something tight, unable
to be loosed easily
tighten kʉtʉtʉꞌka 2 vt tighten
time aꞌtai 2 n time; eꞌkwa4 n time
tin tinin 1 n tin
tip eꞌtɨrinka 2 vi tip over
tiptoe pʉta putu n tiptoe
tire apʉꞌ vi be or become tired; emiyaꞌnʉmʉ 2 vi be or become tired; etaꞌka 1 vt tire of doing something; kumɨta vi be or become tired from
physical exertion
tired eꞌturuma 1 vi be or become tired; eꞌtʉrinka vi tired, sleepy; ɨrɨmokʉ vi tired from exertion, weak; usetaꞌka 1 vi be or
become physically tired
to enaꞌ 2 postp to; enaka 1 postp to; koroꞌtaꞌ postp to, in the direction of; piyaꞌ 2 postp to; pɨꞌ 1 postp to; pona 1 postp to; rakʉiꞌ 2 postp
to
toad pɨrɨtuku 2 n a variety of toad
toast aꞌpiꞌtanʉkʉ vt toast some bread or meat with a little oil on a griddle; karautanʉkʉ vt
toast, blacken the surface of food on a griddle; puru2 2 vt toast cassava bread or meat with some oil on a griddle

© 2014 SIL International®

198

English-Akawaio Index

toasted one karauta something toasted, as a
piece of cassava bread over an open fire
tobacco kawai n tobacco, the leaves and the
product, of which the local product is used most often in ceremonies to discover the cause of someone's illness; tamʉ 1 n tobacco
today serɨ n today
toe mukuꞌpɨ1 2 n toe
toenail pʉta piꞌpɨ n toenail
together asaꞌken two people living together, often as a married couple; itaperʉꞌka nom
being together or in close proximity to one another; ɨsenau 1 adv together, with each other; marɨ1 1 postp together with
togetherness aꞌsamʉtʉ n togetherness,
fellowship
toilet waꞌ yen toilet, outhouse or hole for
depositing human waste
tomb uruwaiꞌ 2 n tomb
tomorrow awanapairɨ n tomorrow
tongue ani n tongue
too many tuꞌke 2 nom too many
tooth ɨ n tooth
toothache ɨkɨrʉwa n toothache
top enpu n top of a tree; kɨwɨꞌ 2 n a toy top made from same; nakapu 1 n top
top part nakapu 2 n the top part
topside kawinɨkʉiꞌ 1 adv in the direction of
topside
toucan kamata n a variety of small toucan; kuyapoꞌ n a variety of toucan; kʉrʉmaya n a
variety of medium-sized toucan
touch apɨ1 vt touch; aꞌsi 3 vt touch
toward piyaꞌ 3 postp toward; pɨꞌ 2 postp toward
towards winɨkʉiꞌ postp towards
toys imamin 3 n a child's toys
tradition eseru 4 n tradition
trajectory
translate enpoika 1 vt translate
trap mare n a trap using string or cord; saꞌma 1

vt trap; tʉranpa n trap used to catch birds
tray opa1 n a woven serving tray for serving
cassava bread
treat epiꞌtɨ 2 vi be or become treated for an
illness
tree akoto n a variety of tree used for making woodskin canoes, tritle tree; araira n a variety
of tree from which roofing slats are cut, yariyari tree,from which fishing rods are also made; arara n a variety of tree, black yarri-yarri tree; ariꞌsa n a variety of tree that thrives with its trunk under water, found on river banks; aꞌsaꞌreꞌ n a variety of tree, silk cotton tree, has edible seeds, brown cotton is used on arrows for blow guns; aꞌwoꞌpʉ n a rotting tree trunk, standing or fallen; eriꞌ1 n a variety of tree similar to the mora; good for lumber, dugout canoes; eroi 1 n a variety of cashew tree; iren1 n a variety of tree, white silver-balli; iruwa 1 n a variety of tree; kaikara2 n a variety of tree, a lot like bamboo; kanwaaiꞌ 1 n a variety of tree with shallow roots; kanwaaiꞌ 2 n a variety of fruit tree; karapa 2 n crab oil tree; known for its oil used on hair and skin; karapiꞌpɨ 1 n a variety of tree; karipon n a variety of tree from which the outer skin is stripped to make shoulder and head straps for warishis, grows purple flowers; karu n a variety of tree with fruit that gives a sticky substance for use in a bird trap; kawi n a variety of tree, the leaf of which is used in thatching; kopari3 n a variety of tree with a red colour under the skin, good for building material; kopere n a variety of tree, cedar tree; kotoi n a variety of tree; kumaꞌ n a variety of cotton tree, silk cotton tree; kumei n a variety of tree with unusual seed pods, monkey pod tree; kumeiwarai 1 n a variety of tree similar to the kumei tree, hence its name; monkey-pot tree the variety of tree from which benab posts are cut; the seed pods of this tree look like small clay pots with edible nuts inside; kun n a variety of palm tree (moriche) the leaves of which are used in making a thatched roof; kuraiꞌ 1 n a bamboo-like tree; kureꞌkʉ 1 n a variety of tree, dukali; kuwariꞌ 1 n a variety of tree, the inner bark of which is used to make a sap to fill cracks in boats and other applications which require a glue.; kuwinaꞌ n a variety of tree that gives a rubber substance

© 2014 SIL International®

199

English-Akawaio Index

when tapped; kwatʉrʉꞌ n a variety of tree with small seed pods that look like fairy hats, the seeds of which are not edible; maiꞌ2 n a variety of tree, kunter tree, agouti eat the seeds; maipa n a variety of waiti tree with long seed pods; makara n a variety of tree, walaba, a hardwood tree with edible, walnut-sized fruit; makarin 2 n a variety of tree producing same fruit, matchwood tree; maꞌpa n a variety of tree; Miripa yeꞌ 2 n a variety of tree; mɨꞌ 1 n purple heart tree; moꞌke n a variety of tree with short bean pods containing edible fruit; muru n a variety of tree that bears a small fruit; opa2 n a variety of tree from which roof shingles are cut, walaba tree, seed pods hang down from branches by long stems; oꞌpan 1 n a variety of fruit tree; oro 1 n a variety of tree; paiwatʉpu n a variety of tree, candlewood tree; parakwa 1 n a variety of tree, known as mora tree; paraꞌta n a variety of tree, the bulletwood tree, the rubber tree, also produces a type of fruit; parawakasi n a variety of tree, trysil tree; paru2 1 n a variety of tree; Parupa 2 n a variety of fruit tree; paruwe 1 n a variety of tree having a wide trunk at ground level; pasiꞌwʉ n a variety of tree, the leaves of which are used for thatch; piroto 5 n bulletwood tree; piyɨꞌ 1 n a variety of tree with edible fruit similar to the orange; pɨkɨi n a variety of tree; pɨꞌre n a variety of tree; poirɨ2 n a variety of tree, the bark of which is boiled and drunk to stop excessive menstrual bleeding; poreka n a variety of tree; powa 1 n a variety of tree, Balsam of Peru tree; puru1 n a variety of tree with fruit to pick; puruwe n rubber tree; riyuru n a variety of tree from which roofing slats are cut; rumaꞌ 1 n a variety of tree, kupa tree; ruweta n a variety of tree, balata tree; sanwoto 1 n a variety of tree; saparaꞌwʉ 1 n a variety of fruit tree with small green berries that turn ripe; sikɨniꞌ n a variety of fruit tree with small, round fruits; simaꞌna 1 n a variety of tree that puts out baseball-sized seeds; the Baramani tree; siꞌnaꞌ 1 n the variety of tree from which inner bark is stripped to make shoulder and head straps for warishi and bundles of other things to be carried out of the bush; the tree from which the fruit is taken to make the toy kɨwɨ'; sinau2 n a variety of tree from which a part is extracted to make a person

sneeze; suruwa 1 n a variety of tree which produces edible seeds; sʉreꞌpa n a variety of tree, perhaps a palm tree; tapʉrenken n a variety of tree, the leaves of which are used to make a drink to prevent or cure worms, cold symptoms, or fleas and chiggers; tatan 1 n a variety of tree good for lumber, whose seeds float on the river; tensen n a variety of tree with red colour under the bark, good for building material; tero n a variety of tree; toro2 1 n a variety of tree, the mora tree, a large tree that grows near water, with large seeds that float and wide lower buttresses; tun n a variety of tree; uisi n a variety of tree from which bark is peeled to make straps for back packs and smaller pieces as ties across the open side of same; urupɨ1 1 n a variety of tree with red seeds that burn like red pepper and are probably poisonous; wakawaꞌ2 1 n a variety of tree from which inner bark is peeled for use as head and shoulder straps on back packs; wana n a variety of tree, often cut and used as a walking stick; warapari n a variety of tree; warima n a variety of tree from which roofing slats are cut; waruwa 1 n a variety of tree, candlewood tree; warʉkɨ 1 n a variety of tree bearing seeds, the nut of which is sweetly edible; waꞌtakuran n a variety of tree, the leaves of which are used to relieve cold symptoms; waꞌtuwa n a variety of tree that is used for wood, not a hard wood; wayaka n the mythological tree from which all plant seeds came; wekupi 1 n a variety of tree from which wall bark is taken, the paromali tree; yeꞌ1 2 n tree; yʉi 1 n tree, a general term
tribe eseꞌ 2 n tribe, the name by which one
belongs to a particular culture and language
trick ennaka 1 vt trick someone by talking to them; wɨnɨ 6 vt trick
tripod apoꞌ eꞌseꞌ tripod on which to cook food
in a pot, made of three logs or three rocks
trouble eparanka 2 vt cause someone else to
have trouble or an accident of some kind; manenpa 1 vt trouble, bother; paran 3 n trouble
troubled eꞌmanenpa vi be or become troubled
troublesome ekamʉra 2 nom troublesome, being in trouble; senoꞌmariꞌ 1 nom
troublesome

© 2014 SIL International®

200

English-Akawaio Index

trough kuriyara 2 n drinking trough; yʉi piꞌpɨ
3 n the inner bark of a tree made into a trough used in the kitchen for holding grated bitter cassava
true one iꞌnai 1 nom something true or real
trunk eꞌkwapiꞌ n solid or cured trunk lying on the ground; epuꞌpɨ 1 n trunk of a tree; yeꞌ1 4 n
trunk
try iꞌtu 2 vt try; usiꞌtu 2 vi try
tuber mun n cassava tuber, yam tuber, potato
tuber, the general term for any tuber
tuberculosis wayapaimɨ n tuberculosis
tuberculosis patient toretorepan nom a
person with tuberculosis
tumble eꞌtururuka vi tumble, fall down a steep
incline
tumor soꞌkoro 1 n tumor
turn eraꞌtɨ 2 vi turn or turn back; raꞌtɨ 2 vt turn
over, flip
turn blue arita 1 vi be or become blue, as in

the colour of dead flesh
turn over rawoika vt turn over
turtle arakaka n a variety of small, swamp turtle; not found in rivers; peitura n a variety of water turtle; warara n a variety of turtle,
possibly only found in the Rupununi area; wayamori n a variety of land turtle
Tuꞌpoꞌko Falls Tuꞌpoꞌko 2 nprop the name
given to the falls, after which the village is named
twin ratoi 1 n a twin to another person
twine aꞌsiꞌkɨtɨꞌpɨ n a variety of cotton twine, especially when rotten; kurayaꞌ 2 n twine made
from pine leaves
twins ɨsimunuiꞌ 1 n twins
twirl raꞌtɨ 1 vt twirl, spin
twist iraꞌtɨ vt twist; iseꞌme 2 vi twist; tawenka
vt twist; injure by twisting
twisted one kisiꞌkisiꞌpan nom something
twisted
two asaꞌrɨ n the number two, 2

Uu

ugly one ene1 4 n something or someone ugly
unadorned tɨu 1 nom unadorned, especially of
hair
uncertainty -n2 uncertainty; rɨnau adv
uncertainty, whatever
uncover aꞌpo 2 vt uncover
under oꞌno postp under; pupiyau 1 postp under; rakʉiꞌ 1 postp under, as in physical position or
authority
under (water) oꞌkoroꞌno postp under (water)
under water iꞌnau 1 adv under water, deep
underground iꞌnau 2 adv underground, under
the surface of the ground, say, in a hole; deep
understand apiꞌ 2 vt understand; entokaꞌnʉkʉ vt understand; toꞌkaꞌnʉkʉ 2 vt
understand

underwear moꞌsa1 1 n underwear, panties unfinished utakama 1 vi leaving something
undone
unfold kariꞌma 1 vt unfold unknowing usenuꞌmereꞌma vr be or become
unknowing
unroll aranka 5 vt unroll untie aranka 2 vt untie; eukwa 1 vt untie untied utaranka vi be or become untied until pona 5 postp until
up kakʉiꞌ 2 adv in an upward direction; kaꞌtakʉiꞌ 1 adv up, in a skyward direction
upriver kawinɨkʉiꞌ 2 adv upriver, in the
direction of a higher elevation following the river
uproot eꞌmoꞌraiꞌka vi uproot

© 2014 SIL International®

201

English-Akawaio Index

upside down weꞌnaꞌsokoi 1 nom upside down upstairs kakʉiꞌ 1 n upstairs urinate usuꞌta vi urinate urine suꞌ n urine

us ina1 2 pron us (exclusive) use apurɨ2 2 vt use; -ꞌtɨ to use (N) using something for the first time
aꞌkuꞌtɨ vt using something for the first time

Vv

valley soronpan n valley; yaranta n valley
vein kara1 1 n vein
venereal disease samoroni n venereal
disease
very kuru adv very; tamɨ adv very
vex eꞌnaika vr be or become vexed
vexed usakorota vi be or become vexed
via yai1 2 postp by way of, via
vine kamowa n a variety of vine that grows on the savannah; kapʉi enkumaꞌpʉ n a variety of
vine, also called bush rope, monkey ladder vine, etc.; kararapɨ n a variety of vine that puts out white, fragrant flowers; kaꞌtawaiꞌ 1 n a variety of rough vine from which one can collect water to drink; possibly ka'tawa ye'; kopari2 n a variety of creeping vine; maꞌku n a variety of creeping vine; nipi 1 n a variety of vine;

pawisimʉ 1 n a variety of creeper vine; piriyoi n a variety of tree-climbing vine with red, trumpet-like flowers; siꞌpotai n a variety of thorny vine; urari 1 n a variety of vine, bearing a type of fruit; wakawaꞌ2 2 n a variety of vine; waꞌkwama 1 n a variety of vine; warin2 n a variety of vine used as a frame for back packs; wayapiro 1 n a variety of vine that grows in the bush, used to weave opa and wari'sa; wayaura 2 n a variety of vine that grows on the savannah
visit kaꞌkʉranpa vt visit
visitor kaꞌkʉran 1 n visitor
volcano non eꞌmo n volcano
vomit enarumʉ vi vomit
vulture kurun n a variety of vulture, Johnny
Crow
vulva sai n vulva

Ww

Wa paru Wa paru nprop the name given to a
creek along the path between Pipiri pai and Amoko kupai
wafer apiꞌtɨmɨn 2 n the wafer given in Anglican
communion, so named because of the thin character of the wafer
wag sʉkʉsʉkʉma 1 vt wag, as in a dog's head or
tail
wagon tararan 1 n wagon
Waikaꞌta Waikaꞌta nprop the name given to a
settlement

waist oroꞌpai n waist
wait apʉne interj wait; enuripʉ vi wait; masa
interj wait
waiti enpiꞌpɨ2 n a variety of fruit tree, waiti; kuran n a variety of fruit tree, waiti; muraurai n a variety of fruit tree, waiti; poro1
n a variety of fruit tree, waiti (small pods); pororomai n a variety of fruit tree, waiti; wairawoꞌ n a variety of fruit tree, waiti
wake up upaka vi wake up
waken enpaka vt waken, wake someone up

© 2014 SIL International®

202

English-Akawaio Index

walk upinimʉ vi walk; usarɨ vi walk
walker sonson 2 nom someone walking fast
walking stick tekeꞌsen n walking stick
wall wekupi 2 n wall made from tree of same
name
wall in wekupiriꞌtɨ vt put up traditional walling
made from the bark of a certain tree
walling poraiꞌ n a variety of weaved walling
walthrush paruwena 1 n a variety of river
mammal, common in the Kamʉran River, possibly the walrus
Wanawon Paru Wanawon 2 nprop the name
given the creek near the same settlement
want -pai want
wanted thing iꞌse nom something wanted
wanting -seꞌna wanting
Wapishana person Wapiyana 1 nprop a
Wapishana person
Wapishana tribe Wapiyana 2 nprop the
Wapishana tribe of amereindians in Guyana and Brasil
war ewaꞌnoma 2 vi wage war
warm aꞌmuna 2 vi be or become warm; aꞌno vt
put something in the sun or near the fire for warmth
warn karaiꞌ vi give a warning, like the karai grasshopper; panama vt warn
warp eꞌme 4 vi warp, as in lumber; karanai n
the long, length-wise strands of weave in a hammock
warped useꞌme 1 vi warped, as in lumber
warped one panaipan nom something warped,
especially related to boats
wash enpataukwa 2 vt wash a face, to splash with water; euranka 2 vt wash; iꞌkuka vt wash, referring to clothes or the body; korʉka 1 vt wash, as in clothes; kumisi 1 vt wash clothes or wares; sukuꞌsukuꞌma vt wash, usually refers to washing clothes by hand; tuꞌkuna vt wash, especially clothes; usenpataukwa2 1 vr
wash oneself, wash one's face
wasp arʉka n wasp, marabunta; eꞌkan 1 n a
variety of wasp, found hanging in rafters without

a nest; paraꞌ n a variety of large, black wasp; tapiyuka n a variety of wasp, brown marabunta; wanawana n a variety of wasp that lives in the ground and has a reddish back
waste maꞌtanʉkʉ vt waste
watch eꞌmainanpa vr watch oneself, watch one's behaviour; mainanpa 1 vt watch; paꞌsima 1 vt watch
water tuna 1 n water
water fall ena2 n water fall
water place tunaꞌkwa 3 n a place where one
finds water
waterfall manari n waterfall; meru n waterfall
watermelon paꞌtiya n watermelon
wave ariꞌma 2 vt wave; sipaꞌsipaꞌ 2 n wave of water; wayaima vt wave; wʉkwa vt wave
something on a stick
wax maitaken 2 n wax, used for same
way ken2 n way, manner
we ina1 1 pron we (exclusive)
weak one aꞌtuꞌmʉn nom someone or something weak; ɨꞌsɨꞌmʉn nom someone or something
weak
weakness ɨꞌsɨꞌmʉra n weakness
weapon epaai n a variety of weapon - need description; urapa 2 n a general term for any weapon; waꞌtana 1 n a special type of weapon
used in warfare in ages past
wear arʉkoꞌtɨ vt to give someone a hat to wear,
to make someone wear a hat
wear out eketuꞌka vt wear out, exhaust
weasel iwaruwana 2 n a variety of weasel,
tayra
weave kaniꞌtɨ vt weave; as in making a hammock; kapʉ 2 vt weave, as in a basket or
waricha
weaving mana2 n weaving, something woven
web pon2 3 n a spider's web
weed ina2 vt weed, particularly pulling up unwanted plants by the roots; kaꞌtawaiꞌ 2 n a
variety of weed that scratches and burns the skin; wanaꞌ 2 n weed, a general term; wanapu

© 2014 SIL International®

203

English-Akawaio Index

n a general term for weeds
week suntaaka 2 n week, from Sunday to the
next Sunday
weevil kunwaiꞌ 1 n a variety of wood weevil
that attacks dugout canoes
welcome apurɨ1 7 vt welcome; ereutanʉkʉ 3 vt welcome, receive; ɨurɨ1 vt welcome
well atuꞌ 1 nom someone well; kaꞌnʉ nom well wet eꞌkurimʉ vi be or become wet; eꞌnanʉkʉ
vr make oneself wet; inanʉkʉ vt make wet wet one aiꞌku 2 nom something wet; aserʉ 1
nom something or some place wet; iꞌkurinsaꞌ 1 nom something or someone wet what ɨꞌrɨ pron what when aꞌtai 1 postp when where nai adv where while -iꞌma while, as; koroꞌtau 1 postp while, as, at the same time; tane 1 conj while while that mɨrɨpan 1 adv while that while they mɨrɨpan 2 adv while they whirlpool maruwasimɨ n whirlpool whisper etarerumʉ 1 vi whisper whistle pɨpu 2 n a whistle made from the kwɨpu grass; sowesowe n a whistle of a kanaima or large bat-like animal; uturumʉ 2 vi whistle white one aimuꞌne something or someone white white person paranakʉrʉ n white person who ɨnʉꞌ pron who whooping cough arautaimɨ 1 n whooping cough widow noꞌpʉ rʉꞌpʉ widow widowed epiyapainoma 3 vr be or become widowed width etaka n width; kaꞌta 1 n width wife noꞌpʉ n wife wiggle teketekema vi wiggle wild enariꞌkenaꞌ nom wild, not tame will eseru 6 n will willing one ausin 1 nom someone willing

wind peseꞌtɨ n wind, breeze
wind storm kuranau 1 n wind storm
windy one aꞌsetʉn windy place or condition
wing apiri 1 n the wing of a bird
wink kisiꞌ n a wink
wipe eꞌweꞌsenaukwa vi wipe oneself after
defecating
wisdom emepokeꞌ 1 nom wisdom; eseru 3 n wisdom; eseruꞌtɨ vt give someone wisdom; puꞌkeꞌ n wisdom
wise one emepokeꞌ 2 nom a wise person; emiyaꞌpokeꞌ 1 someone wise; ɨkenaꞌ 1 nom a
smart person, a sharp wit
with aꞌkɨrɨ postp with; enau postp with; ke1 postp with; kenan 1 postp with a person; pɨꞌ 6 postp with; pɨkɨrɨ 1 postp with; poi 1 postp with; pokon postp together with; yaꞌ 2 postp
with
wither aipʉta 1 vi be or become withered or
skinny
withhold amʉreꞌnʉmʉ 2 vi withhold
without pʉn postp without negative for a noun phrase or verb phrase; pʉra 2 adv without
withstand aꞌkʉreꞌtɨ 2 vt withstand; put up with
woman uriꞌsan 2 n young woman
wood yʉi 3 n wood
woodpecker kaiꞌparaꞌ n a variety of
red-headed woodpecker
woof kaniꞌ 1 n the woof, or width-wise strands of
weave in a hammock
word main 1 n word or words
words kareta 5 n words
work kupʉ 2 vt work; tʉrawaso n assigned
work, work one is employed to perform
work lightly usennaka 2 vi work lightly
worker emiyaꞌpokeꞌ 4 a good worker
world orʉ 1 n world, the earth
worldly things orʉ 2 n worldly things, the
wicked things that distract a spiritual (Alleluia) person
worm iꞌki n a variety of worm, found on mora

© 2014 SIL International®

204

English-Akawaio Index

tree leaves during rainy season; ɨrʉkɨ 2 n worm, the general term; mosokoroi n worm, especially as bait for fishing
worry siwankama vi be or become worried; usewankama vi worry
worry over sanoma1 1 vt make a fuss over
worship apurɨ1 2 vt worship
worst one makuꞌpɨ 1 the worst one of many
worthy yeꞌ2 2 nom someone or something worthy
of the noun to which it is attached
wound akama 3 vt wound, injure; apuruka 2 vt
wound

wrap wontɨ 1 vt wrap, surround wrapper won1 1 n wrapper wrestle amoꞌkoro 1 vt wrestle wrestle each other utamoꞌkoro 1 vr wrestle
each other
wrestle oneself utamoꞌkoro 2 vr wrestle
oneself
wrinkled one epikɨrɨꞌ nom someone who has
wrinkles on his or her forehead
write menuka 1 vt write writing menu 1 n writing

Yy

yam napʉi n yam; pawisimʉ 2 n a variety of
yam
yard pʉroroi 1 n yard
yarn kaꞌpoꞌti n yarn; kɨtɨꞌkwaꞌ 2 n yarn made
from cotton
yawn entakapima vi yawn
year wʉipiya 1 n year
yell yaipita vi yell, scream
yellow one karaꞌkwaꞌpan nom something yellow, the colour of bile; tʉkotonpire nom a
faint yellow colour; the colour of grated cassava (before cooking) that signifies it will be good-tasting
yes ewaiꞌ 1 adv yes; the affirmative response to a yes-no question; tai interj yes, uh-huh,
affirmation by the hearer, used while listening to someone else talk

yesterday koꞌmamiyau adv yesterday
yoke iꞌmʉkamʉ vt yoke, connect a pair of
animals by a yoke around their necks
you a- 1 you, second person verb prefix; ɨ- 1 you, second person verb prefix; ɨmɨrɨ 1 pron you; mʉ- you, second person verb prefix
you all -tʉu you all, used with verbs as a
command to more than one person
young man moine 1 n young man
young one ewakayu nom someone or something young; munkɨ 2 n young ones of any
species - birds, animals, people
your a- 2 your, second person noun prefix; ɨ- 2 your, second person noun prefix; ɨmɨrɨ 2 pron
your
you-subj auya you (singular), as subject of a
transitive sentence

Zz

zig-zag sakaꞌsakaꞌpan nom someone walking

in a zig-zag fashion

© 2014 SIL International®

205

