M.Litt Social Anthropology and Amerindian Studies
THE AUTHENTIC INDIAN
RETHINKING COLONIALISM, INDIGENOUS IDENTITY, AND SOCIAL CHANGE IN CONTEMPORARY AMAZONIA
Christopher Abbott University of St. Andrews
August 2001

ABSTRACT
The indigenous peoples of Amazonia have been our non-European Other since the times of the first Conquest 500 years ago. Although our way of looking at them has changed from 'wild cannibal' to 'noble savage', the consequences have not really altered all that much. At the same time, their interpretation of what it means to them to be ‘indigenous’ has been ignored. This is all linked to our notions of homogenous 'culture' and what it means to be an 'authentic' Indian.
This dissertation examines the above issues with particular reference to the Huaorani of the Ecuadorian Oriente, at the western edge of the Amazon Basin. It explores the questions surrounding colonialism, indigenous identity, and social change – from before the European Conquest until present day Amazonia. It ultimately argues that our notions of contemporary Amazonian peoples are inherently misguided, and that our 'ways of seeing' need to be rethought.
I argue that we need to look at 'culture' as an ongoing activity, and as such the notion of 'authenticity' is simply a part of our colonial (and anthropological) imagination. By listening to the indigenous voice we can see that they are actively engaged with history, and indeed with us, in ways that we have previously not understood. Only when we truly listen to what they are saying will we realise what they mean when they tell us "We are Huaorani".

CONTENTS

Abstract

i

Acknowledgements

iii

INTRODUCTION

1

I COLONIALISM AND NOTIONS OF THE OTHER

5

Pre-Conquest Amazonia

5

The Conquest and Notions of the Other

7

Indigenous Perspectives on Colonialism and the Other

12

II CULTURE AND SOCIAL CHANGE

17

Bounded Cultures

17

Culture as an Activity

19

Heterogeneous Culture

22

III THE AUTHENTIC INDIAN

25

The Question of Authenticity

25

Case Study: The Huaorani of Ecuador

29

Dealing with the Company

31

The Tagaeri

35

Indigenous Promotion of Tourism

37

IV INDIGENOUS PEOPLES AND THE NATION-STATE

43

Being Indigenous Within a Nation-State

43

Case Study: The Huaorani and Land Rights

47

Indigenous Political Organisations

49

V DISCUSSION

53

Representing the Other

53

Conclusion

55

REFERENCES

59

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
I would like to thank my supervisors, Professor Joanna Overing and Dr. Robert Storrie, for all their help and guidance. This dissertation is partly the result of fieldwork in Ecuador during July-September 1999 and May-June 2000 – my thanks to all those that made that possible. I would also like to thank the Huaorani of Wentaro and Quehueiri-uno for their warmth, kindness, and honesty – may some things never change.

INTRODUCTION
"These are unique cultures in the world that deserve government protection. Our job is to keep modern society away from them." - Sydney Possuelo, Department of Isolated Indians, FUNAI.
"It won't do to have Indians in the 21st century. The idea of freezing man in the first stage of evolution is in truth, cruel and hypocritical." - Helio Jaguaribe, Former Science & Technology Minister, Brazil.
The above two quotes are taken from a news article which featured the headline "Saving Indigenous Culture Through Isolation: 'Lost' Tribe to Stay Lost".1 These views seem to represent the opposite ends of the debate in this area. However, they both imply the typical view that prior to their 'discovery' this group’s culture had remained untainted and unchanged for centuries. This is reflected in the revealing language that is used in this type of discourse – "isolated natives" are "contacted" by the "outside world", or "lost tribes" are "discovered" by "Western civilisation". It is as if these people were somehow wondering around in the dark (spiritually and culturally) waiting for an explorer to let them know where they are, and an anthropologist to let them know who they are. This type of discourse has it’s roots in the Conquest of Amazonia, whereby it is thoug ht that history only begins for these people once they have been ‘contacted’ or even conquered.
1 ABC News (10 July 1998) reporting on an "unnamed" indigenous group living near the Brazil-Peru border. More recently, BBC News reported a similar event under the headline "Brazilian Lost Tribe Discovered" (9 April 2001).

This dissertation will argue that this is not the case. I intend to place the indigenous communities of present day Amazonia within a wider theoretical and socio-historical context, in terms of what it means to them to be ‘indigenous’. This will be achieved through an analysis of the theoretical and ethnographic literature, with a particular focus on the Huaorani of the Ecuadorian Amazon and my fieldwork experiences with them.
The thesis starts from the, until recently, commonly held view in anthropology (and in general) that Amazonian cultures were in some way 'pristine', and that there must be a division between the 'traditional' and the 'acculturated' Indian of contemporary Amazonia. In line with Gow (1991) I argue that this must be replaced with a new analysis of today’s Amazonian peoples and Amazonian history, in which the indigenous peoples are recognised as active agents, rather than passive victims of time during which their traditional culture has been lost. I start with a discussion of pre-Conquest Amazonia and what it means within a wider analytical framework. This is not intended to show Amazonia in its 'pristine' state, but rather to demonstrate that the situation in today’s Amazonia is not a timeless 'always', and also that pre-colonial culture was not a bounded ahistorical entity.
I will then continue to explore the issue of indigenous identity, and the concepts of culture, social change, and authenticity, from the perspective of both the 'outsiders' and the indigenous peoples themselves. The dissertation ends with a discussion of what it means to be indigenous within the context of the nation-state and international legal system. However, the various chapters

and subchapters are essentially arbitrary divisions, in that they all relate to each other and explore the same themes from different perspectives.
The various themes come together to show that our accepted views of contemporary Amazonian peoples are misguided, patronising – and ultimately, inaccurate. Wittgenstein (1953) phrased it best when he said that, “We see the world the way we do not because that is the way it is, but because we have these ways of seeing”. Our "ways of seeing" need to develop and change if we are to grasp what is really happening with indigenous identity today. However, I also hope to leave something in the place of these concepts that do not agree with the indigenous voice - perhaps a different way of seeing, one more useful both analytically and practically.
Of course this new way of seeing also comes from the work of others researching in Amazonia – anthropologists such as Pete Gow and Viveiros de Castro rethinking what it means to be Amazonian, and those like Joanna Overing and Tim Ingold who have urged us to listen to the indigenous voice and to rethink our own concepts. I personally came to be interested in this area of study after two incidents that occurred in 1999 whilst carrying out fieldwork in Ecuador. The first was being asked by a group of Huaorani living on the Shiripuno River to help them improve their tourism project – a thoroughly 'inauthentic' thing for indigenous people to be involved in. The second was a confrontation with a group of 'uncontacted' Huaorani, known as the Tagaeri, whilst on expedition near the Napo River (see Abbott, 2000). It drew me into exploring notions of authenticity and what it means to be an

indigenous person in contemporary Amazonia. This dissertation is the beginnings of that exploration.

CHAPTER I COLONIALISM AND NOTIONS OF THE OTHER
Pre-Conquest Amazonia
roosevelt (1998) provides us with a summary of the available research into pre-Conquest Amazonian groups. She argues that many of today’s Amazonian peoples were preceded by ceramic-age, agricultural chiefdoms that had been around for about 1500 years before the European invasion. It is hypothesised that some areas had come to have a more centralised and hierarchical political organisation than earlier (Porro, 1994), and pollen evidence indicates extensive deforestation around these settlements (Bush & Colinvaux, 1988), which were sometimes large and sedentary (Roosevelt, 1991). 2
Accounts by the early European conquistadors describe dense and settled agricultural populations and warring dominant chieftaincies (Roosevelt, 1998). Certainly this is the case as described in the diary kept by Father Carvajel, the expedition priest on Francisco Orellana's unintentional discovery of the Amazon River.3 The diary describes the region at that time (1542) as divided into three kingdoms, or confederations of tribes, who knew of each other and engaged in long-distance trade. It describes the largest (Omagua) as having very fine ceramics and pottery, an organised religious cult, and roads going
2 Although this is difficult evidence to obtain and interpret. 3 Published in J. Toribo Medin (1935), "The Discovery of the Amazon".

off into the interior (Wood, 2000). These accounts have been dismissed as fantastical (for example Orellana claims to have been attacked by female warriors similar to the Amazons of Greek mythology) but increasingly the ethnohistoric significance of such texts is being understood (Wood, 2000: 220).
Furthermore, Wolf (1982: 65) describes pre-colonial trade and conflict between such Amazonian groups and the people of the Andes. Throughout Andean history, products of the eastern slopes - such as coca, feathers, jaguar skins, fish poisons, and medicines - were exchanged for highland produce and crafts. However, the Inca were unable to subdue the populations of the Amazon forest. A war against the Jívaro, whose land was rich in gold, failed and the Inca advancement southeast into the lowlands was stopped in the area occupied by the Mosetene (Wolf, 1982: 65).
During the European Conquest, the indigenous 'chiefdoms' were defeated, politically decapitated, and their populations decimated (Porro, 1994). Many indigenous people fled to the hinterlands away from the main rivers and the advancing Europeans (Roosevelt, 1998: 199). The Huaorani say that they came to be in their current territory a long time ago after they fled upriver escaping the cowode - 'nonpeople' or 'cannibals' - although it is impossible to know for sure whom they mean by this. Roosevelt (1998: 201) concludes, "The process by which these people subsequently lost population, increased their mobility, stopped making pottery, and lessened their reliance on farming appears to have been an adaptation to the disruptions caused by conquest,

missionisation, colonisation, and national development". Although this is much too neat and simple a conclusion, there may be some accuracy to this claim.
The Conquest and Notions of the Other
In the process of European invasion and colonisation of the Amazon, the societies and cultures of all the people involved underwent rapid, major changes. The changes affected the populations that anthropologists have called 'primitive' and have often studied as 'pristine' survivors from a timeless past (Wolf, 1982: 385). Wood (2000: 220) considers it more realistic to view these populations as "post-holocaust" - their 'chiefdoms' having been destroyed by war, exploitation, and disease. Chagnon (1997: 241) describes today’s situation as the process of "peasantization" - with communities becoming less and less self sufficient in an economic sense. However, I will show later that it is also important to examine indigenous notions of history and meaning, and also to respect the indigenous capacity for change.
It is important for us not to look at the European Conquest of the Amazon from a purely historical perspective. The conquest of the Amazon (and indeed the whole of the Americas) had the important effect of revealing a new 'Other' - a non-European Other. In conquering the Americas, Europeans fixed the status of the indigenous populations at the level of the lower ranks of their own society – placing them alongside the insane, the wild, the child, and the lower classes (Mason, 1990). That is, indigenous America became a new primitive Other to Europe’s civilised self (Overing, 1996: 51).

In the 16th century the otherness of the non-European Other became an object of discourse and imagination (McGrane, 1989: 8). Incorporated into this discourse was the rich imagery of the monstrous and fabulous races depicted in Greek and Roman travel lore. In particular, it was the imagery of the naked cannibalistic Wild Man and the sexually profligate Wild Woman, which had previously caught the imagination of medieval Europe (Overing, 1996: 51). These images of the exotic Other were then transported to Amazonia and applied to its inhabitants, as evidenced by, for example , Sir Walter Raleigh’s giant Ewaipanona (Mason, 1990: 106-110) or indeed Francisco Orellana’s warrior Amazons.
In his "inquiry into the history of the different conceptions of difference", McGrane (1989: 10) states that in the 16th century the Other was "related to the Christianity he lacks, the clothes he doesn’t wear, the gold he doesn’t want, the iron he doesn’t have, the written alphabet he doesn’t use. But above all to Christianity". In other words, it was a negative definition. The Other was defined in terms of what they lacked from a European point of view – and the most important thing missing, according to McGrane, was Christianity. The central preoccupation with reference to the Other became whether they were within the threshold of salvation or whether they were beyond hope, and it was within the context of this question that their degree of humanity (or sameness) was determined. For if the non-Christian was also a potential Christian, then similarly the "savages" were also potential Europeans once blessed with the organising presence of Christianity (McGrane, 1989: 11-16).

This caused a profound moral dilemma for Europe because they had to decide whether the Conquest was in any sense just, and if the Indians possessed human rights or if they were simply "natural slaves" (Wood, 2000: 267-268). In the papal bull "Sublimis Deus" of 1537, Pope Paul III declared that the Indians were "true men", capable of receiving the Christian faith and that, essentially, they were equal to Europeans. However, this very declaration of the equality of men was made in the name of a specific religion, Christianity (Todorov, 1984: 162). Eventually, King Charles V ordered that all Spanish conquests in the Americas be stopped, with effect from 16 April 1550, until the matter had been thoroughly discussed (Wood, 2000: 269).
The opposing sides of the Spanish debate were led by the Dominican Bartolome de Las Casas and the philosopher Juan Gines de Sepulveda. For Sepulveda the essential qualities of Spanish civilisation were prudence, intelligence, moderation, humanity and, of course, Christianity. He saw the indigenous societies as devoid of civilisation and hence virtually devoid of humanity. In his own words, "How can there be any doubt that these peoples, so uncivilised, so barbarous, tainted by so many vices and corruptions, have been conquered by a nation that is most humane and excels in every kind of virtue?" (quoted in Wood, 2000: 271).
Las Casas presented a scathing rebuttal of Sepulveda’s idea that those who acted in King Charles’s name in the Conquest were humane, noble people. His fundamental argument was that the world is indeed one; that humans are the same, and all have the possibility of self-fulfilment and of achieving

goodness. He summed up by saying, "For all the peoples of the world are human beings… And the savage peoples of the earth may be compared to uncultivated soil that readily brings forth weeds and useless thorns, but has within itself such natural virtue that by labour and cultivation it may be made to yield sound and beneficial fruits. Thus all humankind is one" (quoted in Wood, 2000: 271). A noble argument, but somewhat patronising in it’s description of indigenous peoples as readily bringing forth "weeds and useless thorns" – the "savage" in need of "cultivation", or in other words, in need of civilising.
Although Las Casas won the debate, in the end the royal ban on further conquest was lifted. The important result of this debate was that the issue had been decided – the indigenous people of the Americas were human and so it would be possible for them to become Christian, and therefore civilised. So the fundamental European response to the alien Other became the massive and endless task of conversion (McGrane, 1989: 13).
As well as been seen as potential Christians, the indigenous populations were defined in relation to the gold, spices, and land that the Europeans desired. The Other was seen next to the brilliant glitter of gold and amidst the exotic perfume of spices. The project of exploration in the 16th century was intimately linked to discovery, as the explorers intended to discover, to find. They were looking for gold, for spices, for colonies, and commerce. As McGrane (1989: 23) puts it, they were looking for "Christians and gold". The Other was seen as inferior to the European because they were not capable of

having a responsible relationship with the gold that surrounded them, and hence the European appropriation of it was justified (McGrane, 1989: 25).
Surprisingly (or maybe not) even 300 years after the Conquest at the time of the rubber boom at the turn of the 19th and 20th centuries, views of the Amazonian Other, and the jungles they inhabited, had changed very little. Writing at the end of the 19th century about the Ecuadorian Amazon, or Oriente, Alfred Simson observed that, "In the civilised portion of the country, the Oriente and the Napo are looked upon as neither more nor less than an inferno filled with wild and murderous tribes", and to go there was "a descent through the circles of race and down the rungs of civilisation" (Simson, 1886: 3-4).
The jungles of the Oriente were still seen as a world quintessentially pagan, without Christ or Spanish influence, inhabited by naked, incestuous, violent, magical, and monstrous people. These people were referred to as auca, an old Quechua word used by the Incas to denote savage, seditious, rebel, and enemy – an intermingling of animal and human.4 This all inspired a paranoid vision of evil lurking in the wilderness, encircling society (Taussig, 1987: 97).
As with the 16th century European Conquest, during the rubber boom it was again the image of the wild cannibal that was pulled out of the collective unconscious and applied to the Other in order to dehumanise them. As Taussig (1987: 105) notes, cannibalism summed up all that was perceived as
4 North American missionaries still describe the Huaorani of today’s Oriente as auca.

grotesquely different about the Indian, as well as providing for the colonists the myth needed for colonialism itself. Taussig argues that stories of cannibalism were indispensable to the formation and flowering of the colonial imagination during the Putumayo rubber boom. These stories and the imagination they sustained were a potent political force, without which the work of colonisation and supervising rubber collection could not have been accomplished. He goes on to argue that what is crucial to understand is the way these stories functioned to create, through magical realism, a culture of terror that dominated both whites and Indians (Taussig, 1987: 121).
Of course the attitudes discussed above are still around today, and the task of colonising the Amazon is still continuing. The duty of looking for "Christians and gold" goes on - North American missionaries are still trying to 'save' the Indians, and the multinational oil companies are tearing the jungle apart looking for their 'black gold'. Žižek (1999: 215) points out that the ironic paradox of colonialism is that there are now only colonies, no colonising countries – the colonising power is no longer a nation-state but the global company itself. However, the consequences for the indigenous population are no less drastic than they were 500 years ago.
Indigenous Perspectives on Colonialism and the Other
It should not be forgotten in all of this that the indigenous populations of Amazonia were not simply passive victims of the Conquest. For example, during Hernán Pérez de Quesada’s advance through the Colombian jungles

in search of El Dorado (1541), the Spanish claimed that they generally met with ferocious resistance. Quesada’s expedition is said to have consisted of 200 horses, 260 Spaniards, and some 6000 Indian porters from the highlands. However, whenever the expedition passed into narrow spaces where the horses could not manoeuvre, the local Indians attacked. The fate of the missionaries who succeeded these men of the sword for the next two centuries was said to be not too much different (Taussig, 1987: 24).
What we sometimes ignore from our Eurocentric perspective, is that the Europeans were in turn the Other in the eyes of the indigenous peoples they conquered (Mason, 1990: 160). As Gow (1991: 296) points out, in 1542 Orellana discovered the Amazon and Amazonian people discovered Europe. One consequence of the increased attention paid to colonial history has been a growing reflexive interest in how the coming of the white people was viewed by the non-European world, both at the time it occurred, and later in mythical categories and narratives (Harris, 1994: 16). In the Amazon, information concerning white people, as well as their commodities such as iron and chickens, and of course diseases, travelled fast, so that ‘contact’ was in many areas a long and drawn out affair, sometimes lasting centuries (Hugh-Jones, 1989). In many instances, white people are only one of a whole host of alien powers. The ways Europeans and their culture have been interpreted and incorporated depends on previously existing indigenous categories of otherness and ways of representing the alien and exotic (Harris, 1994: 17).

One powerful image that the Piaroa of the Venezuelan Amazon have of the colonising whites is, appropriately, that of a giant ogre who wears a suit of armour – a monster who is their own conquistador of the jungle (Overing, 1996: 52). This spirit master protects all jungle people through the aggressive force of white people. The Piaroa use the powers of the white people that they consider different from their own – in this case using the whites’ aggression to protect themselves (Overing, 1998: 20).
It is interesting to note that on both sides of the colonial divide the theme of the violent, cannibalistic, and morally wicked Other are used. For the Piaroa, white people have become especially apt symbols for the monstrous in social behaviour, because they stray so far from Piaroa ideas of sociality and proper living. White people are understood to be people who cannibalise themselves (just as Žižek, 1999: 215, points out that there are no colonising countries anymore, only the multinationals who also treat their own countries as places to be colonised) and so are used in Piaroa myth as a highly suitable exemplification of the monster and cannibal Other (Overing, 1996: 58).
However, there is one difference between Piaroa and European notions of the Other. Since the right to domination is alien to the Piaroa understanding of proper social relationships, they would not judge external Others, even if monstrous, as inferior beings who were therefore rightfully subject to Piaroa domination (Overing, 1996: 53). According to Overing (Overing Kaplan, 1981) the Piaroa system of alterity manifests a tolerance of difference, as well as a fascination and fear of it, and a strong desire for it. Difference is understood to

be highly necessary, if not always desirable, to their own material existence. In fact, achieving the social state requires the force and creative powers of those different from self; and without the benefit of such alterity there can be no fertility and no productive capacity. As there can be no domination and subjugation, there can be no victors or vanquished in any absolute sense. The Piaroa stress that the best that humans can do is to achieve equal relations in their often dangerous dealings with beings of other spaces and other times (Overing: 1996: 77). This concept of the need for difference will also be explored in the next chapter in relation to 'culture'.
Taussig (1987) talks about the indigenous peoples and the Europeans coming together within the "space of death". He argues that terror is a social state whose special features allo w it to serve as the perfect mediator of colonial domination – this is the space of death, where the Indian and the white gave birth to the New World. This space of death is where the social imagination has populated its metamorphosing images of evil and the underworld – in the Western tradition Homer, Virgil, the Bible, Dante; in the Amazon tradition zones of visions, communication between beings of all types, death, rebirth, and genesis. According to Taussig, with the European Conquest and colonisation, these spaces of death blend into a common pool of key signifiers binding the transforming culture of the conqueror with that of the conquered. He thinks of this space of death as a threshold that allows for illumination as well as extinction. In this way, the space of death is pre-eminently a space of transformation; through the experience of coming close to death there may well be a vivid sense of life (Taussig, 1987: 4-7). Indeed contemporary Indian

shamans reach into this space of death, this "epistemical murk", to pull out images of colonialism and terror in order to heal today.
Within studies of the Andean region (and the nation-state), periodisation frequently falls into a pre-colonial, a colonial, and a post-colonial matrix. 5 Anthropologists of Amazo nia have tended to ignore the impact of 16th century colonialism on the populations they study. These peoples are considered stuck in ahistorical, pre-colonial times – until recent 'contact' with oil companies, missionaries, and the such. This neo-colonialism is then considered in the same way as the 16th century Conquest is considered in Andean studies – as the beginning of the end for these previously untainted cultures. History, and social change, is identified with the coming of the whites, whether in the 16th or 20th century. 6 This way of looking at Amazonia is misguided because it ignores the impact of 16th century colonialism, and it assumes that prior to 'contact' (at any time) these cultures remained isolated and unchanged. The next chapter looks at this in more depth, and examines our own notion of 'culture'.
5 See Harris (1994) for a discussion of the relevance of this periodisation. 6 See Hill (1989) as an example of viewing indigenous history in terms of Western contact.

CHAPTER II CULTURE AND SOCIAL CHANGE
Bounded Cultures
Anthropologists have dealt with 'cultures' as if they possess an inherent coherence over time (Wolf, 1982: 387). The understanding was that indigenous people live in homogeneous communities, the members of which share identical worldviews (Rapport & Overing, 2000: 368). So whilst anthropologists have recognised a plurality of cultures, the openness and creative nature of the cultural process has been ignored by most. Instead the notion of the homogeneity of culture has flourished, assuming the coherence and boundedness of cultures (Rapport & Overing, 2000: 94). Any social change is viewed as a diffusion between these bounded cultures, or seen as the result of imposition by a dominant culture.
We have had a rather capitalistic definition of culture. It presupposes that one can have a culture – that is, culture is of such a nature to support being possessed. There is an objective character to our definition of culture, in that we posses our culture rather than, for example, we are possessed by it, or reside in it (McGrane, 1989: 117). Ingold (2000: 137-147) refers to this approach as the genealogical model or “relay baton” view of culture. It sees culture as a corpus of traditional wisdom and context-free representations, handed down through language as a legacy from the past, and which is

applied or expressed, rather than actually generated in the context of present activity. This intergenerational transmission of knowledge is distinguished from environmentally situated experience.
Anthropology lives by seeing and interpreting everything as culture-bound; that is, everything but itself. McGrane (1989: 119) argues that all phenomena, anthropologically speaking, make reference to the relative being of culture – except the phenomena of anthropology itself; it is somehow not cultural or relative, but of the nature of things and of the order of truth. He believes there is a structural inability to perceive anthropology as an activity that is part of what it studies. Furthermore, anthropology assumes that 'culture' is in space and time, the way an object is in a box. To concretely visualise 'cultures' as being shut up in time and space, necessarily presupposes that the anthropologist is above all those boxes seeing the relativity of what’s contained in each culture box (McGrane, 1989: 119).
Numerous cultures and societies have been recognised, but they have been dealt with as isolated and self-maintaining systems (Wolf, 1982: 390). 'Culture', by anthropological definition, is cultures, and 'cultures', by anthropological definition, are relative. Ones culture is one-among -many; it is a unity amongst a multiplicity of unities (McGrane, 1989: 117). An important point is that whilst we consider ourselves to possess our 'culture', anthropology has seen the Other as imprisoned in their culture, in their way of life (McGrane, 1989: 121). This sort of multiculturalism involves a patronising Eurocentric distance or respect for local cultures without roots in one’s own

particular culture. In Žižek’s (1999: 216) words it is "racism with a distance" – a disavowed, inverted, self-referential form of racism. It conceives the Other as a self-enclosed ‘authentic’ community, towards which the multiculturalist maintains a distance made possible by their privileged universal position. In short, "multiculturalist respect for the Other’s specificity is the very form of asserting one’s own superiority" (Žižek, 1999: 216).
Culture as an Activity
Despite all this, we might say that there is no such thing as 'a culture'. Overing (1998) has suggested that instead of considering culture as a noun, it should be used as a verb – "to culture" or "culturing". It is an activity – we are the one’s who place culture within museums. For most peoples, culturing is an endless and on-going, overt activity, which does not fit the anthropologists fixed categories of belonging. From the Amazonian perspective, culture refers to those skills for action that a people have, mould, and use to live a human life particular to their time (Overing, 1998: 11).
Ingold (1994) looks at 'culture' in a similar way, and has argued that people "live culturally" rather than "live in cultures". His relational approach is that cultural knowledge is seen to undergo continuous generation in the context of an ongoing engagement with the land and the beings (human and nonhuman) that dwell within it (Ingold, 2000: 133).

However, the concept of culture continues to be used and we seem unable (or unwilling) to get around it. I believe that Cohen’s (1985) symbolic approach to community may be of some use in explaining why this is so. The word 'community' expresses a relational idea, it implies simultaneously both similarity and difference – but above all it expresses a distinction (important for the mixing of difference as described later). The beginnings and ends of these communities are marked by what Cohen (1985: 12) calls "boundaries", because communities interact with entities from which they are, or wish to be, distinguished.
However, these boundaries are not all objectively apparent (e.g. racial, linguistic, or religious). Rather they exist in the minds of their beholders and so may be perceived in rather different terms, not only by people on opposite sides of them, but also by people on the same side. According to Cohen (1985: 15) the range of meanings can be glossed over in a commonly accepted symbol (community or culture) because it allows adherents to attach their own meaning to it – they share the same symbol (e.g. culture) but do not necessarily share its meanings.7 The problem is that we have taken our concept of 'culture' and our notions of what other peoples 'cultures' are like, and assumed them to be universal.
We need to treat culture with a sense of the fluid and permeable (Wolf, 1982: 387). 'Cultures' are not, and never were (as discussed in the previous chapter), isolated, bounded, or homogeneous entities, but rather are

environments always involved in change and always exposed to a range of influences, both external and internal. We must be careful with our concepts, with our ways of seeing (to borrow Wittgenstein’s phrase). Ingold (2000: 132) argues that even the term 'indigenous' merely perpetuates a thoroughly Eurocentric image of the precolonial world as a mosaic of cultures and territories that was already fixed in perpetuity before the whites arrived and history began. We need to rethink 'culture' as a more dynamic, ongoing, and non-generalisable process (Rapport & Overing, 2000: 357). This is certainly a more useful way to consider Amazonian 'cultures'.
At the same time we must also rethink our conception of social change. If culture is not a fixed, homogenous entity, then change is not as clear-cut as we have argued in the past. At it’s heart, what is implied in our notion of social change is that what is being changed is a baseline, traditional 'culture' – and any change from this is often viewed with disdain. However, for example, Townsley (1993:451) points out that Yaminahua shamans and shamanism have not only survived rapid 'social change', they have actually done very well out of it. In fact, according to Townsley, Yaminahua shamanism has shown an almost infinite capacity to absorb and accommodate imagery and ideas from the non-indigenous world, manipulate them and build them into the core of it’s own practice. This approach to social change is explored further in chapter III in relation to 'authenticity'.
7 Cohen's approach follows on from Wallace (1961; 1962), who looked to cognitive maps, not rules, to explain 'culture' and community.

Heterogeneous Culture
Gow (1991) found that the people of the Bajo Urubamba River in Eastern Peru frequently said that they were "de sangre mezclada" or "of mixed blood". In saying this they seemed to place into doubt the cultural continuity between themselves and the ancestral Piro, Campa, and other indigenous groups of the region. He found that people could be identified as Piro, Campa, or mestizo depending on whom he asked. Also, individual people would change their self-identification from one occasion to the next. This was linked to a linguistic system in which most people were multilingual, and everyday conversations were often held in two, sometimes three, different languages (Gow, 1991: 5).
After travelling upriver in an attempt to find a "more Piro community", Gow concluded that all the communities were characterised by the same level of heterogeneity - although all stressed that they were 'civilised people' in contrast to the 'wild Indians' of the forest. He argues that the heterogeneity of the inhabitants of these communities was intimately linked to their selfidentification as "mixed people" of "mixed blood" (Gow, 1991: 9). Although they might of previously had strong exogamy (Overing, personal communication 2001). As an ethnographic example, this fits the notion of culture as being a dynamic, on-going, and fluid environment.
Overing (Overing Kaplan, 1981: 161) has argued that underlying all the dissimilar social structures of Amazonia is a particular philosophy of society

whereby "the universe exists, life exists, society exists only insofar as there is contact and proper mixing among things that are different from one another". Amazonian 'cultures' are variants of a structure of relations; but no society has this basic structure, for the structure exists in the transformational relations between them all (Viveiros de Castro, 1986: 276). In a way, many of the different cultures of Amazonia 'play' with the core idea of achieving sociality and proper relations through the mixing of difference.
Gow (1991: 276) argues that Overing’s conception of Amazonian sociocosmological philosophy fits the native people of the Bajo Urubamba well. According to them, in order for people to live in real villages as civilised people, there had to be the prolonged and complex process of the proper mixing of difference, summed up in the idiom of 'mixed people'. In order for this process to continue, new differences must be found and mixed in. This accords with the progressivism of the native people of the Bajo Urubamba, and their fascination with the 'white foreigners' and 'wild forest Indians'. It is only through this mixing process that they can imagine life continuing. They have come to their own solution to the problem of dangerous but creative difference, and safe but sterile sameness (Gow, 1991: 275). This way of looking at the 'cultures' of Amazonia does not agree with the diffusion model of social change.
Anthropology sees difference as 'cultural difference', but according to McGrane (1989:129) to see the Other as culturally different is no cause for self-congratulation. To see difference as only difference, is itself an

accomplishment rooted for the most part in the late Enlightenment denial that the Other was inferior. In addition, multiculturalism tolerates the Other in so far as it is not the real Other, but the aseptic Other of prehistorical ecological wisdom and fascinating rites (Žižek, 1999: 219). This is a new image of the Other – the noble savage who needs our protection, but only as long as they remain in line with our new image. The moment we realise we are dealing with the real Other (such as those working for oil companies, promoting tourism, or reading the Bible) our tolerance stops. This question of the 'authentic Indian' and what it means to be 'authe ntic', and for whom, is the focus of the next chapter.

CHAPTER III THE AUTHENTIC INDIAN
The Question of Authenticity
Linked to the notion of homogenous culture has been the question of authenticity. The most common approach to this has been from the point of view of a division between the 'traditional' Indian and the 'acculturated' Indian. From this arises the problem that anthropology has insisted on viewing 'acculturated peoples’ in historical terms and 'traditional cultures in ahistorical terms (Gow, 1991: 3). The stress in studies of 'traditional' peoples has been on cultural coherence and integration, while in the case of 'acculturated' peoples the emphasis has been on cultural incoherence and disintegration through the agency of history (Gow, 1991: 284). Viveiros de Castro (1986) indicates the possibility of a real history of Amazonia. Such a history would see events as the conjuncture of the historical projects of colonialist and indigenous agency. This view of Amazonian history would dispose of the categories of 'traditional' and 'acculturated' indigenous peoples.
The anthropologist has, until recently, sought the 'Pristine Non' - non-Western, non-literate, non-capitalist, and non-state (Ferguson, 1990: 238). The received wisdom was that only the culturally 'pure' were worthy of anthropological attention. If a person wore Western clothes, could speak a Western language, or worked for Western 'masters', they could not be authentic (Rapport & Overing: 367). These are the people described as

acculturated – considered as a product of change that occurred when one culture impinged on another (Chagnon, 1997: 227) - and so could not be studied as true, unaffected Amazonian peoples.
The concept of authenticity has had the effect of freezing indigenous peoples into a mythic past, in which they had to remain to be 'authentic', and thus appreciated (Rapport & Overing, 2000: 367). Those that did not remain there became what Bhabha (1994) called "the unhomely". These unhomely hybrids are the peoples no longer considered to be authentic as a result of Western contact (Rapport & Overing, 2000: 367). The problem with this way of thinking is the analytical priority it gives to history. It understands the culture of these unhomely people in terms of the modification of a prior situation or traditional culture through contact with whites. However, the very notion of a single point when history began to change the their 'baseline' culture is an illusion (Gow, 1991: 14-17).
The idea of self-directed change is just too much of a challenge to the accepted premise of the assimilation paradigm – where all change that can be appropriate must be decided upon by the 'superior' culture or society (Overing, 1998: 13-14). However, even if change has been forced on them by a so-called dominant culture, then native people often exploit this alien medium for the conceptualisation and expression of essentially indigenous ideas (Cohen, 1985: 76). The notion of 'authenticity' is a political stance that can be used against the unhomely of the world as a means to control their self-directed change. However, Gow (1991: 297) sees indigenous peoples as

active historical agents with a profound consciousness of their past, their present, and of their future possibilities. Indeed, indigenous peoples are often quite open to change, and as Walcott (1996: 271) insists, each person has the right, for example, to go to the cinema "instead of been a dammed representative of the folk for the rest of his or her life".
There are problems with our notions of the 'authentic' Indian and 'traditional' Amazonia. The situation is really no different to that of 'traditional' Scotland – itself a creation of Sir Walter Scott’s literary talents only 200 years ago. I am yet to meet a Scot who spends their time wandering the hills and lochs of the highlands, wearing a kilt, and playing the bagpipes with all their patriotic heart (this is usually reserved for the tourists). Our notions of the authentic Indian are exactly that, our notions. As was shown in chapter I, the way the Other is viewed is a product of our colonial (and anthropological) imagination. The 'authentic Indian' is our way of seeing things, and it does not match the ethnographic reality – the indigenous voice.
Ignoring the traditional/acculturated division, Gow (1991) presents an ethnography of the native people of the Bajo Urubamba, in terms of what the people do and say, as opposed to dismissing them as acculturated. According to Gow, these people contrast their current "civilised life" in legally recognised settlements with a school, to their ancestors' lives in the forest, where they lacked "real villages". For these people, being civilised is not opposed to an idyllic traditional culture that has been lost, but to the ignorance and helplessness of their ancestors. In fact, they view being 'civilised' as being

autonomous; as being able to live in villages according to their own values (to "live well" and to eat "real food"), rather than the unpredictable wishes of a hacienda boss (Gow, 1991: 1-2). There are no people without history (Wolf, 1982: 385) and Gow's approach is to deal with history from within indigenous peoples' culture, referring to their own values.
His ethnography points towards a reinterpretation of Amazonian history, written now with a full recognition of the historical agency of the indigenous peoples. Gow (1991: 285) provides an analysis of history as kinship for the native people of the Bajo Urubamba. Their history is an account of marriage, village creation, and chi ld raising (Gow, 1991: 252). For them, history is the creation of contemporary kinship, and the source of their response to new situations. If we take seriously native peoples identification of history with kinship, we can begin to understand why they do not share our nostalgia for 'traditional' culture.
Contrary to how we think they think, the Piro do see their culture as a possession to be inherited or squandered; rather it is knowledge acquired in relations between kin, and responds to the context of such relationships. If parents fear an inability to speak Spanish will lead to the enslavement of their children, then they will encourage their children to learn Spanish. Gow (1991: 286) argues that they see their ancestral cultures as weapons for the defence of kinship – at particular times such weapons may be useless, and are dropped, to be picked up later when circumstances change. The "ancient people" made contemporary people, but they are now dead and cannot help

them. It is the living that must be defended, with whatever comes to hand. As Gow puts it, native people fear the loss of their children, not their culture. This is very important point that we must pay heed to.
There has never been an 'authentic type' or 'pristine system', as people are always exchanging, processing, and incorporating elements of culture. As Rapport & Overing (2000: 368) describe it, to live culturally is an ongoing, ever-shifting activity. Yet we seem to be offended by the unhomely Indian promoting the 'authenticity' of their 'traditional' ways. It is just now being realised that indigenous peoples are often quite open to change, and are not opposed to accepting new practices or ideas. They themselves prefer to have a say in what is good or damaging for their communities and their desired way of living (Rapport & Overing, 2000: 372). This can be further highlighted by examining such issues with reference to the Huaorani of the Ecuadorian Amazon.
Case Study: The Huaorani of Ecuador
Ecuador's Oriente, which forms the Western edge of the Amazon Basin, is a 'traditional' homeland for eight indigenous groups; Cofan, Secoya, Siona, Zaparo, Quichua, Shuar, Achuar and the Huaorani. At one time the Huaorani territory extended from the Napo River in the north, to the Curaray River in the south. Up until relatively recently they were seminomadic hunter-gatherers, living within the interfluvial zones in isolation from each other (Kane, 1995).

The Huaorani were, and sometimes still are, known by the derogatory name of auca, a Quechua word meaning "savage", and which the Huaorani consider a gross insult. They had a reputation as an independent group, hostile to intrusion and willing to resort to violence to defend their territory. The Huaorani call themselves the bravest people in the Amazon and say that they have never been conquered. Today, there are still several 'uncontacted' Huaorani groups. These isolated groups live very differently to other Huaorani, constantly moving to avoid contact with oil companies, missionaries and other cowode (Huao for non-humans or outsiders). Of these, the Tagaeri are the best known, since in 1987 they speared to death Mons. Labaca, the Bishop of Coca, when he attempted to relocate a group living in the Block 17 oil concession (Kane, 1995).
The majority of today's Huaorani live in autonomous communities along the navigable rivers, relying on swidden agriculture, domestic animals, and purchased food (such as oats, rice, and salt), in addition to hunting, fishing, and gathering (particularly for fruit). Although many of their communities are permanent, village membership is not fixed, and there is considerable movement between communities (particularly if local to each other) and children often move villages as their schooling progresses. As Rival (1992) describes it, the Huaorani of today are “partly traditional and partly contemporary, but wholly Huaorani”.

In 1990 they formed the Organizacion de Nacionalidad Huaorani de la Amazonia Ecuatoriana (ONHAE)8 to defend their interests (Smith, 1996). They have since attracted heavy interest from environmental NGO's, indigenous rights groups, and the media. Now that the Summer Institute of Linguistics (SIL) has left, they are actively engaged with the many oil companies operating in their territory, and are currently seeking ways to develop tourism in some of their communities (Abbott, 2000).
Dealing with the Company
For the past 30 years over 90% of Ecuador’s oil has been produced in the Oriente. Oil revenues represent 18% of their GDP, 67% of their export earnings, and 57% of their national budget (figures quoted by Rival, 1997: 1). The oil boom initiated in the late 1960’s led to the construction of a network of roads that has opened up the interior to colonists, land speculators, and loggers. The consequence of this has been the displacement of the indigenous inhabitants and their exposure to previously unknown diseases (IACHR, 1997). Most of the Oriente is now divided up into exploratory or operational blocks, and this includes national parks, biological reserves, and indigenous territories. One of the most controversial areas has been the Yasuni National Park which was created in 1979 and declared a world biosphere reserve by UNESCO in 1987, as well as a world centre for plant diversity – and which is now mostly divided up into oil concessions.
8 This is also the Huao word for "flower".

It is inevitable that all of the indigenous peoples of the Oriente will have dealings with oil companies at one time or another, and this is no different for the Huaorani. Rival (1993) examines the Huaorani way of naturalising outside powers, by attempting to explain the interactions between Huaorani people and "the Company",9 taking their own social philosophy as her starting point. She found that almost all Huaorani men had worked for the Company opening up seismic trails on short contracts at some time. Through our 'patronising gaze' that insists on the purity of culture (Walcott, 1996), these Huaorani would not be considered 'authentic'.
However, Rival (1993: 12) found that the common pattern was for groups of kin to work in areas once occupied by their ascendants - that is, hunting territories that had been abandoned by their parents when Summer Institute of Linguistics missionaries relocated them to the 'Protectorate'. By opening up seismic trails in a particular area, the Huaorani felt like they were reclaiming particular stretches of land and securing their groups' territorial rights.
Furthermore, after the company had left the area, seismic trails were used for hunting, and helicopter landing sites were used as garden clearings. Rival (1993: 15) argues that Huaorani felt that they were working for themselves as much as for the Company, and for food and raw materials rather than for wages. The indigenous viewpoint in this case is in opposition to those who "view any sign of openness to change with disdain, especially if self-directed and self motivated" (Rapport & Overing, 2000: 372).
9 The generic term the Huaorani use for the various subcontractors operating on their land.

The guidelines for good social practice that oil companies are advised to follow, recommend the hiring of anthropologists familiar with the region and local communities concerned. The oil companies use these 'social experts' to carry out 'social impact assessments' which then remain the private property of the company (Rival, 1997: 1-2). Most of this consultancy-based research is undertaken by national anthropologists whose professional credentials vary greatly – some are still students with only one or two years university training. According to Rival (1997: 3), most anthropologists feel that the purpose of these assessments is to indicate to the oil companies who are the potential allies and potential troublemakers within a community. This then makes it easier for a company to split a village through the use of well-placed bribes and promises of assistance.
Our notions of 'culture' and 'authenticity' become potentially very dangerous when used by anthropologists carrying out these social impact assessments. The relay baton view of transmitted cultural knowledge implies that it makes no difference where the indigenous peoples are ilving. Ingold (2000: 147) points out that it is on these grounds that governments have often seen no principled objection to moving indigenous peoples off their land in the interests of exploiting that land. It does not occur to them that such a displacement might rupture the continuity of tradition or cut the people off from their pasts. At the same time, if we apply our notion of 'authenticity' to these peoples, and they fall short of this particular cultural measuring stick, then the oil companies can argue that there will be no social impact as they are already 'acculturated'.

On the 13th August 1993 the Huaorani organisation, ONHAE, signed an "Agreement of Friendship, Respect and Mutual Support" with the oil company Maxus Ecuador Inc. for a 20-year term. This agreement of good faith bound the oil company to provide assistance to the Huaorani in areas of education, health, and community development, and to develop "specific nondependency creating actions which will enhance the Huaorani's capacity for self-management" (quoted in Rival, 1998: 2). The agreement also stipulated that Maxus must provide the goods and services requested by any Huaorani community, offer vocational training, and give Huaorani men employment priority in their operational block (Rival, 1993).
This agreement was not received well by the international community. Instead of seeing the Huaorani as taking their lives into their own hands, they were viewed as accepting financial recompense and development in return for the loss of their traditional culture. Campaigning organisations stopped supporting them on the grounds that they had chosen integration and given up on cultural difference. Environmental and human rights groups did not see it as their business to defend those who thought that their way of life was negotiable (Rival, 1998: 2). It is important to note that even Rival (1998: 3) spoke of this event in terms of the Huaorani "right to a way of life" being replaced by simply a "right to negotiate" - but it is unclear as to which way of life she is referring to; in a way the indigenous way of life has always been one of negotiation. Instead Rival (1993) tried to defend these 'inauthentic' Huaorani with reference to their thoroughly 'authentic' notions of conflict avoidance and apparent accommodation.

Those groups that had sought to help the Huaorani now turned their backs on them because they did not understand, or did not listen to, the indigenous voice. A much more useful way of thinking is that of McCallum (1990), who takes a more positive view of the ability of indigenous cultures to change actively as well as reactively, and draws attention to their active engagement with history. Such a perspective respects the ability of indigenous peoples to take part in the shaping of their own fate.
The Tagaeri
It is often said that the only 'true' Huaorani left in Ecuador are the so-called uncontacted groups. Many reports indicate that there are two or three groups of Huaorani who have rejected all attempts by outsiders to establish permanent contact with them (IACHR, 1997). It is generally accepted that a small group of Tagaeri continue to live within the Oriente, and that two other groups, the Taromenane and Onamenane, possibly continue to remain in isolation in the wild jungles that border Ecuador and Peru.10
These people have been set aside protected areas or "Zonas Intangibles", which are supposedly immune to any kind of development (including tourism). The problem is that they do not know they have these areas, and so do not stay within the boundaries of these zones. This means that they have often been threatened by company workers or bands of mercenaries hired to hunt them down, and by adventurers seeking video footage of these 'wild Indians'.
10 It is not known whether a possible forth group, the Huinatare, ever even existed.

This highlights the fact that dealing with 'uncontacted' groups presents especially difficult and complex questions for the nation-state. Of course even the term 'uncontacted' poses a problem, as I have already noted that information concerning white people, as well as their commodities and diseases, travels fast in the Amazon.
The most infamous of these 'uncontacted' groups is the Tagaeri, who in 1987 were responsible for spearing to death Mons. Labaca, the Bishop of Coca, when he attempted to relocate a family living in the Block 17 oil concession (Kane, 1995). 'The Tagaeri' came into existence in 1968 when, following increased violent internal disputes among the Huaorani, Taga led a few families into hiding deep in the forest (Kane, 1995). It appears that since then the Tagaeri perceive all attempts at contact as aggressive and hostile, and wish to live in isolation (IACHR, 1997).
The Tagaeri killing of Mons. Labaca served to reinforce our views of the savage Other. 'The Tagaeri' has come to be a folk category used by both Ecuadorians and the Huaorani to refer to any 'wild Indians' living in the Oriente. Contemporary Huaorani contrast themselves to the Tagaeri, who they call "Los Bravos" or "the angry ones". For us, peoples such as the Tagaeri are the epitome of the authentic Indian, but the Huaorani view them as angry, frightened, and scary. They live in hiding, outside of communities and kinship, constantly moving to avoid contact with missionaries, oil companies, and adventurers. These are not our sacred 'authentic Indians';

these are a frightened and lonely people, to be contrasted with the rest of today's Huaorani.
Gow (1991) also found a similar situation with the native peoples of the Bajo Urubamba. They constantly asserted that they were "civilised people" in contrast to the "wild Indians of the forest" (Gow, 1991: 265). This could be interpreted as meaning that they had lost their 'traditional' culture, and despised their own origins. However, Gow argues that it is much more complex than that. The categories of 'civilised people' and 'wild forest Indians' are not based on kinship. An important aspect of these categories is that, unlike categories of race or "kinds of people", a person cannot be a mixture of 'civilised people' and 'forest people'. Wild Indians are not associated with the values of kinship; they do not eat "real food", and do not work in the production of gardens or villages (Gow, 1991: 266-267). The people of the Bajo Urubamba view the 'wild Indians' as being outside of kinship, and thus belonging to the category of the dangerous, but creative, different Other.
Indigenous Promotion of Tourism11
As Rapport & Overing (2000: 370) note, the tables can be turned and indigenous peoples may put themselves on the tourist map in order to "subvert colonial discourse". Van den Berghe (1980: 379) points out that it is common in liberal circles to see the indigenous person as the hapless victim of tourist exploitation. Hugh-Jones (1992) also argues that indigenous peoples
11 See Smith (1989) and Urry (1990) for a wider theoretical discussion of tourism.

are normally portrayed as passive victims of the market economy. However, it is rarely considered that these peoples are capable of reflecting upon their relationships with the market economy, and that they are fully aware of the dangers of rapid economic and social development (Hugh-Jones, 1992). This is certainly the case among the Huaorani communities that have decided that they wish to actively promote tourism - they appear to have considered the consequences, both good and bad, and achieved a relatively complex analysis of the situation (Abbott, 2000).
The Huaorani have opted for a self-managed, community-based activity that represents a potential economic alternative to oil and logging. They see ecotourism as the most rational way of protecting the rainforest, creating jobs for the young, and gathering revenue for education, community health, and transportation (Blangy, 1999). They also see it as a way of maintaining their cultural integrity, and at the end of their visit tourists are encouraged to raise awareness in their own countries about the Huaorani efforts to defend their land and culture. A per-person, per-night fee is paid to the head of the community and the money is distributed evenly among all the families (Abbott, 2000). Salaries for the various jobs (guides, maintenance, canoe paddlers etc.) are calculated by doubling what a person would earn as a labourer for an oil company, the main alternative source of income (Blangy, 1999).
The Huaorani began their tourism project in 1993, in the village of Quehueiriuno on the Shiripuno River. They work with a respected tour operator based in Quito, which has won both the TODO! 97 Award for socially responsible

tourism and the Ecotourism Showcase 2000 at the annual Non-Profits in Travel conference. The Huaorani only accept one group of visitors per month, for 2-6 days, who stay in a communal guesthouse built in a 'traditional' Huaorani style, located 45 minutes walk from the village. A similar project run by the Cofan Indians further north, has provided an estimated US$500 annually per-person since 1992 (Blang y, 1999). The Huaorani tourism project is a long way from earning them that sort of revenue, but they still herald it as a way to maintain their cultural integrity and protect the rainforest.
One of the main driving forces behind the tourism project has been Moi Enomenga, a Huaorani from the community of Quehueiri-uno. Moi has featured in several New Yorker magazine articles, as well as the 1995 book "Savages", which brought the plight of the Huaorani to international attention. Additionally, NBC News produced a documentary portraying Moi’s struggle to protect the Huaorani land from oil companies (Darquea, personal communication 1999). In the United Kingdom, Moi’s tourism drive has been featured in the Geographical Magazine and in a documentary by Channel 4 Television. The result of all this publicity, and his campaigning efforts, is that he has been labelled 'inauthentic' as an Amazonian Indian. This is simply not the case, it is just that he is using activities such as tourism to defend his people and his land, and he views this as a much more effective defence than spears.
The tourist, just as the conqueror or missionary, is sometimes seen as the agent of contact between cultures, and the direct or indirect cause of social

change. Nash (1989: 40-43) takes this approach to tourism and he sees it as a form of imperialism. He does accept that indigenous peoples sometimes take the initiative and often collaborate in the establishment of tourist areas, but he argues that they are only collaborating in this tourist expansion. He sees the fate of tourist areas as linked with exogenous forces over which the inhabitants come to have less and less control. However, I believe this is unlikely to happen to the Huaorani, because their tourism is community controlled and because of the remote geographical location of these communities.
Van den Berghe (1980: 380) takes a similar approach to ethnic tourism, and argues that the tourist destroys the very thing that he or she has come to see. According to van den Berghe, the ethnic tourist's search for exoticism inevitably entails the problem of authenticity. He argues that the search for the exotic is self-defeating because of the overwhelming influence of the observer on the observed - in that the exotic quickly becomes fake, and the indigenous people then make it their business to preserve a credible illusion of authenticity for the tourist. It seems from this that the tourist and the anthropologist share the same problem, because their indigenous Other does not measure up to their view of 'authenticity'. Our notion of 'authenticity' can lead to our disappointment (but only because our notion is misguided in the first place) and prompt the indigenous recreation of 'authenticity' for our benefit and theirs.

The Huaorani are promoting a sort of ethnic tourism - they are the primary attraction; an integral part of the exotic spectacle (van den Berghe, 1980: 377). It is marketed to the public in terms of the customs of these indigenous and 'exotic' peoples, and includes activities such as visits to native homes and villages, observing 'traditional' dances, and shopping for 'authentic' handicrafts (Smith, 1989: 4). However, they avoid the potential problem of simply perpetuating the myth of the 'authentic Indian' by also focussing on contemporary issues, such as their dealings with the oil companies, and their environmental concerns. The Huaorani do need to be aware though that as tourism expands and the number of visitors increases, so too will the problems, and these will have to be addressed soon.
It has been argued that as indigenous people learn to market their culture turning their handicrafts into 'airport art' and themselves into exotic peoples with strange customs - so their native way of life become 'trinketised' (Rapport & Overing, 2000: 356). Their dance and songs become 'cultural productions' and their culture takes on the appearance of a 'staged authenticity' (MacCannell, 1976). The difference with the Huaorani is that although they have had tourism since the mid-1970's (Smith, 1996: 43), in recent years they appear to be actively promoting this so-called 'trinketisation'. They have realised that for the first time they have control over a commodity that is sought by the whites (Deitch, 1989: 224), and they intend to use it.
I hypothesise that this promotion is in order to fill a sort of 'cultural void' left by the missionaries, as well as to instil a sense of pride in their communities and

retain some of the 'old ways' as a useful defence against unwanted outside pressures.12 I suspect that this is also a celebration of the Huaorani of today as much as a recognition of their past. As Cohen (1985) would say, it is an assertion of cultural integrity – a contrast with other groups and a statement against a sense of disadvantage and subordination within the nation-state of Ecuador.
Speaking in 1997 at a panel discussion on indigenous human rights organised by the Royal Anthropological Institute, the then director of Survival International, Stephen Corry, argued, "The only way to sway public opinion in favour of indigenous people against oppressive governments and exploitative companies is to portray them as pristine and as fundamentally good people, in short to romanticise them" (quoted in Rival, 1998: 3). The Huaorani seem to have come to the same conclusion and have recreated or, more accurately, invented their new authenticity in the form of 'traditional' dances, songs and handicrafts. The active drive for this has been tourism, which has prompted a deliberate post-missionary 'reinvention of authenticity' or 'staged authenticity' for the benefit of both the tourists and the Huaorani.
However, the question of authenticity and what it means to be indigenous, also needs to be examined in relation to the nation-state. This is the focus of the next chapter.
12 Tourism can also be used as a vindication of 'authentic' indigenous culture, because it has the power to attract tourist money and so can be considered powerful and worthwhile (Gewertz & Errington, 1989).

CHAPTER IV INDIGENOUS PEOPLES AND THE NATION-STATE
Being Indigenous Within a Nation-State
According to a recent United Nations document "indigenous or aboriginal peoples, are so-called because they were livi ng on their lands before settlers came from elsewhere" (United Nations, 1997: 3). Ingold (2000: 3) points out that there is no guarantee that indigenous peoples' ascendants had not displaced a yet earlier people during a previous wave of population movement. He also asks whether it is reasonable to withhold indigenous status from persons who were born and raised in a country, on the grounds that many generations previously their ancestors had arrived from somewhere else. Either way, those that come to be labelled as 'indigenous' within a nation-state, now find themselves in a delicate relationship with that state and the national, and international, legal system.
Indigenous peoples are now faced with the interrelated processes of industrialisation and urbanisation, the dominance of the cash economy and mass production, the centralisation of markets, the spread of the mass media, and the growth of transportation infrastructure. This can lead to an apparent homogenisation of social forms within a country, which may well be encouraged by national government to demean sub-national boundaries (Cohen, 1985: 44). It is the indigenous peoples' responses to these processes that have been part of the focus of this dissertation. Of course we must not

assume that all indigenous peoples have the same relationship with the nation-state, or indeed that even within the same group there will be similar responses from all individuals, families, or communities.
Many indigenous groups are discovering that defending their interests now takes more than spears and a fierce reputation, and are attempting to protect their rights through the law courts. In November 1993 a suit was filed with the U.S. District Court in New York on behalf of several indigenous groups in Ecuador. The group of indigenous communities, numbering 30,000 people, was suing Texaco for US$1.5 billion in an environmental lawsuit (Arana & Leach, 2000). The Rainforest Action Network found that Texaco had spilled 17 million gallons of crude oil, abandoned hundreds of unlined toxic waste pits, and constructed oil roads that opened up more than 2.5 million acres of the forest to colonisation.
Texaco claimed that it's exploration, carried out from 1972 until 1990, did not violate any laws because Ecuador lacked specific environmental legislation until 1990 (Armstrong & Vallejo, 1997). Unfortunately a May 2001 ruling found that all of Texaco's activities were conducted with the oversight and approval of the Ecuadorian government, and that it complied with all it's obligations under Ecuadorian law. It concluded that the Ecuadorian courts provided an adequate alternative forum for the case, and so it should not be heard in the United States (Texaco, 2001). This was the first time that an indigenous community had filed charges against a multinational oil corporation in the company's country of origin (Arana & Leech, 2000).

It is important to realise the impact that the concept of the nation-state is having on Amazonian groups. Indigenous populations do not necessarily restrict themselves to, or are even aware of, national borders - and so may find themselves spread over more than one country. Political differences, attitudes to missionary work, the impact of oil exploration, and many other factors that differ from country to country, all affect indigenous groups in different ways. For example, according to Belaunde (1992) the Airo-Pai of Peru are quite different from those in Ecuador (known there as the Secoya), and Chagnon (1997) has highlighted the different levels of 'contact' for Yanomamo living in Brazil and those in Venezuela. Most of the Huaorani in Ecuador now find themselves living close to roads and oil boom-towns, whilst those living in the demilitarised zone between Ecuador and Peru live in relative isolation (Smith, personal communication 1999). The country that these people are living in makes a huge difference in terms of their dealings with national government and other agencies.
As Thomas (1994) notes, the notion of 'authenticity' has its ambiguity, particularly as a political tool. He argues that it is essential to know the user of such discourse in order to understand the power game at hand. This is particularly relevant now that indigenous rights have become a matter for nation-states and the international legal system. For example, the International Labour Organisation "Convention 169" has a clause recognising the "special bond" between indigenous peoples and their land (Rival, 1998), and the UN document "Article 21" calls for all nation-states to conserve the united cultures of their indigenous peoples (Rapport & Overing, 2000: 368).

The question of authenticity now becomes a question of from whose perspective that authenticity is viewed from, and what is the motivation behind it. Article 21 can be viewed as an attempt to protect indigenous peoples, or simply as another colonialist appropriation – that is, we have individualism; they have community (Rapport & Overing, 2000: 369). There certainly seems to be no scope for the 'unhomely' or 'inauthentic' Indian within Article 21 and its focus on "the united cultures" of indigenous people.
The question of authenticity needs to be explored further within the context of the nation-state and the legal system. However, this may become irrelevant if the World Trade Organisation passes the proposed "General Agreement on Trade in Services" (Gats). This is the plan to create an international agency with veto powers over government and regulatory decisions that violate the Gats "Necessity Test" - that a law or regulation should not be "more burdensome than necessary" to free trade and business (Article V1.4). The final authority will rest with the Gats Dispute Panel to determine whether a law fails this test. These hearings will be closed to environmental and human rights groups - who will be barred from participating, or even knowing, what is said before the panel (The Observer, 15 April 2001). If this agreement is passed, then indigenous groups may even lose their right to negotiate at a national and international level.

Case Study: The Huaorani and Land Rights
In 1983 the Huaorani gained legal title to 66,570 hectares of land, and after much campaigning received an additional 612,560 hectares in 1990. This territory of 679,130 hectares covers approximately only one third of their 'traditional' land (and excludes several Huaorani communities), and they have no rights to the oil and mineral deposits in this area. The Huaorani are finding that they have to adapt fast to being a part of the nation-state of Ecuador. The main priority for the Huaorani in their dealings with the rest of Ecuador has been the defence of their land. However, the government's approach to rural areas gives priority to the full use of the land, and the state's ownership of subsurface minerals (IACHR, 1997). These limitations affect the ability of the Huaorani to enjoy their rights as laid down in the American Convention.
The Huaorani have a moral right to defend their territory against exploitation, but this often comes up against the laws of the nation-state that their land falls in. In 1994 the Ecuadorian government enacted the Law of Agrarian Development, which permits the state to expropriate land that has been left fallow for more than two years (IACHR, 1997). This requirement is obviously inconsistent with indigenous land use systems in Amazonia. Furthermore, Ecuador's Forestry Law specifies that all land within the borders of legally designated natural reserves must be appropriated by the state (IACHR, 1997). The problem is that these areas often include lands inhabited by, and of special importance to, indigenous peoples. Also, once appropriated by the state, these lands are often then opened up to development.

The Huaorani no longer fight threats to their land with "spears from all sides", and instead attempt to use the legal systems to defend their territory. In June 1990 a petition was filed by CONFENIAE which alleged that the Huaorani were under the imminent threat of profound human rights violations due to planned oil exploration activities in Block 16, which was part of their traditional land. The petition pointed out that Block 16 had fallen within the boundaries of the Yasuni National Park and so, in principle, was not susceptible to development. However, in April 1990 the boundaries of the park had been changed to exclude the area that was Block 16, which was subsequently included in the 1990 land grant to the Huaorani. Unfortunately, the terms of the land grant expressly preclude the Huaorani from impeding the exploration of oil or minerals by government, or government-authorised, operations (IACHR, 1997).
Ecuador's indigenous peoples now also face another hurdle in the defence of their land. The country's congress recently passed the TROLE III, or the "Law for the Promotion of Investment and Citizen Participation". The law promotes the use and exploitation of natural resources to bring Ecuador out of its economic recession. The main objectives of this law are to allow the private sector (national and international) to conduct it's own supervision of mining and oil exploration, and to obtain land ownership of previously restricted natural areas for the exploitation of renewable and non-renewable resources. This law states that the needs of the nation have priority over the needs of its population (TROPIC, 2000). So even though the indigenous inhabitants of an

area must be consulted regarding land use, their opinion can be legally disregarded if it contradicts governmental development plans.
Indigenous Political Organisations
Indigenous peoples have significantly redefined their relationship with governments and non-indigenous populations over the past several decades. In Ecuador the indigenous population has created a network of local and regional representative organisations, which in turn belong to the national coordinating body CONAIE (Confederation of Indigenous Nationalities of Ecuador). CONAIE has campaigned to get Ecuador's constitution amended to recognise the country as a multinational, multilingual, and multiethnic state. In 1995 the constitution was modified so that Ecuador is now recognised as "sovereign, democratic, unitary, decentralised, pluricultural and multiethnic". Also, "Quechua and other indigenous languages are recognised within their respective areas of use and fo rm part of the national culture" (quoted in IACHR, 1997).
Following reform that allowed independent candidates to run for elected office, Ecuador's indigenous organisations undertook their first co-ordinated involvement in politics during the 1996 elections. In these elections the CONAIE president, Antonio Vargas, was elected as one of 12 national deputies (IACHR, 1997). Vargas was also involved in the 2000 Ecuadorian coup, in which he was named as part of the three-man council which temporarily took over from the then President Jamil Mahuad. This coup was

partly due to the fact that many of the country's indigenous population had occupied the Congress buildings and surrounded the Presidential palace demanding his resignation (BBC News, 22 January 2000).
The power of indigenous organisations in Ecuador is growing, however this is mostly limited to the Andean groups who are very well organised. Amazonian groups, such as ONHAE, are often newer and at present do not have the same political clout as the highla nd organisations. It will be a long time, if ever, before the indigenous populations of South America will be given their full say within the nation-state, however their political organisations are an important first step. This is particularly relevant now that Peru has recently elected its first president of native Indian origin. Alejandro Toledo started working life as a goat-herder in an Andean village, but eventually gained a doctorate from Stanford University and became a World Bank consultant. He exemplifies Peruvian dreams of upward social mobility, but paid homage to his Andean roots in a ceremony at the Inca citadel of Machu Picchu the day after his inauguration (Reuters, 29 July 2001).
Our notion of 'authenticity' now attempts to keep indigenous peoples at the level of the 'noble savage', as this way they are easier to control. However, today indigenous peoples are realising that they must resort to thoroughly 'inauthentic' methods to protect their rights - they must play us at our own game. Most are now attempting to do this by using representative political organisations to further their interests at the national and international level. Of course this does lead to problems, as the notion of representation does not

sit well with Amazonian ideas of sociality, good community living, and proper leadership.
Kidd (1997) points out that there is a general tendency for anthropologists, who wish to preserve the image of the 'authenticity' of present day indigenous peoples, to mask in their writings the central role of white people within the indigenous organisations. Indigenous peoples who accept help from skilful white people in their relations with governmental bodies are accused of 'inauthenticity' by bureaucrats and development agencies (Overing, 1998: 16). However, Kidd (1997) argues that in playing his part in the organisation of Enxet leaders, he was in fact acting on behalf of the indigenous peoples in accordance to their own set of values. The Paraguayan Enxet were perfectly happy for Kidd to use his skills (which they did not possess) on their behalf in relation to the government and the legal system of the nation-state. In fact, they not only allowed, but actively encouraged him to assume the role of indigenous leader - but only as long as he also obeyed the Enxet rules for leadership. Oldham (1996) notes a similar situation with his assistance to the Piaroa in their organisation to deal with the nation-state.
Overing (1998: 18) argues that there is no reason why indigenous peoples should not use the skills of the white person - so long as he or she learns from them how to act on behalf of the community in the manner of an indigenous leader. The problem is that those indigenous groups that use white people and their skills are labelled 'inauthentic' - yet the indigenous peoples say they are not because the white people are acting in accordance with indigenous

ideas of leadership. Again we can see that it all comes down a matter of perspective - down to our ways of seeing.

CHAPTER V DISCUSSION
Representing the Other
This dissertation has really been about ways of seeing – ways of representing the Other, as a conquistador, as an anthropologist, or as an Amazonian. An ongoing theme has been that of opposites, or more specifically, opposing viewpoints. In many of the areas discussed, views have fallen into two or more opposing sides of debate. I hope I have shown that most of these views are essentially misguided.
I have shown that our ways of representing the indigenous Other, have changed. Our views of 'culture' and 'authenticity' are no different. Our view of the 'authentic Indian' as the noble savage, living within a homogenous culture, and at one with the jungle around them, is simply another way of representing that Other – no different than the 'wild cannibal' of the 16th century Conquest. We dismiss today’s Indian as acculturated simply because he or she plays football and can read the Bible. They are really no more 'acculturated' than the so-called uncontacted groups – both are the result of contact and continuous mixing of groups, cultures, and productive difference.
In 1550 Las Casas argued that the indigenous Other was indeed human, and worthy of human rights. Yet almost 500 years later the situation has not really changed from the times of the Conquest. Oil companies quite literally hunt

down indigenous groups to free up the land in their search for 'black gold', missionaries still continue their search for potential Christians, and anthropologists still view the Other through a patronising gaze that insists on authentic, homogeneous 'cultures'. McGrane (1989: 129) concludes that, "the Renaissance saw the Other on the horizon of the demonical, the Enlightenment saw the Other on the horizon of ignorance, the 19th centur y saw the Other on the horizon of historical evolutionary development; anthropology now sees the Other as 'only' culturally different". I would also add to this that today’s multinational ‘conquistadors’ see the Other as ‘only’ a hindrance.
At the same time, the indigenous incorporation of the European into their systems of knowledge, appears to be much more accurate than ours. We are seen as so cannibalistic, that we cannibalise ourselves – a view not too far from the truth if we are honest. They have appropriated our skills and knowledge to protect themselves and their homes – as either spirit masters in the form of giant conquistadors, or by using anthropologists as indigenous leaders to further their political organisations.
Our view of the indigenous Other has changed from 'wild cannibal' to 'noble savage', and we are now romanticising them in ways we never have before. Some see the Indians of Amazonia as our saviours, with their knowledge of medicinal plants and their supposed ability to live at one with the rainforest. As previously mentioned, this image is actively promoted by organisations such as Survival International in their attempts to protect indigenous peoples

and their rights. Coinciding with this is the way that the indigenous view of us as the Other is also changing. Although many still look at us as the 'wild cannibals' or 'non-humans', paradoxically some are beginning to appropriate our skills and knowledge in order to defend themselves against us. The very people that are causing them problems sometimes become their 'saviours', through helping to promote tourism or assisting their political groups. However, this is really not surprising if you take into account Amazonian peoples’ view of ‘culture’ as a skill, and their ability to incorporate the dangerous Other for productive, and reproductive, purposes.
Conclusion
The transnational oil companies and evangelical missionaries at work in Amazonia today could be thought of as American neo-colonialists. However, they are not disrupting previously untainted cultures, rather they are continuing the rapid changes started by the catastrophic impact of the first European conquistadors and continued over the last 500 years, as the West attempted to seek a profit in rubber, oil, or souls. Contemporary Amazonian cultures must be seen in the light of a certain sort of historical change since the first colonisation of the pre-Conquest states. Although, as this dissertation has shown, it is important to remember that the moment just before European Conquest cannot be viewed as the 'traditional' Amazonian society, and the European Conquest cannot be thought of as the beginning of history for Amazonian peoples.

Indigenous peoples of Amazonia have always had to assimilate and adapt to other indigenous groups or outside influences, yet when they try to do so today we are horrified at the loss of their 'traditional' culture. It is true that we should deplore, as morally and ethically unjust, the enforced change imposed on many groups - but we should not turn our backs on those groups that have adapted to this influence, and label them 'inauthentic'. It makes little sense to insist upon a nomadic hunter-gatherer lifestyle as the authentic indigenous way of life - as we have seen that this is simply a point in the history of Amazonia. We should also be wary of viewing this history as impinging on indigenous peoples - as Gow (1991) insists, we must listen to their meanings and explore indigenous discourses of identity and history. This is particularly relevant to the Huaorani, as their history, linguistic affiliations and ethnic origins remain unknown (Smith, 1996: 11).
Despite this fact, in the anthropological literature relating to the Huaorani there is little, if any, reference to contemporary Huaorani culture. It mostly discusses the Huaorani as if they were still living in longhouses and using stone axes. However, contemporary Huaorani live in autonomous communities, wear Western clothes, travel on buses to the nearest town, and have to deal with government officials, oil companies, and tourists. I even know one Huaorani twelve year old who, as well as speaking Huao, is already fluent in Spanish and is now currently learning English - and he sill lives in his jungle community. The modern Amazonian moves between two worlds, neither of which is the so-called 'traditional' way of life described in the ethnography. Just like the indigenous rights organisations that attempt to halt the flow of

'progress', anthropologists have fixed indigenous peoples in some arbitrary past. 13
Anthropologists cannot accept the attitude "we know best"; but at the same time we should not accept that "they know best" no matter what the consequences. Perhaps we have a moral obligation to at least present the choices to them and help in their decision making; to somehow make up for the mistakes of the past. The two quotes at the beginning of the introduction to this dissertation represent opposite ends of the spectrum of debate in this area. Somewhere in between is the indigenous voice that we have refused to hear above our own political, religious and theoretical arguing. The indigenous voice is just as strong and capable of rational thought as ours - we just have to learn to listen to it.
At the same time, the change we refer to is often not 'social change' at all. Rather it refers to the 'traditional' material culture that we love to examine and collect for it’s exotic and unique nature. These are the things that we try to obtain in order for us to be able to put a people’s 'culture' into a museum. When we examine the issue of sociality we find that often little has changed at all . At it’s root the sociality of Amazonian peoples has not changed – what we have lost (not necessarily them) are the spears, headdresses, and blowguns that made them quaintly inferior or different to us. This is what we have lost.
13 See Fabian (1983) as an example of how anthropologists have frozen indigenous peoples in a certain time.

An elderly Huaorani woman once told me, "We may wear clothes and live in villages, but we are Huaorani". At first I interpreted this as her trying to defend their 'inauthentic' ways by claiming that underneath it all they are still Huaorani. I still think this is true to a certain extent; contemporary Huaorani do share many things with the Huaorani of the past. However, I also think that what she was actually saying was "we are Huaorani"; that the Huaorani wearing clothes and living in villages are the Huaorani. The 'authentic Huaorani' (or indeed any indigenous group) of our imagination does not exist. It is the meanings that they give to being 'indigenous' that we as anthropologists need to look at further, but only once we have removed our 'patronising gaze'.
Taking the approach to 'culture' and 'authenticity' discussed in this dissertation, anthropologists must re-examine contemporary Amazonian peoples from the points of view of the peoples themselves. There must be a new analysis of colonialism, social change, and what it means to be indigenous – but this must be done using the indigenous conceptions of history, identity, and community. By thinking in this way, and realising that our concepts are simply our concepts (not universal 'truths'), we may be able to achieve a realistic picture of Amazonia and the peoples that live there. In doing so we will gain a greater understanding of the indigenous Other, and also be able to rethink our concepts and ways of seeing.

REFERENCES
Abbott, C. (2000). Expedición al Parque Nacional Yasuní, Ecuador 1999: Informe del Líder de la Expedición. Unpublished expedition report: Royal Holloway, University of London.
Arana & Leech (2000). Globalized Grievance. http://www.salon.com/news/feature/2000/09/07//index.html
Armstrong, G. & Vallejo, M. (1997). Ecuador Oil Export Dispute. TED Case Studies, 1, 1.
Belaunde, L. E. (1992). Gender, Commensality and Community Among the Airo-Pai of West Amazonia. Unpublished PhD thesis: London School of Economics, University of London.
Bhabha, H. (1994). The Location of Culture. London: Routledge.
Blangy, S. (1999). Ecotourism Without Tears. The UNESCO Courier, 8.
van den Berghe, P. (1980). Tourism as Ethnic Relations: A Case Study of Cuzco, Peru. Ethnic and Racial Studies, 3, 4, pp. 375-392.
Bush, M. & Colinvaux, P. (1988). A 7000-Year Pollen Record from the Amazon Lowlands, Ecuador. Vegetatio, 76, pp. 141-154. Chagnon, N. A. (1997). Yanomamo (5th Edition). Fort Worth: Harcourt Brace.
Cohen, A. P. (1985). The Symbolic Construction of Community. London: Routledge.
Deitch, L. I. (1989). The Impact of Tourism on the Arts and Crafts of the Indians of the Southwestern U.S. In V. L. Smith (ed.), Hosts and Guests: The Anthropology of Tourism. Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania Press.

Fabian, J. (1983). Time and the Other: How the Other Makes it's Object. New York: University of Columbia Press.
Ferguson, R. B (1990). Blood of the Leviathan: Western Contact and Warfare in Amazonia. American Ethnologist, 17, pp. 237-257.
Gewertz, C. & Errington, P. A. (1989). Tourism and Anthropology in a PostModern World. Oceania, 60, pp. 37-54.
Gow, P. (1991). Of Mixed Blood. Oxford: Clarendon Press.
Harris, O. (1994). ‘The Coming of the White People’. Reflections on the Mythologisation of History in Latin America. Bulletin of Latin American Research, pp. 9-24.
Hill, J. (1989). Rethinking History and Myth: Indigenous South American Perspectives on the Past. Illinois: University of Illinois Press.
Hugh-Jones, S. (1989). Waribi and the White Men: History and Myth in NW Amazonia. In E. Tonkin, M. McDonald, & M. Chapman (eds.), History and Ethnicity (ASA Monographs 27). London: Routledge
Hugh-Jones, S. (1992). Yesterday's Luxuries, Tomorrow's Necessities: Business and Barter in Northwest Amazonia. In C. Humphrey & S. HughJones (eds.), Barter, Exchange and Value: An Anthropological Approach. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
IACHR (1997). Human Rights Issues of Special Relevance to the Indigenous Inhabitants of the Country (Ch. IX). Report on the Situation of Human Rights in Ecuador. Inter-American Commission on Human Rights & Organization of American States.

Ingold, T. (1994). Introduction to Culture. In T. Ingold (ed.), Companion Encyclopaedia of Anthropology: Humanity, Culture and Social Life. London: Routledge.
Ingold, T. (2000). Ancestry, Generation, Substance, Memory, Land (pp.132151). The Perception of the Environment: Essays in Livelihood, Dwelling and Skill. London: Routledge.
Kane, J. (1995). Savages. New York: Alfred A. Knopf.
Kidd, S. (1997). Invisible Whitemen and Indigenous Organisations. Presented at the International Contres of Americanists, Quito, Ecuador.
MacCannell, D. (1976). The Tourist. New York: Schocken.
Mason, P. (1990). Deconstructing America: Representations of the Other. London: Routledge.
McCallum, C. (1990). Language, Kinship and Politics in Amazonia. Man, 25, pp. 412-433.
McGrane, B. (1989). Beyond Anthropology: Society and the Other. New York: Columbia University Press.
Nash, D. (1989). Tourism as a Form of Imperialism. In V. L. Smith (ed.), Hosts and Guests: The Anthropology of Tourism. Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania Press.
Oldham, P. (1996). The Impacts of Development and Indigenous Responses Among the Piaroa of the Venezuelan Amazon. Unpublished PhD thesis: University of London.

Overing, J. (1996). Who is the Mightiest of them All? Jaguar and Conquistador in Piaroa Images of Alterity and Identity. In A. J. Arnold (ed.), Monsters, Tricksters, and Sacred Cows: Animal Tales and American Identities. Charlottesville: University Press of Virginia.
Overing, J. (1998). What’s the Difference Between a Peace Corps Worker and an Anthropologist?: A Millennium Rethink of Anthropological Fieldwork. Presented at the Conference on the Human Impacts on the Environments of Brazilian Amazon, Linacre College, Oxford.
Overing Kaplan, J. (1981). Amazonian Anthropology. Journal of Latin American Studies, 13, 1, pp. 151-165.
Porro, A. (1994). Social Organization and Political Power in the Amazon Floodplain: The Ethnohistorical Sources. In A. C. Roosevelt (ed.), Amazonian Indians from Prehistory to the Present: Anthropological Perspectives. Tucson: University of Arizona Press.
Rapport, N. & Overing, J. (2000). Culture (pp. 92-102). Social and Cultural Anthropology: The Key Concepts. London: Routledge.
Rapport, N. & Overing, J. (2000). The Unhomely (pp. 363-374). Social and Cultural Anthropology: The Key Concepts. London: Routledge.
Rapport, N. & Overing, J. (2000). Tourism (pp. 353-360). Social and Cultural Anthropology: The Key Concepts. London: Routledge.
Rival, L. (1992). Social Transformations and the Impact of Formal Schooling on the Huaorani of Amazonian Ecuador. Unpublished PhD thesis: University of London.

Rival, L. (1993). Marginality with a Difference, or how the Huaorani Preserve their Sharing Relations and Naturalize Outside Powers. Paper prepared for M. Biesele et al. (eds.), Hunters and Gatherers in the Modern World: Conflict, Residence and Self-Determinism.
Rival, L. (1997). Oil, Sustainable Development, and the Use and Misuse of Anthropology. Anthropology Today. Editorial (December issue).
Rival, L. (1998). The Right to Life, or the Right to a Way of Life? http://www.gn.apc.org/resurgence/issues/rival189.htm
Roosevelt, A. C. (1991). Moundbuilders of the Amazon: Geophysical Archaeology on the Marajo Island, Brazil. San Diego: Academic Press.
Roosevelt, A. C. (1998). Ancient and Modern Hunter-Gatherers of Lowland South America: An Evolutionary Problem. In W. Balée (ed.), Advances in Historical Ecology. New York: Columbia University Press.
Simson, A. (1886). Travels in the Wilds of Ecuador and the Exploration of the Putumayo River. London: Samson Low.
Smith, V. L. (1989). Hosts and Guests: The Anthropology of Tourism. Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania Press.
Smith, R. (1996). Crisis Under the Canopy (2nd Edition). Quito: Abya-Yala.
Taussig, M. (1987). Shamanism, Colonialism, and the Wild Man: A Study in Terror and Healing. Chicago: The University of Chicago Press.
Texaco (2001). Ecuador. http://www.texaco.com
Thomas, N. (1994). Colonialism's Culture. Cambridge: Polity Press.

Todorov, T. (1984). The Conquest of America, The Question of the Other. New York: Harper & Row.
Townsley, G. (1993). Song Paths: The Ways and Means of Yaminahua Shamanic Knowledge. L’Homme, XXXIII, pp. 449-468.
TROPIC (2000). Environmental News. TROPIC Ecological Adventures. http://www.tropiceco.com
United Nations (1997). The Rights of Indigenous Peoples (Human Rights Fact Sheet 9). Geneva: United Nations.
Urry, J. (1990). The Tourist Gaze. London: SAGE Publications.
Viveiros de Castro, E. B. (1986). Sociedades Minimalistas: A Prop?sito de um Livro de Peter Rivière. Anuário Antropológico, 85, pp. 265-282.
Walcott, D. (1996). Afterword: Animals, Elemental Tales, and the Theatre. In A. J. Arnold (ed.), Monsters, Tricksters, and Sacred Cows. Charlottesville: University Press of Virginia.
Wallace, A.F.C. (1961). The Psychic Unity of Human Groups. In B. Kaplan (ed.), Studying Personality Cross-Culturally. New York: Harper & Row.
Wallace, A.F.C. (1962). Culture and Cognition. Science, 135, pp. 351-357.
Wittgenstein, L. (1953). Philosophical Investigations. New York: Macmillan.
Wolf, E. R. (1982). Europe and the People Without History. Berkeley: University of California Press.
Wood, M. (2000). Conquistadors. London: BBC Worldwide Ltd.

Žižek, S. (1999). The Ticklish Subject: The Absent Centre of Political Ontology. London: Verso.

