Searching for undetected genetic links between the languages of South America
Willem F. H. Adelaar
Leiden University Centre for Linguistics
With more than a hundred phylogenetic lineages, indigenous South America is often highlighted as a region with one of the highest degrees of linguistic diversity in the world. A systematic investigation of the possible phylogenetic relations that may exist between its numerous language families and isolates is overdue. It is argued that the possibilities of discovering such relations are far from exhausted. Previously undetected phylogenetic relations were uncovered by comparing selected sets of basic vocabulary in combination with shared morphosyntactic elements. The selection of vocabulary to be used in this procedure implies the elimination of residual morphology and the recognition of semantic fluctuations proper to the cultural environment of the languages involved. Such techniques can be expected to further reduce the number of phylogenetic units recognized for South America.
1. Introduction
The phylogenetic composition of the native languages of the Americas is one of the major unsolved issues in present-day historical linguistics. With more than a hundred linguistic lineages, consisting of genealogical isolates and language families of different size and complexity, indigenous South America is often highlighted, along with New Guinea, as the region with the highest degree of linguistic diversity in the world. Not only is the linguistic diversity in South America exceptionally great due to the amount of allegedly independent phylogenetic units, its typological variety is equally impressive. This extreme diversity of the indigenous South American languages stands in sharp contrast with the relatively short history of human presence in the South American subcontinent. Most dates attributed to the earliest human occupation of South America oscillate around 11,000 BP, although earlier dates have been proposed as well (see, for instance, Dillehay et al. 1992, for Monte Verde in southern Chile). Since few South American lineages

116 Willem F. H. Adelaar
have been attested outside South America, it is reasonable to assume that most of the existent linguistic diversity originally developed in the region itself.
The present contribution looks at possibilities to reduce the number of independent phylogenetic units in South America with a special focus on those lineages for which no external connections have been established so far. For this purpose, I advocate the use of non-quantitative comparative methods that until now have not been applied to the languages of South America in an exhaustive and satisfactory way. Sections 2 to 6 will provide general information on the state of the historical-comparative research on the languages of South America. Some methodological issues that are relevant in order to explain and reduce the amount of phylogenetic diversity in South America will be discussed in Sections 7 to 12.
2. The Amerind hypothesis and the languages of South America
Greenberg (1987) argues for the genetic unity of almost all New World languages, including all the South American lineages but leaving aside two North American groups (Na-Dene and Eskimo-Aleut). His proposal of a phylogenetic Pan-American language group called ‘Amerind’ has received very little support from linguists in the field, mainly on the basis of its methodology (“mass lexical comparison”) and the poor handling of data (Campbell 1988; Adelaar 1989; Matisoff 1990; Poser 1992; Rankin 1992; Ringe 1992). Greenberg’s classification of the South American languages also distinguishes a number of subgroups within the putative Amerind phylum that are supposed to unite some of the lineages considered independent in other classifications. Most of Greenberg’s non-superficial subgroups have never been confirmed by ongoing research with at least two important exceptions: Greenberg’s assertion that the Chiquitano language, an alleged isolate of eastern Bolivia, and the Jabutían family in Rondônia (Brazil) are related to the Macro-Jê stock has received additional support, as well as the Macro-Jê hypothesis itself (see Section 7 below). Finally, in a more general perspective, we may observe that Greenberg’s views on the relatedness of the South American languages were based on his interpretation of linguistic evidence, but that it is also possible to defend the hypothesis of a common origin for all the South American languages on other than linguistic grounds, for instance, by the practical elimination of most of the imaginable alternatives.

Searching for genetic links between the languages of South America 117
3. Extent and representation of South American language diversity
In general, historical linguists working on New World languages have been skeptical about claims of unconfirmed distant genetic relationships that are meant to reduce the elevated number of independent linguistic lineages recognized until recently (see, for instance, Campbell 1997). Conservative counts by Loukotka (1968) and Kaufman (1990), respectively, distinguish 117 and 118 separate linguistic lineages for South America (including the Caribbean islands). Since neither of these two lists covers all the lineages included in the other, the number of lineages to be distinguished for this area may actually be higher than 118. Furthermore, many extinct and undocumented languages that are mentioned in early historical sources have not been included in these classifications, and, conversely, some of the extinct language groups that are included in these classifications are so poorly documented that their status as independent genetic units is doubtful and probably will remain so forever. As can be deduced from the above, the linguistic diversity of South America does not primarily reside in the number of its languages, but in the unusually high number of its linguistic lineages consisting of stocks, families and isolates (unclassified languages and languages without known genetic relatives).
4. Recent advances in the reduction of lineages
In the last few decades, advances in the phylogenetic classification of the languages of eastern South America have made possible a reduction of the number of lineages recognized for that area. For instance, Kaufman’s (1990) classification is accompanied by some tentative suggestions for a reduction of the inventory of phylogenetic units by combining groups originally classified as independent. The most important of his suggestions concerns a set of linguistic lineages that are often listed together under the heading Macro-Jê (for instance, in Greenberg 1987). When confirmed, it would reduce Kaufman’s list to 108 units. Meanwhile,
. There is very little overlap between the lineages attested in South America and Mesoamerica. Only the Chibchan language family occupies substantial areas in both South America and Central America. Another case of overlap is the Garífuna language in Central America. It belongs to the Arawakan language family, which is native to South America and the Caribbean islands, and it reached its present location in the post-Columbian contact period.
. More than 400 languages are attested in South America, including recently extinct ones, but not counting an indefinite number of poorly documented or undocumented languages that have disappeared since the European discovery and occupation.

118 Willem F. H. Adelaar
the so-called Macro-Jê hypothesis (Rodrigues 1999), which now brings together an even greater number of language families and former linguistic isolates located in Brazil and Bolivia, has become more and more widely accepted. In addition, an even more comprehensive phylogenetic grouping involving the Cariban language family, as well as the Tupían and Macro-Jê language stocks (Rodrigues 2000, 2009), has also been envisaged. Another phylogenetic grouping that unites lineages previously considered independent concerns the Harakmbut language and the Katukinan family, located in Peru and Brazil, respectively (see Section 7 below). A recent state-of-the-art overview of the classification of the indigenous languages of South America (Campbell 2012) expresses a guarded optimism with regard to progress that is currently being achieved in the field at issue.
5. Increased availability of data
For a long time, the absence of reliable data on most South American languages with small speaker numbers has been a major obstacle to progress in the establishment of phylogenetic connections. Languages that could not be classified within larger groupings due to a lack of data were easily listed as isolates, except if their apparent characteristics were definitely very close to those of better known languages. However, since the 1990s, the amount of accessible data on the languages of all parts of South America has increased spectacularly due to a wave of interest in language description and language documentation focusing on languages in danger of extinction (see, for instance, Robins & Uhlenbeck 1991; Grenoble & Whaley 1998; Gippert, Himmelmann & Mosel 2006; Brenzinger 2007; Moseley 2010). Since most South American languages are threatened with extinction, our knowledge of these languages has benefited from this current to a considerable extent. A generalized interest for linguistic typology, a field of research that is fed by data from as many different languages as possible, also supported the surge of interest for the South American languages (see, for instance, the contributions in Campbell & Grondona 2012). Nevertheless, the need for a breakthrough in our understanding of the phylogenetic relations that may be found to exist between the native languages of South America remains unchanged. Progress is hampered, among other things, by the circumstance that few researchers can oversee the entire field of South American linguistic diversity due to its formidable complexity. In order to achieve results it is necessary to handle ready-to-use knowledge of as many languages and language groups as possible. Fortunately, the availability in published or online form of good data on almost any South American language now provides hope for a breakthrough in our knowledge and understanding of the phylogenetic background of these languages.

Searching for genetic links between the languages of South America 119
6. The harvest of previous historical-comparative research
Although much remains unknown about the early history of the South American languages, it stands to reason to assume that their development over time is not very different to that of languages anywhere else in the world. As a matter of fact, South America comprises a number of large language families or stocks that are comparable to any other well established phylogenetically based language group in the world. These large language families or stocks include well-known cases such as Arawakan, Cariban, Chibchan, Guaicurúan, Jêan (or Macro-Jê if that combination is accepted), Pano-Tacanan, Tucanoan, and Tupían. The internal history of these language groups can be traced by establishing the sound developments and syntactic changes underlying their modern representatives. Eventually, proto-languages may be reconstructed, albeit partially. The sound changes that characterize the different branches of these South American language groups are often similar to sound changes that are known to have occurred in Old World languages. This makes it clear that well-established methods such as the comparative method in historical linguistics are perfectly applicable to South American language groups as well. Over the last few decades considerable progress has been made in the historical-comparative analysis of these large South American groups (e.g., Constenla 1991; Meira 2000; Rodrigues 2000). However, along with these extensive and elaborate phylogenetic groupings, there are many more isolates and small shallow families for which no external relations have been established so far. Interestingly, most of the large families and stocks are located in the eastern lowlands of South America. The western part of South America, including the Andes, the eastern pre-Andean areas and the southern cone, remain problematic as far as their phylogenetic constituency is concerned.
7. Focusing on undetected phylogenetic relations
In spite of all this challenging diversity and the huge surge of academic interest in South American languages of the last two decades, a systematic investigation of the possible phylogenetic relations that exist between South America’s numerous language families and isolates is still to be undertaken. As it stands now, the possibilities of discovering genetic and other historical relations (including many undetected past contact situations) between the different phylogenetic entities of South America have not been exhausted, and these relations can be researched in a conventional, non-quantitative way.
As a matter of fact, the present author is convinced on the basis of his own experience that the application of qualitative techniques for the discovery of

120 Willem F. H. Adelaar
phylogenetic relations between apparently unrelated native American languages can still be successful. In 1999, I established a phylogenetic relationship between two linguistic lineages of western Amazonia that had never been associated or brought into comparison before. These languages are Harakmbut or Amarakaeri, an alleged linguistic isolate of south-eastern Peru, which had previously been treated as a branch of the Arawakan language family but without conclusive evidence (Matteson 1972; Greenberg 1987), and Katukina or Kanamarí, the main surviving member of a small language family located in the Brazilian state of Amazonas (Adelaar 2000). The choice of languages for this comparison was based on pure co-incidence. The confirmation of a systematic relationship was reached by comparing selected sets of basic vocabulary items from the two languages, a procedure that immediately yielded about 50 possible cognate pairs as well as a set of regular sound correspondences. Naturally, the inventory of cognates may be expanded through further investigation. Meanwhile, the documentation for the two languages was too limited to also establish morphological evidence for the proposed linking, but this situation has changed now that a grammatical study of the Katukina language is available (dos Anjos 2011).
Subsequently, the application of the same qualitative method of lexical comparison made it possible to confirm a long suspected phylogenetic link between another alleged isolate, the Chiquitano language of eastern Bolivia, and the Macro-Jê language stock of Brazil (Adelaar 2008; Ribeiro 2010). As we saw before, a relationship between Chiquitano and the Macro-Jê languages was proposed by Greenberg (1987), but it had not been accepted by leading authorities in the field (e.g., Rodrigues 1986). In the case of Chiquitano and Macro-Jê shared morphophonemic idiosyncrasies have emerged, which further confirm the link established by a comparison of the basic vocabulary.
Yet another recently established phylogenetic link is that of the Jabutían languages in the state of Rondônia in western Brazil with the Macro-Jê stock (Ribeiro & van der Voort 2010).
As we can see, such new insights characteristically involve small language families or isolates that are only recently being studied and analyzed in a modern linguistic sense. This observation certainly holds for Chiquitano, morphologically one of the most complex languages of South America, that had been studied in colonial times but for which a modern description is still lacking.
. The Chiquitano language is currently being investigated by Pierric Sans, a researcher from Lyons (France).

Searching for genetic links between the languages of South America 121
8. Bilateral language comparison
The establishment of more phylogenetic connections between the languages of South America is an urgent task that must not be left to coincidence. The process can be accelerated by a systematic search focused on pairs of selected languages or, in the case of well-established language families, of (partly) reconstructed proto-languages. This practice of bilateral language comparison may appear self-evident, but it is also novel to the extent that it has never been systematically applied to the languages of South America. It is a laborious procedure because, theoretically, it may imply as many as 5,000 comparisons, even when only the possible phylogenetic relations within South America are addressed and not any external relations involving both South American languages and languages of other areas (for instance, Mesoamerica). Eventually, such external relations will also have to be considered, but the phylogenetic relations within South America certainly deserve priority attention in their own right. A systematic bilateral comparison of all the linguistic lineages, preferably in a reconstructed form if the internal variation of the lineage allows it, is the best way to uncover undetected links in a situation where so little is known about the pre-history of the languages at issue. Whenever adequate reconstructions of proto-languages are available, they should be used in the comparisons, rather than modern daughter languages. If necessary, such reconstructions will have to be provided for before a comparison takes place.
9. Selecting the data
For the establishment of genetic links, initial discovery procedures will be based on basic lexicon unlikely to be borrowed even in intense contact situations. It is assumed that, whenever two languages are genetically related, regular lexical correspondences are more likely to show up in the basic vocabulary (body part terms, kinship terms, non-cultural terms referring to the natural environment, etc.), than in other parts of the lexicon of the languages concerned. If correspondences are more frequently found in non-basic, cultural vocabulary a borrowing scenario is more likely (cf. Heggarty 2005).
A possible tool for the selection of lexicon is a list of 40 basic vocabulary items established at the Max-Planck Institute for Evolutionary Anthropology in Leipzig in the framework of the Automated Similarity Judgment Program (ASJP)
. A search for phylogenetic relations between Mesoamerica and western South America is the subject of the ERC project MesAndLin(g)k, which is carried out by Leiden University and the Max Planck Institute for Evolutionary Anthropology in Leipzig.

122 Willem F. H. Adelaar
for computerized lexicostatistical analysis (Holman et al. 2008). This list of 40 basic vocabulary items is intended to recognize similarities in the basic vocabulary of language pairs at an early stage. It has been tested as more effective than an alternative list of 100 items (basically adapted from the Swadesh list selection of 100 items) because the chances of lexical borrowing are more reduced. Obviously, the ASJP list (or other similar lists) can only be used in bilateral language comparison as a fact-finding tool. Once a possible genetic link is discovered by means of such a list, it will still have to be analyzed to the deepest possible extent using the procedures of bilateral language comparison and deconstruction in order to establish regular correspondences as required by the standard comparative method (cf. Campbell 2004). Any links once detected will have to be followed up by an in-depth study of the correspondences, and these may turn out to be the result of contact when phonologically unpredictable or when the criterion that basic vocabulary must show more shared items than non-basic vocabulary is not met.
10. Preparing the data: Morphological deconstruction
Until recently, the documentation on many South American languages mainly consisted of unanalyzed wordlists. This was particularly true for the languages of the Amazonian region and the eastern and southern lowlands of South America. At the same time, South American languages often feature complex morphological systems. Lexical items in wordlists usually contain morphological material that can be isolated by the consultation of grammatical descriptions when these are available. Even when such descriptions are not available, morphological elements may be easily recognized and isolated. This is the case, for instance, of the nominal possession marker for 1st person singular in the Arawakan languages, which is usually a prefix nu- or no- and which often accompanies (inalienably) possessed nouns when they appear in lists of unanalyzed words. However, lexical items in wordlists may also contain remnants of non-productive morphological formations. The identification of such residual morphology is one of the main challenges for historical reconstruction in South American languages, as grammatical descriptions often disregard derivational morphology, let alone the fossilized remnants of morphological processes that are no longer operative. Another point of attention is the habit, frequently found in Amazonian languages, to expand a nominal or verbal base by adding an additional root or element with a related
. For other lists of vocabulary items with retentive meanings that might fulfill a similar factfinding function see Starostin (1991), Lohr (1999), and McMahon & McMahon (2005: 89–118). See also Campbell (2013).

Searching for genetic links between the languages of South America 123
semantic content. This procedure is frequently followed in order to compensate for a loss of phonological contrast that caused two originally different forms to coincide.
As an example of residual morphology, consider the term for ‘nose’ in Hara­ kmbut ʔõh. Its equivalent in Katukina is o(h)pak or u(h)pak. Only the first syllable in Katukina is cognate with the Harakmbut term. The element -pak (for as yet of unidentified meaning) was possibly added to compensate for the loss of phonological complexity (vowel nasality and glottal stop) in Katukina.
We may also consider an example from Chiquitano, where the root of the word for ‘eye’ is sïto- or suto-. Its equivalent in Xavánte, a Jêan language, is tɔ. Here we can ascertain that sï- / su- is indeed an added element with an identifiable meaning. It is found in the base i-su- ‘face’ and in the compound i‑su-ki- ‘eyebrow’ (containing the root ki- ‘hair’). The element i- is presumably a fossilized prefix. The element sï- / su-, meaning ‘face’, may have been added as a compensation for the fact that Chiquitano lost a vowel distinction (/o/ vs. /ɔ/) still present in the Jêan languages, although this remains to be proven.
In order to overcome obstacles of this kind, I advocate a “proactive” approach that consists in the deconstruction of the available lexical material prior to its inclusion in the comparison. Lexical comparisons between languages must not be based on raw lexical data, as has often been the case in the analysis of lexicostatistical data taken from unanalyzed wordlists. In order to ensure a successful and objective comparison, the lexical material has to be analyzed and reduced to its etymological essence by first eliminating all productive affixes and all residual morphological material. Thus, instead of measuring the loss and/or retention of lexical similarity, which is the main function of lexicostatistical analysis, this method seeks to actively recover shared inherited language material through internal reconstruction in an effort to arrive at earlier stages of the languages at issue without falling into arbitrariness.
11. Preparing the data: How to deal with semantic shift?
The proactive approach to bilateral language comparison also extends to the meaning of the elements that enter the comparison. It is not enough to establish that two languages have formally unrelated terms for the same concept. One also has to find out if a word that is used with a particular meaning in one of the
. The Katukina data are from François Queixalós (pers. comm.).
. The Chiquitano data are from Galeote Tormo (1993).

124 Willem F. H. Adelaar
languages under comparison is not used in the other language to denote a related concept (e.g. ‘son’ / ‘child’, ‘water’ / ‘rain’ / ‘river’, ‘fire’ / ‘firewood’, ‘to be’ / ‘to stand’, ‘to sit’ / ‘to reside’, etc.). Semantic shifts are acceptable as long as they fit the cultural context of the languages in question. However, semantic equations should never be stretched beyond credibility, only because the forms under comparison are apparently related or even the same. Examples of culture-related semantic equations that are frequent in the languages of the tropical lowlands of South America are ‘head’ / ‘hair’, ‘hand’ / ‘leaf ’, and ‘dog’ / ‘jaguar’. Such pairs of concepts can be indicated by the same word (or formally related words) within a language, but the form in question may also appear with either one of a pair of alternative meanings in languages that are genetically related to each other.
In Amazonian languages a root that functions as a noun in a particular language may surface as a nominal classifier or a shape morpheme (a term introduced by Hart 1963) in a related language. Thus, the word for ‘egg’ (po) in Katukina surfaces as the shape morpheme for round objects (and the word for football) in the related language Harakmbut, whereas Harakmbut uses a special root ‑knda for ‘egg’.
The words for ‘hand’ and ‘leaf ’ are interchangeable in Harakmbut, where the root in question ‑mbaʔ functions as a shape morpheme. The corresponding form ba in Katukina means ‘hand’, whereas the word for ‘leaf ’ receives an added element hak- or taro- (in hakba, taroba) with an original function yet to be determined.
An interesting category of correspondences that is also worth mentioning is that in which roots detectable in one language are found in descriptive compounds in a related language. A case in point is the Katukina word for ‘fire’ i(h)tano, in which two roots from the related language Harakmbut can be recognized: ïtaʔ ‘firewood’ and nõʔ ‘tongue’. In Katukina, i(h)ta also means ‘firewood’ but the word for ‘tongue’ is noko (with an added element -ko). The etymology of the Katukina word for ‘fire’ can thus be established as ‘tongues of the firewood’. It does not come as a surprise that the Harakmbut word for ‘fire’ no longer has a cognate in Katukina.
The above mentioned culture-related semantic equations and the associated semantic shifts or specializations require special attention in the context of the Amazonian and eastern lowland languages of South America. They cannot be expected to occur in other languages of South America, in particular, of the Andean region, where other types of semantic association may occur. In the selection and the deconstruction of items to compare one has to take into account such cultural differences.

Searching for genetic links between the languages of South America 125
12. Dealing with lexical borrowing and diffusion
This contribution focuses on the discovery of inherited similarities in a search for previously undetected phylogenetic relations between South American linguistic lineages. It does not mean, however, that similarities based on borrowing or diffusion should be disregarded. The identification of past contact situations and elements of lexical diffusion is equally important for the study of the linguistic past as the discovery of phylogenetically based similarities (cf. Aikhenvald 2001). In general, it can be assumed that lexical similarities between unrelated languages must be attributed to borrowing unless compelling evidence of a common genetic origin is found.
These premises are crucially important for the two main language families of the Andean region, Aymaran and Quechuan, which share more than 20% of their reconstructed lexicon and which are also structurally extremely similar (Adelaar 1986, 2012; Heggarty 2005; Cerrón-Palomino 2008; Muysken 2012). The scarce unsystematic similarities not unequivocally due to diffusion that these two language groups share in their morphological forms and in their most basic vocabulary do not provide the necessary evidence to defend a hypothesis of genetic relationship. Lexical diffusion and language contact can account for almost all similarities between these two language groups. By contrast, two other pairs of lineages highlighted in this article (Harakmbut / Katukina, and Chiquitano / Macro-Jê) do meet the condition of systematic lexical similarity and phonetic correspondences in their basic vocabulary, which makes the case for their phylogenetic relatedness substantially stronger.
It can only be emphasized that South America constitutes an ideal laboratory for studying the effects of historical language contact. The history of language contact should play a central role in any reconstructive attempt. Illustrative examples of past or recent language contact can be found in the Vaupés area of the Brazilian-Colombian border area, where Arawakan and Tucanoan languages have interacted for a considerable time (Aikhenvald 2001, 2002), in the transitional area between the Peruvian Andes and the Amazon, where the Amuesha (Arawakan) language was transformed by lexical and phonological influence from a neighbouring Quechuan language (Adelaar 2006), and in the Central Andean highlands, where the Aymaran and Quechuan language lineages exhibit an extreme case of historical convergence (see above).

126 Willem F. H. Adelaar
13. Final word
In the previous pages I have tried to emphasize the importance of bilateral language comparison based on a critical qualitative analysis of carefully selected language material for the establishment of previously undetected phylogenetic relations. Several quantitative tools that have been developed in recent years can be helpful in many ways but are not necessarily equipped to deal with the issues of residual morphology and culturally motivated semantic shift. Historical linguists will not easily accept the validity of a phylogenetic relationship between languages that has been established on the sole basis of statistics. Such a relationship has to be clearly visible in the core vocabulary after a proper deconstructive analysis.
References
Adelaar, Willem F. H. 1986. “La relación quechua‑aru: Perspectivas para la separación del léxico”. Revista Andina 4:2.379–426. Centro de Estudios Rurales Andinos “Bartolomé de Las Casas”, Cuzco.
Adelaar, Willem F. H. 1989. Review of Greenberg (1987). Lingua 78:2–3.249–255. Adelaar, Willem F. H. 2000. “Propuesta de un nuevo vínculo genético entre dos grupos
lingüísticos indígenas de la Amazonía occidental: Harakmbut y Katukina”. Actas del I Congreso de Lenguas Indígenas de Sudamérica ed. by Luis Miranda Esquerre, Tomo II, 219– 236. Lima: Universidad Ricardo Palma, Facultad de Lenguas Modernas, Departamento Académico de Humanidades. Adelaar, Willem F. H. 2006. “The Quechua Impact in Amuesha, an Arawak Language of the Peruvian Amazon”. Grammars in Contact: A Cross-Linguistic Typology ed. by Alexandra Y. Aikhenvald & R. M. W. Dixon, 290–312. Oxford & New York: Oxford University Press. Adelaar, Willem F. H. 2008. “Relações externas do Macro-Jê: O caso do chiquitano”. Topicalizando Macro-Jê ed. by Stella Telles & Aldir Santos de Paula, 9–28. Recife: Nectar. Adelaar, Willem F. H. 2012. “Modeling Convergence: Towards a Reconstruction of the History of Quechuan-Aymaran Interaction”. Lingua 122.461–469. Aikhenvald, Alexandra Y. 2001. “Areal Diffusion, Genetic Inheritance, and Problems of Subgrouping: A North Arawak Case Study”. Areal Diffusion and Genetic Inheritance: Problems in Comparative Linguistics ed. by Alexandra Y. Aikhenvald & R. M. W. Dixon, 167– 194. Oxford: Oxford University Press. Aikhenvald, Alexandra Y. 2002. Language Contact in Amazonia. Oxford: Oxford University Press. Anjos Gonçalves da Silva, Zoraide dos. 2011. Fonologia e Gramática Katukina-Kanamari. Utrecht: Netherlands Graduate School of Linguistics (LOT). Brenzinger, Matthias, ed. 2007. Language Diversity Endangered. Berlin & New York: Mouton de Gruyter. Campbell, Lyle R. 1988. Review of Greenberg (1987). Language 64.591–615. Campbell, Lyle R. 1997. American Indian Languages: The Historical Linguistics of Native America. New York: Oxford University Press.

Searching for genetic links between the languages of South America 127
Campbell, Lyle R. 2004. Historical Linguistics: An Introduction (2nd edition). Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Campbell, Lyle R. 2012. “Classification of the indigenous languages of South America”. Campbell & Grondona, 59–166. Berlin: Mouton de Gruyter.
Campbell, Lyle R. 2013. Historical Linguistics: An Introduction (3rd edition). Edinburgh: University of Edinburgh Press.
Campbell, Lyle R. & Verónica M. Grondona. 2012. Indigenous Languages of South America: A Comprehensive Guide. Berlin: Mouton de Gruyter.
Cerrón-Palomino, Rodolfo M. 2008. Quechumara: estructuras paralelas del quechua y del aimara (2nd edition). La Paz: Universidad Mayor de San Simón, PROEIB Andes, Plural Editores.
Constenla Umaña, Adolfo, 1991. Las lenguas del área intermedia. Introducción a su estudio areal. San José: Editorial de la Universidad de Costa Rica.
Dillehay, Tom D., Gerardo Ardila Calderón, Gustavo Politis & Maria da Conceição de Moraes Coutinho Beltrão. 1992. “Earliest Hunters and Gatherers of South America”. Journal of World Prehistory 6:2.145–204.
Galeote Tormo, Jesús. 1993. Manityana auki besïro. Gramática moderna de la lengua chiquitana y vocabulario básico. Santa Cruz de la Sierra: Centro de Estudios Chiquitanos.
Gippert, Jost, Nikolaus P. Himmelmann & Ulrike Mosel, eds. 2006. Essentials of Language Documentation. Berlin: Mouton de Gruyter.
Greenberg, Joseph H. 1987. Language in the Americas. Stanford: Stanford University Press. Grenoble, Lenore A. & Lindsay J. Whaley. 1998. Endangered Languages. Language Loss and
Community Response. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. Hart, Raymond E. 1963. “Semantic Components of Shape in Amarakaeri Grammar”. Anthro-
pological Linguistics 5:9.1–7. Heggarty, Paul. 2005. “Enigmas en el origen de las lenguas andinas. Aplicando nuevas técnicas
a las incógnitas por resolver”. Revista Andina 40.9–80. Centro de Estudios Regionales Andinos “Bartolomé de Las Casas”, Cuzco. Holman, Eric W., Søren K. Wichmann, Cecil H. Brown, Viveka Villupilai, André Müller & Dik Bakker. 2008. “Explorations in Automatic Language Classification”. Folia Linguistica 42:3–4.331–354. Kaufman, Terrence S. 1990. “Language History in South America: What We Know and How to Know More”. Amazonian Linguistics: Studies in Lowland South American Languages ed. by Doris L. Payne, 13–73. Austin: University of Texas Press. Lohr, Marisa 1999. Methods for the genetic classification of languages. Ph.D. Dissertation, University of Cambridge, UK. Loukotka, Čestmír. 1968. Classification of South American Indian Languages. Los Angeles: UCLA, Latin American Center. Matisoff, James A. 1990. “On Megalocomparison”. Language 66:1.106–120. Matteson, Esther. 1972. “Proto-Arawakan”. Comparative Studies in Amerindian Languages ed. by Esther Matteson et al., 160–242. The Hague, Paris: Mouton. McMahon, April M. S. & Robert McMahon. 2005. Language Classification by Numbers. Oxford: Oxford University Press. Meira, Sérgio. 2000. A Reconstruction of Proto-Taranoan. Munich: LINCOM Europa. Moseley, Christopher, ed. 2010. Atlas of the World’s Languages in Danger (2nd edition). Paris: Éditions UNESCO.

128 Willem F. H. Adelaar
Muysken, Pieter C. 2012. “Modelling the Quechua-Aymara Relationship. Structural Features, Sociolinguistic Scenarios, and Possible Archaeological Evidence”. Archaeology and Language in the Andes. A Cross-Disciplinary Exploration of Prehistory. Proceedings of the British Academy 173 ed. by Paul Heggarty & David G. Beresford-Jones, 83–107. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Poser, William J. 1992. “The Salinan and Yurumanguí Data in Language in the Americas”. International Journal of American Linguistics 58:2.202–229.
Rankin, Robert L. 1992. Review of Greenberg (1987). International Journal of American Linguistics 58:3.324–351.
Ribeiro, Eduardo R. 2010. “Prefixos relacionais como evidência histórico-comparativa: Os casos Chiquitano e Jabutí”. Paper presented at the VIIth Macro-Jê Meeting. Brasília (19-10-2010).
Ribeiro, Eduardo R. & Hein G. A. van der Voort. 2010. “Nimuendajú Was Right: The Inclusion of the Jabutí Language Family in the Macro-Jê Stock”. International Journal of American Linguistics 76:4.517–570.
Ringe, Donald A. 1992. “On Calculating the Factor of Chance in Language Comparison”. Transactions of the American Philosophical Society 82:1.1–110.
Robins, Robert H. & Eugenius M. Uhlenbeck. 1991. Endangered Languages. Oxford, New York: Berg Publishers.
Rodrigues, Aryon D. 1986. Línguas brasileiras. São Paulo: Edições Loyola. Rodrigues, Aryon D. 1999. “Macro-Jê”. The Amazonian Languages ed. by R. M. W. Dixon &
Alexandra Y. Aikhenvald, 164–206. Cambridge, UK, New York: Cambridge University Press. Rodrigues, Aryon D. 2000. “ “Ge-Pano-Carib” x “Jê-Tupí-Karib”: sobre relaciones lingüísticas en Sudamérica”. Actas del I Congreso de Lenguas Indígenas de Sudamérica ed. by Luis Miranda Esquerre, Tomo I, 95–104. Lima: Universidad Ricardo Palma. Rodrigues, Aryon D. 2009. “A Case of Affinity Among Tupí, Karíb, and Macro-Jê”. Revista Brasileira de Lingüística Antropológica 1:1.137–162. Starostin, Sergei A. 1991. Altaiskaja problema i proiskhozhdenie japonskogo jazyka. Moscow: Nauka.

