3.2 The Quechuan language family

237

Onomatopoeic roots make up an important part of the Quechua lexicon and contribute greatly to the richness of expression of the language. Unfortunately, onomatopoeic words are often not considered as real words, a reason why they are not included in most of the dictionaries. For instance, in northern Jun´ın Quechua (San Pedro de Cajas) we ﬁnd: ha:kal=ha:kal-ya- ‘to pant’, parara- ‘the sound of engines’, pirpi-l ya=pirpi-r ‘moving like an arrow’, puqlulu- ‘the sound of heavy rain’, qic.ˇic.ˇi- ‘the sound of static electricity’, quc.ˇuc.ˇa- ‘the sound of gnashing teeth’, qur=qur-ya- ‘to coo (as pigeons do)’, and many, many more.

3.2.8 A sketch of an Ecuadorian Quechua dialect (Salasaca) Salasaca is a group of comunidades in the province of Tungurahua, central Ecuador, that together form a clearly deﬁned ethnic group, the Salasacas. This group is recognised as separate from neighbouring groups, and is often claimed to be a direct descendant of a community of Bolivian mitimaes in the popular tradition. However, the dialect spoken in Salasaca, though characteristic, closely resembles that of neighbouring groups in Tungurahua and the province of Cotopaxi.
The Quechua dialects of Ecuador are morphologically, syntactically and lexically quite similar. The main differences lie in a number of morphophonological processes that have affected the afﬁxes in particular. While a southern dialect such as Can˜ar is rather conservative, Salasaca Quechua has undergone most of the processes involved.
We will illustrate different morphosyntactic features of Ecuadorian Quechua, as well as the phonological characteristics of central dialects such as Salasaca Quechua, with a presentation and analysis of a folk tale, Mizˇi acˇku diablomunda ‘The terrible devil dog’.
1. nyawba-ga kawsa-sˇka sˇux cˇolo kay sixsiwayku nyan-bi ﬁrst-TO live-SD.3S one cholo this Sigsihuaico road-L ‘In earlier days a white man lived on the road to Sigsihuaico.’
2. cˇolo-ga awatero ga-sˇka cholo-TO water.guard be-SD.3S ‘This man was a water guard.’
3. sˇux phunzˇa yaku larka thuni-sˇka-da hapi-rga one day water ditch cave.in-SN-AC catch-PA.3S ‘One day the irrigation ditch caved in.’
While in sentences 2 and 3 we have verb-ﬁnal word order, the regular pattern in most Quechua varieties, sentence 1 shows a different pattern with the verb following the topic. Case marking is constituent ﬁnal: locative -bi in sentence 1 and accusative -da in 3. We notice the use of a -sˇka tense glossed as ‘sudden discovery’ in sentences 1 and 2, followed by past-tense -rga in 3. For the third person there is no overt subject agreement in either

238

3 The Inca Sphere

past tense, but there is in the present. Appositive nominal expressions such as sixsiwayku nyan in sentence 1 and yaku larka in sentence 3 are also head-ﬁnal. Sentence 2 contains an example of the copula, ga- in this variety of Quechua (ka- in Peruvian Quechua). In sentence 3 there is a case of a nominalisation, very frequent in Quechua, with the resultative nominaliser -sˇka (homophonous with the tense marker).
4. cˇi-munda ni-sˇka that-AB say-SD.3S ‘Therefore he said:’
5. ima-munda larka-ga thuni-gu-n-zˇa kay sixsiwayku cˇaka-bi-ga what-AB ditch-TO cave in-PR-3S-DL this Sigsihuaico bridge-L-TO ‘“Why is the ditch at the Sigsihuaico bridge caving in?”’
We notice in sentence 5 that question words tend to be fronted, and that elements marked with topic -ga can occur both at the beginning and at the end of the utterance.
6. cˇay zˇuzˇu tuta cˇapa-ki-ga, acˇku-ga rumi siki-bi siri-gu-sˇka ni-n that tender night watch-DS-TO, dog-TO stone bottom-L lie-PR-SD.3S say-3S ‘That evening while he was keeping watch, there was a dog lying asleep at the bottom of a stone, they say.’
7. yaku-ga thuni-sˇa gulun munda-sˇka water-TO cave.in-SS boink heap.up-SD.3S ‘Pouring in, the water came down with a bang.’
In sentence 6 we have the different subject adverbial subordination marker -ki (< *-kpi, Peruvian Quechua -pti), and in 7 the same subject marker -sˇa (<*-sˇpa). In sentence 6 furthermore, we notice the progressive marker -gu- (< *-ku-, Southern Peruvian Quechua -cˇka-).
8. cˇi-munda cˇolo-ga ni-sˇka that-AB cholo-TO say-SD.3S ‘Then the man said:’
9. kay acˇku-ga sˇux mizˇi-ku-ma-cˇari this dog-TO one terror-DI-EM-DU ‘“This dog must be a devil.”’
10. awatero-ga upazˇa-wa kucˇu-ya-sˇka water.guard-TO quietly-DI near-TF-SD.3S ‘The guard came closer quietly.’

3.2 The Quechuan language family

239

We notice an emphatic marker -ma in sentence 9, possibly from -mi+ari, and a diminutive -wa in 10, probably from wawa ‘child’. The ablative -munda is often attached to demonstratives that function as narrative sequencers, throughout the story.
11. cˇi-munda-ga sumirru-da zˇuxsˇi-cˇi-sˇka that-AB-TO hat-AC leave-CA-SD.3S ‘Then he took off his hat.’
12. sˇux rosariyo-da kunga-munda zˇuxsˇi-cˇi-sˇka acˇku-mun cˇura-cˇi-nga-bux one rosary-AC neck-AB leave-CA-SD.3S dog-to put-CA-FN-B ‘He took a rosary from his neck to put in on the dog.’
13. acˇku-ku-ga hatari-sˇka dog-DI-TO get.up-SD.3S ‘The dog jumped up.’
14. cˇi-munda-ga cˇolo-da kati-sˇa puri-sˇka-zˇa-mi that-AB-TO cholo-AC follow-SS walk-SD.3S-DL-AF ‘Then he just walked following the man.’
Very widespread is the same subject purposive -nga-bux in sentence 12; its different subjects pendant is -cˇun.
15. kayi-ndix tuta acˇku-ga swenyo-bi sˇita-sˇka cˇolo-mun next.day-IN night dog-TO dream-L throw-SD.3S cholo-AL ‘The next night the dog appeared to the man in a dream.’
16. nyuka kunga-munda kay rosariyo-da zˇuxsˇi-cˇi-ba-y I neck-AB this rosary-AC leave-CA-CS-IM.2S ‘“Please take this rosary off my neck.’
17. masˇna kucˇki-da ni-ngi how.much silver-AC say/want-2S ‘How much money do you want?’
In sentence 16 we notice that possession in Ecuadorian Quechua is not marked with person markers on the possessed noun, but with a preposed pronoun, marked genitive for all persons but the ﬁrst. The sufﬁx -ba, possibly derived from Peruvian Quechua -pu-wa ‘benefactive + ﬁrst-person object’, is used to soften imperatives and to mark deference. Sentence 17 shows the use of the verb ni- ‘say’ in the meaning of ‘want’, which derives from its use in a verbal periphrastic construction (‘I say I’ll eat’ becomes ‘I want to eat’; cf. Muysken 1977).
18. baul kucˇki-da ni-ki-bisˇ ku-sˇa-zˇa-mi trunk silver-AC say-DS-AD give-F.1S-DL-AF ‘Even if you want a trunk of silver, I’ll give it to you.’

240

3 The Inca Sphere

19. uku hunda-da ni-ki-bisˇ masˇna-da ni-ki-bisˇ nyuka-ga ku-sˇa-zˇa-mi room full-AC say-DS-AD how.much-AC say-DS-AD I-TO give-F.1S-DL-AF ‘Even if you want a room full, whatever you want, I’ll give you.”’
20. acˇku-ga swenyo-bi sˇina-mi ni-sˇka dog-TO dream-L thus-AF say-SD.3S ‘The dog said in the dream.’

The use of the verb ku- ‘give’ in sentences 18 and 19 without object marking exempliﬁes the much reduced object marking in this variety of Quechua, either completely gone or reduced to the ﬁrst-person object marker -wa. As in many Quechua varieties, the combination of additive -bisˇ (Peruvian Quechua -pas/-pis) and the adverbial subordinator yields an indeﬁnite or even concessive interpretation (‘even though’). We see in sentence 19 that question words double as indeﬁnite quantiﬁers. In sentence 19 the adjective (presumably) hunda ‘full’ follows the noun uku ‘room’ (as it does in English, for that matter), but in general attributive adjectives precede nouns.

21. utun maki ga-sˇa-mi mana pudi-sˇka rosariyo-da zˇuxsˇi-cˇi-nga-bux stump hand be-SS-AF not can-SD.3S rosary-AC leave-CA-FN-B ‘Being stump-handed he could not take the rosary off.’
22. kayi-ndix phunzˇa awatero-ga acˇku-da riku-sˇa ni-sˇka next.day-IN day water.guard-TO dog-AC see-SS say-SD.3S ‘The next day the water guard, upon seeing the dog, said:’
23. acˇku, ima-sˇa nyuka-da swenyo-cˇi-ngi dog what-SS I-AC dream-CA-2S ‘“Dog, with what in mind do you make me dream?”’

Sentence 21 contains an example of the innovative modal + inﬁnitive combinations in Ecuadorian Quechua, with -nga-bux used on the complement. While grammar books describe Quechua as having both a negative adverb mana ‘not’ and a concomitant negative particle -cˇu on the verb, the latter is absent in sentence 21. In sentence 23 we see the ease with which nouns, in this case a Spanish borrowing, are incorporated into causative verbs with causative -cˇi-. Notice ﬁnally the verbal use of the question word ima ‘what’.
24. bweno rosariyo-da zˇuxsˇi-cˇi-sˇa pero nyuka-mun kucˇki-da ku-ngi good rosary-AC leave-CA-F.1S but I-to silver-AC give-F.2S ‘“Good, I will take off the rosary but you will give me money.”’

3.2 The Quechuan language family

241

25. sˇina ni-ki-ga acˇku-ga cˇay tuta-zˇa-dix kucˇki-da pay-bux wasi-bi cˇura-sˇka
thus say-DS-TO dog-TO that night-DL-EM silver-AC he-G house-L place-SD.3S
‘When the man had said this, the dog put the money in his house that very night.’
26. kayi-ndix phunzˇa kucˇki-da riku-sˇa awatero-ga rosariyo-da zˇuxsˇi-cˇi-sˇka
next.day-IN day silver-AC see-SS water.guard-TO rosary-AC leave-CA-SD.3S
‘The next day the water guard, after seeing the money, took off the rosary.’
In sentences 24–26 we see, as before, the very characteristic alternation of same subject -sˇa/different subject -ki marking to indicate the perspective in the story, forever shifting between the two protagonists. In sentence 24 we see two examples of the only category of Spanish borrowings which is at all frequent, next to single nouns: bweno ‘good’ and pero ‘but’, which serve as discourse markers. In sentence 25 there is an example of the genitive marker -bux (Peruvian Quechua -pa), which has emerged through syncretism with the benefactive (Peruvian Quechua -paq).
27. cˇi khipa acˇku-ga akapana tuku-sˇka that after dog-TO whirlwind become-SD.3S ‘After that the dog became a whirlwind.’
28. gulun-zˇa ruru-sˇa kutupagzi-mun ri-sˇka bang-DL make-SS Cotopaxi-AL go-SD.3S ‘With a bang it went to Cotopaxi.’
29. cˇasˇna-mi awatero riku tuku-sˇka thus-AF water.guard rich become-SD.3S ‘Thus the water guard became rich.’
30. yaku larka-ga na kutin thuni-rga-cˇu water ditch-TO not again cave.in-PA.3S-NE ‘And the water channel did not cave in again.’
In sentence 27 there is a postposition, khipa ‘after’. Location-specifying postpositions, such as rumi siki-bi ‘at the bottom of the stone’ in sentence 6, are particularly frequent in Quechua.
This story is typical of many similar tales, juxtaposing Christianity with paganism (Cotopaxi is one of the sacred mountains, but had been transformed into a gate of hell in the colonial period) and untamed nature with (agri)culture, and containing the motif of a poor man making good.

242

3 The Inca Sphere

Above we have limited ourselves to grammatical features. The text also exempliﬁes many of the phonological characteristics of Salasaca Quechua. These include:
a. voicing of stops after vowels and sonorants across morpheme boundaries, hence: papa-ta > papa-da ‘potato-AC’ pantiyon-pi > pantiyon-bi ‘cemetery-L’
Notice that only afﬁxes are affected productively by this rule, and even among the afﬁxes we have reciprocal -nuku (< *-naku), not *-nugu or *-nagu (though -nau in fairly close-by Tena lowland Quechua), next to -rga (<*-rka) ‘past’, -nga (<*-nka) ‘inﬁnitive’, etc.
b. raising of /a/ to [i] or [u]: -man > -mun -manta > -munda -pak > -pux -rak > -rix -pasˇ > -pisˇ -tak > -tix
This rule is obligatory in afﬁxes, but applies optionally in afﬁxed lexemes as well: kayi-ndix (<*kaya-ntik) ‘next’ and ruru-sˇa (<*rura-sˇpa) ‘making’.
c. optional, though very frequent, deletion of the ﬁnal stop of the afﬁx in word-ﬁnal position: pay-pak > pay-bu ‘her/his’, ‘for her/him’ may-man > may-mu ‘where to’.
d. consonant cluster simpliﬁcation in some afﬁxes, yielding -kpi > -ki ‘different subject adverbial subordinator’, and -sˇpa > -sˇa ‘same subject adverbial coordinator’.
e. vowel cluster simpliﬁcation, yielding mizˇa-y > mizˇi ‘terror’ and tuku-y > tuki ‘all’, as well as wicˇay > icˇi ‘above’ and wira > ira ‘fat’.
f. the palatal zˇ is pronounced as a palatal affricate before voiceless stops, yielding kuzˇki > kucˇki and azˇku > acˇku.

3.2.9 A sketch of a Peruvian Quechua dialect (Pacaraos) Pacaraos Quechua is spoken in the village of Pacaraos, a district capital situated near the upper reaches of the Chancay river at an altitude of more than 3,000 metres (for further details see Adelaar 1982, 1986a). The Chancay river waters the Paciﬁc slopes of the Andes. The district of Pacaraos, which comprises several more villages, is part of the province of Huaral, belonging to the department of Lima.
Pacaraos lies on the border of a Quechua-speaking area (on the cordillera side) and a Hispanicised area (the lower Chancay valley). The dialect known as Pacaraos Quechua

