Names of Pano groups and the endings -bo, nawa and huaca

UniverSOS 5, 2008 9-369

Names of Pano groups and the endings -bo, nawa and huaca
Maria S. Aguiar*
<aguiar@letras.ufg.br> Universidade Federal de Goiás

Abstract
The present paper will analyze the names with which the indigenous groups are recognized in literature, giving special attention to those names that end in -náwa, bo and huaca. The analysis of the Pano groups aims at understanding their possible meanings and raising hypotheses about their motivation. By considering the meaning and the contextualization that motive them, it will be possible to obtain more elements to comprehend the low acceptance of these names by the Pano groups. Our discussion does not aim at promoting change in these Pano group names. What we propose here is to present the issue from a linguistic and historic point of view which will allow scholars and the Pano groups to give their opinions about these names. Key words: Pano groups, indigenous names, toponymy, the nahua / nawa, auto-ethnonymy.
Resumen
En el presente artículo analizaremos los nombres con los cuales los grupos nativos son reconocidos en la literatura. Daremos mayor atención a los grupos de la familia Pano. Trataremos de observar etimológicamente esos nombres con las terminaciones náwa, bo y nahua. Procuraremos comprender la razón por la cual muchos de los nativos no aceptan de modo natural el nombre que a ellos les es atribuido. Sin embargo, no pretendemos proponer cambios de ningún tipo; buscamos solo que los estudiosos de los grupos nativos, en especial, de los Pano, discutan con esos grupos el tema de su nombre. Creemos que por medio de la discusión de ese problema con los nativos se garantizará que los dejemos de ignorar y desconocer. Palabras clave: Grupos pano; nombres nativos; toponimia, nahua / nawa, auto-etnonimia.
* We wish to thank NWO (The Netherlands Organization of Scientiﬁc Research) and the Universiteit Leiden – Faculteit de Letteren for their ﬁnancial and logistic support, which has made possible the realization of this research.

10

Maria S. Aguiar

INTRODUCTION
The present paper analyzes the names with which the Pano groups are recognized in literature, giving special attention to those names that end in -bo, nawa and huaca.
Our study of the names of the Pano groups aims at uncovering their possible meanings and it proposes hypotheses concerning their motivation. By considering the meaning and the contextualization that have motivated their creation it will be easier to understand the low acceptance of these names by the Pano groups.
The proposed analysis is preceded by a discussion about the act of naming, followed by an explanation of the motivations that determine the naming of these Pano groups in general. In this way, we will be able to reveal some common characteristics of the name-giving and of the probable conditions in which the naming of the different groups took place.
In our discussion we will focus on the expressions -bo, nawa and huaca talking into account their different phonological and orthographic variation their origin, and attribution to a given groups of the Pano family.
In addition, we will also consider the other names of Pano groups that have not received these endings. These names will be classiﬁed according to their origin Pano or non-Pano in which the last class is subdivided into names of Romance-Tupi, Tupi and Quechua origins.
As result of this discussion, we hope to make a contribution towards clarifying the terminology of the names of the Pano groups, and consequently create a ﬁrmer basis for the discussion about the names that should be used to designate the different Pano groups a question that continuous to be polemical. We will not, however, defend here any changes in designating the Pano groups. Our only purpose is to present the issue from a linguistic and historical point of view which will allow specialist as well as the Pano peoples to decide for themselves, whether or not they with stay with the existing designations, or not.
1. NAMING AND/OR NICKNAMING
With regard to the act of naming one could ask why it is that almost all human groups give individual names to their members, or what is the motivation behind the choice of a name for some individual or for a group of people? The probable answer to the ﬁrst question is that we need to refer to individuals and groups of individuals. The answer to the second question is of a less general nature. For example, the choice of a name for a child may express the hope for a characteristic quality or it can simply result from a family tradition or express a conformation to fashion.1
1. Regarding individuals, in history there are many examples of people who became known only by their nicknames. A well known case is that of Claudius from Latin claudicare from which come the Portu-

Names of Pano groups and the endings -bo, nawa and huaca

11

Naming is different in the case of a people. If the name by which the group calls itself is unknown often outsiders will refer to the group by way of some characteristic feature. When name the group designates itself becomes known, it may happen that the auto-designation replaces the name earlier proposed by outsiders.
Regarding the Pano indigenous groups, the names attributed to them by outsiders were inspired by varying factors, ranging from fashion, as in the case of the Katukina, to nicknames based on jokes, or misinterpretation of indigenous words, which create embarrassment when analyzed, as is the case of the Chácobo and others that will be discussed in this paper.
Most of these nicknames are still in use nowadays. Our analysis of these names will make it understandable why the Pano groups do not wish to be called by these named.
In the remaining of this paper we will address the different motivations for the names that been proposed, their meaning and the conditions under which they possibly began to be used.
2. MOTIVATIONS FOR THE PANO ANTHROPONYMS
We have interested in the Pano names for many years especially because of their uniformity. We became even more interested after we heard the testimonies of Pano leaders on this theme. For this reason, we gathered some data that could help us outline of the Pano naming process. We only considered the names that they are already known by. We hope this outline will permit us to arrive at an identiﬁcation of the principal characteristics of the Pano names.
As we stated earlier, what normally motivates the name-giving to groups is some external characteristics that calls the attention. In the case of the Pano groups, the most relevant four were selected. They are as follows: oral expression, body markings, artifacts, and the needs of non-indigenous people.
The case of the Shipibo illustrates the motivation by oral expression. They were named Chama. This group received this name from the indigenous groups of the region who in times past had been their enemies. According to the information that was given by a Shipibo [»tSãma]2 leader, it is an expression that comes from [hi:»tSãma], used to announce
guese verb claudicar (XVII Century) «to limp, not to be ﬁrm on the legs». This name was given to an important ﬁgure at the time of the Roman Empire. This person was short and corpulent who has a problem with his legs, a representative characteristic for those who knew him. He was thus nicknamed Claudius ‘the one who limps’, ‘a cripple’. (There are quotes in Basseto-2001: 117) about the decision of a character, «Claudius Pulcher, a member of the Claudii clan and an enemy of Cicero who began to call himself Clodius when he lost his patrician status and became a plebeian». In Ilari (1999). 2. Zingg (1998: 4) presents various deﬁnitions for chama. We deduce, however, that they came after the meaning suggested by the Shipibo. There is one meaning that comes close to what we consider to be

12

Maria S. Aguiar

the beginning of a war. It was cried out by the leader and repeated in chorus by the other warriors who then proceeded to attack. Needless to say, the word chama is considered an embarrassment by all those of the group since it refers to occasions of extreme anger and tension such as that of an inter-group battle.
The Remo group offers an example of an anthroponym motivated by a body mark. The Spanish named the group in this way because of the tattoos with a design that resembled a paddle (remo in Spanish).
The name of the Korubo3 group is a perfect example of the fact that the name of the group is given due to a characteristic element. The Matis named the Korubos because of their grey colouring which was acquired by the use of a clay put on the body. In some Pano languages we ﬁnd for koru the meaning ‘without paint’ and ‘greyish’.
Still discussing this group, we can add the pertinent information that illustrates anthroponyms motivated by artifacts. The group was known initially as Caceteiro due to the fact that its members used a type of club which in the region was known as cacete. On a certain occasion,4 some non-indigenous peoples were killed with this instrument which was used to smash the heads of the victims. However, with the help of the Matis, the group stopped being called Caceteiro (the ones with a club) and became known as Korubo.
Another example of a name motivated by the use of artifacts is the case of the Katukina group, which became known by other groups of the region as [Bi«tSi»nawa] because the members used a leather [Bi»tSi] on their backs as a shield during battles.
The same group took on the name Katukina arbitrarily since it did not originally have a generic name. This group has speciﬁc names only for their clans. However, at each contact with «white» civilization, a name was demanded from them and as the term katukina was used in the region, the group adopted it as their name. This term certainly was brought to the region in Acre State by travelers who must have encountered the original indigenous group named Katukina in the Amazon. Thus the Katukinas from Acre received their names from the non-indigenous peoples.
Besides these motivations, others that result in the naming of groups are related to animals and plants and still others to expressions that mean ‘people’, ‘men’. These names referring to Pano groups will be treated here when we discuss the motivations and speciﬁcally the endings -bo, nawa and huaca.

the original one, «yell», «disquiet». In Key (1968: 53) there is the suggestion of proximity to chama and c‡ama ‘to see’ in Tacana. In this article we do not assume that any of these are the etymology of the word chama. 3. Speakers of a Pano language; the members understand a little of the language of the Matis and of the Marubo. The members of the Korubo group want to keep their isolation even from other indigenous peoples. 4. A Marubo woman told us that this fact was a consequence of an invasion by non-indigenous peoples in the area of the Korubo, which resulted in deaths on both sides.

Names of Pano groups and the endings -bo, nawa and huaca

13

We can state that the problem of the names by which these groups are called is relevant to scholars and to indigenous peoples as we have mentioned on other occasions (Aguiar 1993: 141), just as other authors have done. We mention Erikson (1992: 242) who states, «In a general way, the Pano refuse the designations by which they are known, on the one hand, due to their exogenous characteristics and on the other hand due to their generally pejorative characteristics». We can state, considering some testimonies by the indigenous people themselves,5 that it is necessary that researchers revise, along with each group, the names that identify them in the literature. Without a doubt, this revision would be complex, but the result would be of great relevance to the groups involved.
Whilst it is not possible to revise the anthropnyms, we will analyze the names of the Pano group and prioritize those ethnonyms that are followed by -bo, nawa and huaca and their phonological variations.
3. ENDINGS OF THE PANO GROUP
In the literature, the speakers of Pano languages are recognized by their names which have uniform endings such as -Bo ~ -bo ~ -bu ~ -vo ~ -vu ~ -va and náwa ~ nawá ~ nahua ~ naua ~ dawa. From this we hypothesize that these names were given by the groups themselves or by groups or peoples who knew a language of Pano origin.
Another observation that we veriﬁed is that the names attributed to the Pano groups with this terminology -bo and nawa refer to animals, plants or something that characterizes them as we mentioned earlier. We can illustrate with some examples such as Cashibo the cashi (‘the bats’), Conibo the coni (‘the eels’), Chacobo the chaco (‘the mean ones / pigs’), Korubo the koro (‘the grey ones / without paint’), Shetebo the shete (‘the hawks’), Shipibo the shibi (‘the soin monkeys’), Marubo the maru (‘the bald ones’), Panobo the pano (‘the armadillos’), Pisquibo the isqui (‘the calm ones’) and others that we will discuss later in this paper.
These names almost always have the expressions bo, nawa or huaca added. It is important to remember that there are exceptions, since other names of groups which also are of Pano origin, do not have these endings and there exist other names of nonPano origin.
We will consider the names of these groups, beginning with those that end in -bo and its variations. We will then analyze the expression nawa and its possible variations and ﬁnally we will consider the names ending in huaca. And to conclude, we will review what we have presented with a discussion about the names of Pano origin and those of non-Pano origin.

5. A Shipibo leader in 1987 asked for our support in removing the name Chama from the restaurant in the airport at Pucallpa, Peru.

14

Maria S. Aguiar

3.1 The expression -bo

The Pano groups can be easily identiﬁed by the endings of their names, one of which is the expression bo. It is important to clarify that this expression has variations due to the phonological and/or morphological system of the language of each group. The possibilities in the variations of bo are: va, vu, vo, Bo, hu, fo and no. Any of these forms can be found in the literature, as an ending in a name of the Pano groups. Whether the form is a morpheme or not also is a result of the structural particularity of the languages of each group. In this way, it is necessary to take on a base form for the time being for didactic reasons as a free element and not needing the preceding hyphen.
It is possible to state that in the majority of the Pano languages studied, this expression signiﬁes the pluralization of the Name (from now on N) to which it appears postponed or sufﬁxed according to each case.6 In other words, bo can be translated into English as «the Ns», the article coming before the pluralized name, but as indigenous names are not pluralized following English rules and as there are no articles in the Pano family languages, we can say that it is a pluralizing expression of N. There is a small divergence between the languages as far as the application of this pluralizer. In some, it is only permitted with Ns that have human or parts of the human body as referents, whereas in others it is permitted with Ns that have non-human referents. In Katukina, in particular, it appears with parts of non-human animals, but with diverse meanings, that is, it speciﬁes a certain part (for example, kamã ‘dog / wild cat’, but kamâ-Bu ‘dog’s eggs’ and not ‘the dogs’).
Nevertheless, in all Pano languages,7 which have this expression, it refers to plurality. Therefore, in all these languages, bo pluralizes the N that immediately precedes it. In the case of the name of groups, bo resulted in the identiﬁcation taken on by the literature, showing the pluralizing of N as we can see below:

Cacataibo Cashibo Conibo Chacobo8 Korubo Shetebo Shipibo

the cacat-ai the cashi the coni the chaco the koro the shete the shipi

(the real men) (the bats) (the eels) (the mean ones9 / pigs) (the grey ones / without pain)10 (the hawks) (the soin monkeys)

6. The expression bo in katukina is /Bu/ and syntactically is an elliptic capable of substituting the subject if it is plural. It can also suffer alterations to /Bu/ when the plural subject is an ergative with an -n usually added. The same applies to Marubo and other groups in which the expressions refers to the plural.
7. Key (1968: 102) says that bo is ‘carry’, ‘take’ in Shipibo-Conobo and in Chama (op. cit., p. 88) it is ‘cloud’, ‘shadow’.
8. Zingg (1998: 93) says, «Chacobo = el chancho» and Abreu (1914: 600), «panô: armadillo-canastra; midwife».
9. For Abreu (1914: 615), «txakabô: bad». 10. Abreu (1914: 529 and 582).

Names of Pano groups and the endings -bo, nawa and huaca

15

Marubo Panobo11 Pisquibo

the maru the pano the pisqui

(the bald ones) (the armadillos) (the calm ones)12

As far as the varieties of this pluralizer are concerned, bo is the most common form. We ﬁnd ba in some examples, such as in Shipi-ba, but this variety is less common. We believe that this variation was motivated by the structure of the Romance languages, Portuguese and/or Spanish, that show word gender, such as «a lingua» («lingua» = language and has feminine word gender, thus «a»). In these two languages, the oscillation between the vowels o and u is natural when they are unstressed and in ﬁnal position. In various Pano languages in any position they are not phonemes, but only phones. That is, in the majority of the Pano languages, there are two phones [o] and [u] that correspond to one phoneme /o/ or /u/.
As far as the alteration between v, B and b, it is explained by the phonetic chart of each language and possibly by the referential phonetic facility. In other words, even the native speakers of a minority language approximate their pronunciation and/or written language to the majority language. Groups that live in Brazil and the Brazilian researchers hear the pronunciation of v, whilst the non-Brazilian researchers who know Spanish and the indigenous peoples who have been to school and follow the written alphabet, use the pronunciation [B] due to the Spanish language. The same occurs with the expression nawa. It is found in written Spanish as nahua. This will be explained in more detail later on in this text.
Returning to the question of the two written languages/pronunciation, we emphasize that the [B] is found in the Pano languages and Spanish, but not in Portuguese. For this reason there is a divergence in its writing. As such, in older texts in Portuguese it is found as v, whereas in Spanish texts it is found as B.
Another important issue to be noticed is the fact that in the proposals for writing the indigenous languages, it is common to utilize the alphabet of the speakers’ national language. As the speakers of the Pano languages are located in territories that speak Portuguese and in others that speak Spanish, it is natural that in certain cases v was chosen and in others B to represent /b/ which explains the divergence in the writing of the nominal pluralizing expression Bo.
The necessity to register the names in the past is the most relevant point. Naturally the alphabet of the national language of each country was used. In Brazil there is only v, so [B] - /B/ → v and it is in this way that the names with /Bo/ are written vo in Portuguese.

11. According to Navarro (1927), pano is «ai» related to lament, pain; according to Tessmann (1999: 58), pano is ‘giant armadillo’.
12. According to Montag (1973: 149), pes-ki is ‘to be calm’. However, for Abreu (1914: 601), «pixk): ‘a tickle, to tickle’»; and «pix: preﬁx that indicates waist, rib, armpit». Pisqui is the name of a river in Peru.

16

Maria S. Aguiar

Another variety of vo that appears less frequently is the expression va and even less frequently vos, for example in the word «Shipivos» (cf. Colini 1884: 531). The ﬁrst form, va, follows the same reasoning as ba and the other variant, vos, is justiﬁed by the use of the plural Portuguese morpheme which is inadequate, as the Pano languages use another morpheme. Another aggravating circumstance for this expression vos is in respect to the ABA (Brazilian Association of Anthropologists) convention which does not pluralize indigenous group names as they are non-Portuguese expressions and ought to always be treated in Portuguese texts as foreign expressions.
As far as the variant hu is concerned, it is used by the Yawanawá as a pluralizer. However, it is a non-existent ending amongst the Pano anthroponyms. The expression no was only applied to the name of the Cashibo13 group and only rarely. It also refers to plurality because it originates from the lexical item noki, which means ‘we’ in many pano languages. The fact of not ﬁnding certiﬁcation of the other varieties of vo is one more piece of evidence that the names by which the groups are known are not the result of self-naming. Perhaps the group itself did not even know or participate in the deﬁnition of its name.
From what we have pointed out about the expression bo, theoretically it is possible to ﬁnd in the literature names of Pano groups with a certain variation following the phonological chart of each language. We chose the name of the Korubo group randomly, only to illustrate the possible variations of bo. In this way, hypothetically we could have: korubo, koruba, koruvo, koruva, koruhu, kurofo and koruno. This would cause surprise initially in the non-indigenous peoples, however it shows a phonological coherence with each of the Pano languages, pointing at a possible participation of the indigenous people in the naming of their group.
Following we will discuss the nawa terminology as we view its meaning, origin and the varieties of the expression, besides speculating on the participation of the Pano groups in choosing the names.
3.2 The expression nawa
Amongst the Pano groups there is a considerable number that are identiﬁed by names with the lexical item nawa added. This characteristic of the name, just like bo, creates a facilitating uniformity for researchers since when we initially sought information about these groups and languages, one of the directions chosen was the ending of the names of

13. Besides these variations, there is –nõ that Tessmann (1999: 70) presents as equivalent in meaning to nawa for the Cashibo and which alternates with cashinnõ. We do not agree with the author as we believe that it is no and not nõ, but the latter has a semantic relation with bo since it refers back to nu «we», according to the author. Tessmann must be relatining the pronoun nu that comes from nukÆ «we» with plurality.

Names of Pano groups and the endings -bo, nawa and huaca

17

these groups in bo or nawa. There are at least 27 names that end in nawa, conﬁrmed or not as being of the Pano groups, and at least 10 ending in bo.
The lexical item nawa, just like bo, are of Pano origin and also have alterations in its form. These alterations are due to the phonological chart of each Pano language, with the same mechanisms as those shown when we discussed the variant forms of bo.
In defense of our statement that nawa is an expression originally from Pano, we count on the fact that we found this expression in various Pano languages. This led us to believe that this statement is not new, since this lexical item is located in various research papers including classics such as that of Capistrano de Abreu in 1914 about the Kaxinawá language, Tessman in 1930, which is a large-scale ethnography about groups and languages of Peru including various Pano languages and other research papers such as the ethnography by Signorini in 1968.
Following we will see what we found in the Pano literature about the lexical item nawa, beginning with the variations in meaning and characteristics of the groups to justify certain divergences in meaning.
3.2.1 The meanings of nawa
Amongst the Pano languages that have the lexical item nawa, we observed various meanings. Some researchers deﬁne it as «people», others as «enemy» and there also meanings referring to colours and animals. To deepen the discussion, we will point out these meanings and the languages where they are present to, afterwards, justify them from speciﬁc causes for each group and language.
In statements found in ﬁeld research, we came across various deﬁnitions for the lexical item nawa. Amongst the Jamináwa-Arara the item is deﬁned as «non-indigenous», whilst the Nukini say that it refers to a «wild pig». For the Náwa group this item refers to «native», in the sense of the indigenous person who lived in the forests before the arrival of the non-indigenous peoples.
However, in a research of the literature, we found that in Capanahua, Loos (1969) states that nahua refers to «people». In Shipibo we have the meaning of «foreigners» as Valenzuela (2000: 02) states, «... Los “mestizos” (monolingues hispano-hablantes) son llamados nawa «foráneo», y el idioma castellano es conocido como nawa-n joi ‘lengua de los forasteros’».14 According to Armentia (1898: 58) the term referred to «enemy». However, more distinct than the others is what is found in Chacobo. In this language, the item is taken by Prost (1967: 352) as referring to action and when it receives sufﬁxed hi, becoming hi-nawa, its meaning is ‘what?’, ‘how?’.
In Panobo and Amahuaca, nawa is translated by a referent that is distant from the name of the group. Key (1968: 54 and 94) gives the translation for nawa, in these two
14. «...The ‘mestizos’ (monolingual Spanish speakers) are called nawa ‘foreigners’ and the Spanish language is known as nawa-n that is ‘the language of the foreigners’».

18

Maria S. Aguiar

languages, as «blue colour» and «green colour». Yet, for some authors, there are other meanings in the Panobo language for this term, besides these that were shown.
For example, Tessmann (1999: 58) speaks of nawa in the following terms: «Las tribus vecinas por lo general son denominadas con preferencia como náwua = indígenas, con el resabio de “salvajes”».15 This author continues at another moment saying that, «A la palabra nahua = ‘indígena’ en chama corresponde el nõ en cashibo. Entre ellos, no tiene la connotación de “salvaje”. En un dialecto signiﬁca ‘hombre’ en general y parece que se deriva del radical no, nu = ‘nosotros’» (1999: 70).16
In the Kaxinawá language, nawa corresponds to ‘people’, ‘folk’ whilst in Katukina, its meaning is ‘scar’, ‘mark’. When it occurs juxtaposed to the right of a name to refer to the Katukina clans, nawa is interpreted similarly to the meaning in the Kaxinawá language and others, as «people».
To summarize what we have discussed, we present the names of the Pano languages with the deﬁnitions attributed to the lexical item nawa as were found in the sources researched:

Amahuaca Chacobo Jaminawa-Arara Nukini Shipibo Panobo Chama Náwa Capanahua Kaxinawá Katukina

«green colour», «blue colour» «act of» «non-indigenous» «wild pig» «foreigners» (foráneo y mestizos) «savage», «indigenous», «blue/green colours» «we (=no)» «native» «people» «people/folk» «scar/mark», «people»

In order to be able to explain these different deﬁnitions attributed to the item nawa, in the next section, we will go over various arguments ranging from questions about the use or not of the native language to others of an anthropological and historical nature.

3.2.2 Justiﬁcations for the meanings of nawa
Because of the existence of various possible translations for nawa, it is necessary to investigate all of them. We will not, however, discuss the meanings ‘colour green’, ‘colour blue’ and ‘the act of ’ as we understand that they are not a part of our proposal, which is to study the expression nawa as it relates to the names of groups.

15. «The tribes are called preferentially náwua = indigenous with the salvo of ‘savages’». 16. «To the word nahua = indigenous in chama corresponds to nõ in cashibo. Amongst them, it does not
have the connotation of savage. In one dialect, it means “man” in general and appears to derive from the radical no, nu = we».

Names of Pano groups and the endings -bo, nawa and huaca

19

As such, we can say that the Jamináwa-Arara deﬁned nawa as «non-indigenous», probably due to the intense familiarity with speakers of Portuguese, for it is as indigenous people that these speakers deﬁne the Jamináwa-Arara in the region.
In the speciﬁc case of the Nukini group, we are sure that it is a natural interchange due to disuse, but nevertheless incorrect, that is [y] in the place of [n] in the minimal pairs [nawá] and [yawá]. This last word refers to «wild pig» in various Pano languages. But probably [yawá] in Nukin would be [nawá] as in other Pano languages.
We point out that the Nukini and the Jamináwa-Arara spoke Portuguese for over 80 years which can justify these deﬁnitions for nawa and at the same time explain what caused the distance from the original meaning of nawa in these languages, following the analysis that we propose.
To explain the meaning that the semantic content «savage» presents, we can go to the so-called «civilized» indigenous people who collaborated with the non-indigenous people in «pacifying» indigenous groups. Since the identity of the «civilized» indigenous groups was stolen, they began naming reluctant indigenous groups as «savage», «wild» because they rejected the process of integration.
In this way, we heard various statements by indigenous people both old and young that illustrate this concept. Some of these statements are: «Today we are not wild, we are all Brazilians»;17 another pertinent statement is
Here we have some wild Indians, they are all savages. We’re afraid of them, because they don’t want to have anything to do with the whites or us. A lot of us didn’t want to see them. My grandfather told me that the whites treated the Indians badly, and for this they wanted to stay hidden in the forest;18 –and also–, Here there were a lot of nawas, but they kill a lot of them. Today, there still be wild Indians, but it isn’t easy to see them. Even we are afraid of them.19
From these statements, we can easily deduce that these so called «savages» or «wild Indians» are taken for «enemies», since they represent danger to the non-indigenous people and to those indigenous peoples who have become allies of the non-indigenous.
As such, it is possible that in the Pano languages that translate nawa as «savage», «wild», «enemy», such translations had their origins amongst the non-indigenous peoples, due to the conﬂicts that occurred with the indigenous peoples. In the same way probably the translations of «foreigner» and «mestiço» came from the indigenous collaborators who joined the non-indigenous peoples out of fear of the «unknown ones» and these terms were used to refer to the indigenous peoples when speaking to the non-indigenous.
17. Mai Katukina (Sr. Baia) who was 65 years of age in May 1984, telling about the massacre of Indigenous peoples in the Juruá region of Acre State.
18. Nilton Costa de Oliveira (67 years old) of the Náwa group (May 2004) commenting on the reluctant indigenous peoples that sometimes go near his village and do not make contact with the Náwa group.
19. Paulo Nukini (30 years old) in July 2002, commenting on the indigenous peoples who do not want to make contact.

20

Maria S. Aguiar

Our hypothesis came about from the fact that various indigenous groups only made contact due to the contribution of these indigenous «collaborators» who used various strategies to make the «non-indigenous» more «similar» to the indigenous peoples for these groups. To use nawa to refer to the non-indigenous was a way of containing all the differences that existed between the indigenous and on-indigenous peoples in one term.
Another important fact that reinforces this hypothesis about the term nawa being an internal expression to Pano is that it refers back to the clan names20 of various Pano groups. These names, without a shadow of a doubt, were given by the group itself. All of them end with the term nawa. In the case of the Katukina group, the names of these clans are Varinawa ‘people of the sun’, Satanawa ‘people of the otter’, Nainawa ‘people of the sky’, Waninawa ‘people of the pupunha palm’, Numanawa ‘people of the juriti’ and Kamanawa ‘people of the wild cat’.
We can assume that there is no possibility of these names having been «nicknames» given by non-indigenous peoples and still less by «civilized» indigenous peoples. They are completely of the responsibility of the group itself. As such, we can feel safe in stating that nawa, besides originating in Pano, remits back to the identity of someone and or a group of people with certain previously established characteristics.
After these observations on deﬁnitions of nawa as referring to «people» and «folk» we will now go on to those that mean «identiﬁcation». And to be able to handle these deﬁnitions we will relate them to «scar» and «mark» as deﬁned by the Katukina who, besides understanding the word in this way, also add the meaning ‘people’ to nawa when the expression is mentioned together with the name of its clans.
In this way, we will seek, amongst these three meanings of nawa, the one which we can assume to be responsible for the generation of the others. In other words, we will only verify the original meaning of the item nawa.
3.2.3 The origin of the meaning of nawa
As we observe the meanings of nawa, two groups of meaning are immediately apparent: those that are of a wider focus and those of a more restricted focus, in other words, on the one hand there is the deﬁnition «people», «folk» and on the other «scar», «mark». This observation takes us to the following question: which of the meanings theoretically could have come ﬁrst? In other words, which could be a base term? It seems quite possible that one of these meanings appeared ﬁrst and then initiated the other semantic contents.
Our hypothesis is that the meanings «people» and «folk» were deduced from a more speciﬁc context. We suggest that nawa had as the ﬁrst meaning the idea of «mark». From this meaning the term «people» was arrived at and all other meanings came from what the
20. This is taken from what was told us whilst we made a demographic survey in 1985 and got the information about the membership in clans. We veriﬁed that the father has sons only from his clan and the mother has daughters from hers.

Names of Pano groups and the endings -bo, nawa and huaca

21

Katukina language demands. That is, after being deﬁned as scar, as particular and speciﬁc, it became possible to make semantic modiﬁcations in the term nawa.
To argue in favour of taking «mark/scar» as the base meaning of nawa, we can consider that amongst all the meanings found in the Pano language, this is the one that has the most speciﬁc meaning. This is the same as saying that the semantic content ‘mark’, ‘scar’ for nawa anticipates the others by its speciﬁcities.
To hypothesize the opposite, that is, to take «people» and «folk» as the base meaning of nawa, seems to us not to be probable, for it is difﬁcult to see how, starting from this semantic content, it is possible to point to the creation of the meaning ‘mark’ and ‘scar’. What is behind this hypothesis is a presupposition that from a mark, a group is identiﬁed, but an individual is not labeled starting from the group.
In concrete terms, we can illustrate this with the structure of the clans. We say that a person needs to bring a characteristic that will prompt a belonging to one clan or another. This «mark» is attributed previously, before his birth. In the origins, the clans are constituted from one person or from a couple, that is, from the particular to the general and not the opposite.
Thus, we assume that «mark/scar» institutes a particularity as it distinguishes a person from another and/or a group of people from another by the fact that a particularity is shared. Speciﬁcally examining the term nawa, we suggest that «scar/mark» be understood as the base meaning.
It is important to observe that this meaning ‘mark / scar’ that we are taking as the base meaning of the expression nawa, was maintained in Katukina because of the use of the traditional language, since the language of the Katukina group is practically the only one for its members. We believe that this meaning can be found, also, in other Pano languages, but has not been registered or made known yet.
In the case of Katukina, this term occurred for the ﬁrst time spontaneously.21 In other words, nawa was said within the context of a conversation between the members of the group. From then on, we were able to take it up again in a monitored situation in order to record it.
Therefore, we are assuming that the original meaning of nawa is ‘mark / scar’ and from this meaning it is applied to human groups which ampliﬁes its semantic ﬁeld to «a mark that characterizes as belonging to» and from this to «people», «group» and ﬁnally «folk» always specifying human groups.
3.2.4 Varieties in the form nawa
We must add to this discussion the variants of the term nawa as far as its tonicity (nawá, náwa), its phonological matrix (nawa, dawa) and its written form (nawa, naua, nava, navo e nahua) as some authors have registered the term.
21. Fieldwork at the Campinas village in 1989, Acre State.

22

Maria S. Aguiar

As far as its tonicity is concerned, this term can be produced with the acute accent on the last syllable, nawá, or with the acute accent on the penultimate syllable, náwa. This last form could be from an inﬂuence of the Romance languages, speciﬁcally Spanish and/or Portuguese, which has this pattern. Yet, these two positions for the acute syllable is due to the Pano languages themselves, for in these languages there are some with the acute accent on the last syllable and others on the penultimate syllable.
In the ﬁeld of segmental phonology, in each Pano language that has the term nawa, it can appear with at least one different segment. There are cases in which the phoneme /n/ corresponds to /d/ or even /nd/, for example, «sky» in the Katukina language is nai, whilst in Poyanáwa it is dai and in Chacobo it is ndai. This assures us that depending on the phonological chart of the language we can ﬁnd dawa or ndawa with the same semantic value as nawa. This also explains why we have Shawandáwa and not Shawannawa. However, it is expected that there would be Poyandáwa and not Poyanáwa if it really were self-determined. This shows that the name of the group was given by those outside the group.
As far as the written form of the term is concerned, the form nahua is generalized for all the Pano groups in Peruvian and/or Bolivian lands with names that end in nawa. This is due to the decision of the ILV (Instituto Linguístico de Verano) missionaries that inserted an h in the orthography of the Pano languages to avoid vowel sequences22 as is the case in this term. But for Pano groups that have communities in Peru and/or Bolivia and Brazil, there is a double form of the written term found in the literature as is the case for the Jamináwa, where it is possible to ﬁnd the form Yaminahua and Jaminawa.
As for those Pano groups found in Brazil, their names, when they include this term, are written nawa. This form is a result of certain decisions based on phonological analyses which, on not inserting h between the vowels, opted to treat the [u] /w/ as a consonant obeying the syllabiﬁcation rule,23 which results in /nawa/. Thus, we have an explanation for the two forms that the Pano group names take on, nahua and nawa.
We will see next how these are organized according to the variations most commonly found in the literature.
3.2.5 The nawa groups
We have classiﬁed the names of the Pano groups24 following various written forms of the expression nawa, diverging in tonicity and/or in the written form: nahua, náwa,

22. Zingg (1998: 01) «... hu (w)...». Taken from the introduction of this material. 23. Syllable base CV in which it is possible to interpret i and u as y and w, respectively. 24. At the moment we will not discuss whether these names refer to groups, sub-groups nor whether these
names refer to the same indigenous group, since we are only attending to the distribution of the term nawa.

Names of Pano groups and the endings -bo, nawa and huaca

23

nawá, naua and dawa. These are the most frequently used forms in the literature. These forms refer to the Pano groups or sub-groups:

-nahua Capanahua Isconahua Marinahua Morunahua Sharanahua Yaminahua

«the quatipuru group» «the japó group» «the cutia group» «the bibosi group»25 « the ‘friend/good group’ group» «the group of the axe»

-náwa Jamináwa Bashonáwa Kamannáwa Kontanáwa Kununáwa Mastanáwa26 Náwa Poyanáwa27 Rununáwa Saináwa Shanenáwa Txashonáwa Tutxináwa Varináwa Vitxináwa Xixináwa Waninawa Yoranáwa

«the group of the axe» «the group of the mucura» «the group of the wild cat» «the group of the jaci (a palm)» «the group of the orelha-de-pau (a type of mushroom)» «the group of the socado» «the native group» «the group of the bird» «the group of the serpent» «the group of the yell» «the group of the blue bird» «the group of the deer» «the group of the»28 «the group of the sun» «the group of the leather shield» «the group of the quati» «the group of the pupunha» «the group of the people»

-nawá Kaxinawá Yawanawá

«the group of the bat» «the group of the wild pig»

-dawa Shawandáwa «the group of the macaw»

25. In Chacobo, the term moro is the referent for tree known as bibosi, from which ﬁbers are extracted to make clothes.
26. According to Townsley (1994: 247 e 248), masta is translated as ‘ladder’ in Yaminhua. 27. Poya-vo = bird (supposedly a form in Abreu-kaxinawá). 28. Shell (1985: 19) also quotes Tušinawa. For Zingg (1998), tuši is ‘tui’ which refers to a bird that is a kind
of parrot in Chacobo.

24

Maria S. Aguiar

With the aim of strengthening the hypothesis that the Pano groups were not responsible for their names, there is the case of Payanawa which, if it were a name originating from the group itself, would obey the phonological system of the language and would have the form Poyandawa, as mentioned earlier, in terms of the linguistic rule.
There are still other names with the nawa ending, but the aim of these examples is only as an illustration. The reader who wishes to read at greater length can ﬁnd more names in the studies about Pano linguistic classiﬁcation by various authors, such as, Shell (1985).
We will now present other Pano groups that have names of Pano origin, but that differ from those we have shown. In the following section, we will focus on those names that have the Pano origin, but that have the endings waka/huaca.
3.3 Names with the ending huaca
There are only three names of known Pano groups that have the ending waka/huaca. It is possible to note that both the expressions waka and huaca have Pano characteristics, in other words, they are similar in the syllabiﬁcation and tonicity, besides being able to consider the forms as lexical items and not grammatical ones as is the case of -bo. Consequently, these two expressions are similar also as the two cause compound names for the groups.
Thus we present the possible meanings of these names of the Pano groups with the aim of proving that huaca is an expression of Pano origin.
These groups names Amahuaca, Atsahuaca and Matsahuaca29 are believed to be names of non-Pano origin by some authors. However, it is worthwhile to comment on their possible meanings and consequently their origin. We will present some arguments that aim at ﬁnding, within the Pano lexicon, translations that may be allowed as part of the name of the group.
Initially we will look at the expression amahuaca because of the existence of the form amoaca. This is necessary due to the statement of a member30 of this ethnic group, amahuaca, that said «I am amoaca from Santa Rosa». The pronunciation of the name of this man’s ethnic group could at ﬁrst be taken as the inﬂuence of Portuguese or of other languages. However, analyzing the possible alterations undergone by the Pano languages, we consider that it is plausible that this man could have used older traces in his speech and expressed the original form of the name.

29. An extinct group cited by Villarejo (1959) and quoted by Shell (1985: 33) in a footnote. 30. Mr. Thaumaturgo, 90 years old, an indigenous man of the Amahuaca ethnic group that belongs to the
Pano group Apolima-Arara, localized in Brazil, on the banks of the Amonia River, near the border with Peru.

Names of Pano groups and the endings -bo, nawa and huaca

25

Based on these facts, we decided to make the alternation between ama and amo. In Katukina, there is amo which means ‘light’ and waká is translated by ‘water’. This leads to «light of the water» a designation that seems to us completely impossible as a translation of the name of an indigenous group.
On the other hand, we found ame which means capybara in Chacobo and in Marubo. We also found amuo in Panobo31 with the same meaning. Thus we can assume that the name of the group comes from [amou uaka] with the suppression of vowel similarities32 [uo] > /o/ ou /u/. So we have [amuo] > [amo], resulting, in the case of the name that we are examining, in amuouaka that became amoaka, and is known as amahuaca due to the other variations that this item has been through in these languages. In this way, it seems quite reasonable to accept the meaning of capybara to refer to the Pano group.
As for the other item, huaca, we can suppose that it presents one of the two possible meanings in the Pano languages. The meaning «water» is found in various languages of groups in Brazil and the meaning «poison»33 is found amongst groups in Peru and Bolivia.
In this way we could ﬁnd the meanings «water capybara» and «poisoned capybara». The ﬁrst meaning is less probable than the second. The translation «poisoned capybara» does not appear absurd to us if we consider the various motivations that cause a group to receive a certain name, as in the case of Caceteiro for the Korubo.
The other group name, Atsahuaca, presents the same characteristics as the former one and appears to be more of Pano origin than the other one, if we concede that atsahuaca is the junction of two terms, atsa and waka. This group name has a lexical item that is common to other Pano languages that corresponds to «manioc», in all the languages that present this item. With this fact, we have no doubt that it is Pano.
As far as the term huaca is concerned, the item can be waká that corresponds, as we have already said, to «water» or «poison». This poison, which is written uáka in Panobo, is used a lot by the groups for ﬁshing. It is a poison made from the sap of açacu which is thrown into the water of the river causing the ﬁsh to ﬂoat and to die asphyxiated.
From these two possibilities for translating huaca we can say that atsahuaca refers to «water manioc» or to «poisoned manioc». Between the two, we choose «poisoned manioc» since this one allows us to contextualize a possible motivation for the name of the group.

31. Panobo is characterized as the oldest Pano language as it has various signs which show that other languages were derived from it. For example, where it has mb and nd, some languages have m, n and others have b, d.
32. A process common to all Pano languages is the suppression of vowels when these are equal, for example, tSii «ﬁre» is transformed into tSi and in the same way tSi, amongst many other cases.
33. Tessmann (1999: 60) «Se pesca con el veneno de la Tephrosia toxicaria = aša, y del Clibadium Vargasii = uáka». Thus both refer to poison.

26

Maria S. Aguiar

In this way this name suggests the occurrence of a conﬂict between the groups from which an event involving people being poisoned came about. This possibility does not seem improbable to us if we consider that this practice was followed by the indigenous groups.
According to the narratives of the Apolima-Arara,34 there were many cases of murders by poisoning, of people of other groups and of those from the group itself.35
Our proposal makes even more sense when we think that the groups used distinctive forms to defend themselves. In the case of poisoning, it is an action that is discrete and calculated. We can understand that it might have been the only way for smaller groups not to be eliminated.
Thus, based on the situations faced by these groups in the past, we can admit that amo, atsa and huaca are terms with Pano origin and the names of the groups have the following interpretations:

Amahuaca «capybara-poison» Atsahuaca «mandioc-poison» Mastahuaca36 «socado-poison»

«people of the poisoned capybara» «people of the poisoned manioc» «people of the poisoned socado (farofa)»

3.4 Names of Pano origin

The names of Pano groups that are truly of Pano origin are not many when compared to those that are accompanied by -bo and náwa. According to what our research show, there are only three names as we can see below:

Matis Matses Nukini

«mountain/mountain range» «people» «we are wild cat»

«people of the mountain range» «group of people» «people of the wild cat»

Each one of these names has its motivation in the various contexts in which the different groups live, which can range from the places they lived (Matis) to their original ancestry (Nuki-inun).
We shall look at these motivations, some in a speciﬁc form and others with only hypothetical commentaries to posit possible explanations for the names of these groups.
The lexical item matis is translated by the language of the group itself as «people». This information can be veriﬁed in the list of lexical items encountered in Ferreira (2000)

34. An indigenous group of Brazil near Peru made up of Shipibo, Amoaka, Jamináwa, Shawandáwa and another non-Pano ethnic group named Ashânica.
35. According to Dona Ilda of the Apolima-Arara group (interviewed on March 9, 2003) when an old Indian wanted a young girl, he would invite the whole family to go to his house to talk with her parents, who normally agreed to give their daughter, but when the young girl refused, this man would put poison in her food. More than an hour later, this poison would begin to work and was fatal.

Names of Pano groups and the endings -bo, nawa and huaca

27

annexed -I where we found this term written mates «folk». In addition, in this source we found that the e is a phonetic representation of [i] which means that the speakers of the Matis group did not pronounce [matis]. Consequently, [matis] cannot be translated by «folk» but rather by «mountain range». That is, according to Abreu (1914: 569), in Kaxinawá, mati is ‘mountain range’, ‘mountain’ and has the same meaning in Cachobo and in Katukina, languages that phonetically have the form of this item matSi. From this we can hypothesize that the name of the group corresponds to the semantic content «mountain range», since for the speakers of Romance languages the expressions matis and matis have a discrete distinction. Since great care was taken in the analyses, it seems unlikely that the researcher would not have noticed that i or i were being dealt with in the actualization of the segment used to refer to «folk». Of course, this is possible, but until the opposite has been proven, our position is that the name of the group is Mati [mati], with the meaning of «mountain range». As for the s, there is the possibility of its presence being a copy from the Portuguese language, that is, s as a pluralizer. Even though s is inadequate in the names of indigenous groups, it is commonly applied by the speakers of Portuguese who are Brazilians.
As for matses, this name means «person» in the language of the group itself. But it is worth emphasizing that in Chacobo matsi is translated as ‘cold’. With this same meaning, in Amahuaca there is the word matzi and in Panobo, mbatsi (Tessmann 1999: 69). This suggests to us that a revision of the meaning of this group is needed, as it is not so sure that matses originally corresponds to ‘folk’.
Nukini refers to a Pano group with its own name recognized in the literature as inum. As we have already stated at the beginning of the study, this name is of Pano origin and is the result of the junction of two terms: noki and inu ‘wild cat’. It would be, then, nukiinu which became nukini by vocalic adaptation [i] + [i] = [i] from the Portuguese language. The segment [u] turned into [i] by the assimilation of the vowel by the antecedent syllable.
We are tempted to state that it must be, if not the only one, one of the few Pano groups that is identiﬁed by its original name. The meaning of the name of this group – «we are wild cat» – is conﬁrmed in their own language and also in others of the Pano family. Besides this, there exist various paintings from remote times that refer to the wild cat.
Still related to the Nukini, we know that some authors37 believe that the Remo group is the same as the Nukini. They state that remo is the given name nucuiny which means ‘good folk’. We believe there are two mistakes. The ﬁrst is regarding the two being the same group and the second is regarding the interpretation of the term nucuiny as «good folk», and it is the latter that is of interest to us at this moment. As we saw, the name Nukini refers to a «group of people descending from the wild cat».
36. According to Townsley (1994: 247 e 248), masta is ‘ladder’ in Yaminhua. 37. Shell-1985: 20; Valenzuela-2000 and also http://orbita.starmedia.com/~i.n.d.i.o.s/remo1htm.

28

Maria S. Aguiar

We will see, as follows, the names of the Pano groups that we identiﬁed as non-Pano according to the material that we had available to analyze. However, we highlight that, possibly, there are some amongst them that can be interpreted as Pano or at least part of the name merits this interpretation. Nevertheless, they will be pointed out here as terms of non-Pano origin.
3.5 Names of non-Pano origin
There are a total of six names of Pano groups that we have classiﬁed as of non-Pano origin. Amongst them, it is possible to state that two of them are of Romance language origin, that is, from Portuguese or Spanish. The non-Pano names are:
a) Apolima-Arara b) Remo c) Karipuna d) Katukina e) Kaxarari f) Pakawara
a) Apolima-Arara
The name apolima-arara was adopted by the group itself due to the necessity to obtain registration at the national level. This name is justiﬁed by the group because of two factors: the ﬁrst is that apolima takes into consideration the name of the place from which the majority of the older members come from; and secondly, the word arara is the name of the Shawandawa ethnic group which is the most numerous in the ﬁve that make up the group.
The expression arara (macaw) refers to a bird that is well-known in the region and in all of Brazil. This denomination was attributed to a Pano ethnic group because its members used ornaments made from feathers taken from these birds. Arara is of Tupi origin and was adopted by Portuguese speakers. It is a word borrowed from Portuguese which borrowed it from Tupi. Thus it was not borrowed directly from Tupi.
b) Remo
The Remo group was called this by the Spanish because its members used body paintings shaped like a paddle (remo). This appears to be the only indigenous Pano group that received a non-indigenous name.

Names of Pano groups and the endings -bo, nawa and huaca

29

c) Karipuna
The Karipuna were also listed as Jaunavo. This is certainly the Pano name. The term navo comes from nawa as we have already commented on and jau may be [jaú] or [jáw]; both are possibly Pano words. The meaning may refer to some animal. A ﬁrst hypothesis would be to take the term jawishi (with the variant jawish) which means «armadillo» in various Pano languages. There is a term in Chacobo for «to yawn» that is jao, but this appears to us to be less probable than «armadillo» which we have mentioned.
The term karipuna has great chances of being of Tupi origin as other scholars have stated. In Tupi-Guarani the meaning for kari is ‘white / foreigner’, but for puna we did not ﬁnd any meaning in the lists of Tupi languages that are available.
On the other hand, it is possible to ﬁnd in Pano lists, the meaning «potato» for kari, and punan as a term that refers to «arm», but these are too far removed to be possible. We do not see any sense in the sequence of words «potato arm».
There is another point that calls our attention which, in our opinion, antecedes the analysis and the search for meaning for this name. This point refers to the existence or not of this Pano group. We were in the region where this group supposedly exists and we veriﬁed that there is indeed a group with this name. However, after checking some basic linguistic data with the members of this group, we conﬁrmed that they were indeed called Karipuna, but were speakers of Tupi. As long as there is not a conﬁrmation of the existence of such a Pano group, there is no need to search for the origin of the name here.
d) Katukina
The Katukina group has been designated by such a name for many years as Tastevin (1924) shows. The term has no original link with the group, and it is not of Pano or Portuguese origin. This group was called Vitxináwa [BitSináwa] by the Shawandáwa and other groups of the region, but in a restricted way. One of the reasons for this is that this name, vitxinawa, emerges from the history of intertribal conﬂicts and this denomination is not accepted by the group. This conﬁrms that the name is another «nickname».
This Katukina group is also called as waninawa which is really the name of one of their clans. Tastevin (1925) states that the name of the group is sáwanawa, as in the passage, «...sawanaua (sáwa, big headed red macaw) on the banks of the Gregório, who adopted the deceitful name Katukina» (1925: 415).
As far as the motivation for the name katukina, it was possibly due to the pressure from the non-indigenous groups to ﬁnd a name for the group. This name was used a lot by the people of the Amazon region and is used as well to refer to a type of mosquito which has a painful bite. It is also a name of an indigenous group established in the Amazon State, besides naming a linguistic family. This name was used in such a general way that we can say that, at the time in which rubber production was at its peak, it became a kind of fashion.

30

Maria S. Aguiar

The meaning for the term katukina remains obscure for the authors that we consulted. What we can deduce is that the use of this term in the Acre region came about because of the missionaries and travelers there. These people must have had information about various indigenous groups, but without emphasizing their particularities or diversities, the word katukina must have come to their attention. For the members of this group it was appropriate because, as well as this name not being applied to any other Acre group, it guaranteed that the group would not be called by a less appropriate «nickname».
In the Acre region, katukina was a name that stood out. The authorities took it as general38 and used it to name any group. And as it was treated as a «generic» name, the so-called Katukina group adopted it from pure convenience and to satisfy the pressure from the non-indigenous groups who always insisted that they reveal their «real» name.
There is a text by Tastevin (1924) in which his insistence in knowing the name of this indigenous group becomes clear, an attitude that was not different from that of other «visitors» who contacted them. This same author clearly states that they are not Katukina. This shows the need they had to adopt any name for their group.
According to some scholars (cf. Tessmann 1930), the Pano groups which are normally organized in clans do not have a generic name for all the group. They are referred to by their clans and this applies to the Katukina group, in the same way to the Cashibo group and others.
e) Kaxarari
The name of the Kaxarari group can be formed by two lexical items, kaxa and rari. Analyzing these lexical items by the list of probable meanings in the Pano languages, we have the following possibility: Caxa [kaSa] that means ‘angry’, ‘irritated’ and ‘bad’, which are very appropriate names for a «nickname» given by adversaries. The item rari or riri in Pano can have the meanings of «exchange», «detour» and «cross the paths». When we put these two items together, the result is quite forced as far as being the name of the group.
Another possibility is to consider the item rari instead of rari. This is the name of a tree the leaves of which are used for a medicine and known by the non-indigenous as macocoro. Using this meaning we can, hypothetically, come to the meaning for kaxarari, translated as ‘bad macocoro’, a deﬁnition which is totally disposable as a group name.
On the other hand, if we see this name as non-Pano we can construct the following hypothesis: in regards to kaxa, it can be a borrowing from the Portuguese for «box» (caixa) as was suggested to us. Box here would refer to a drum, a percussion instrument
38. (Cf. Aguiar 1993) The Shanenáwa group was called Katukina until 1987 in a random way by the authorities of Rio Branco, Acre (ﬁeld work carried out by Aguiar in 1987 in the Morada Nova Village, Feijó, Acre).

Names of Pano groups and the endings -bo, nawa and huaca

31

that some Pano groups used originally. As far as rari or riri is concerned, we can think of an onomatopoeic expression. This would cause us to interpret kaxarari as «a box to make riri or rari».
To this commentary it is appropriate to add that there are various Pano groups in Brazil that do not use any type of musical instrument and say they never have. For these groups, their cultural festivals use only songs and group dancing. They only utilize their mouth, hand and feet for all kinds of music and to obtain special sounds such as those of the forest animals, whereas the Pano groups located in Peru or who are near the border use ﬂutes and drums for their festivals and for everyday music. If the Kaxarari had used some musical instrument, this fact would have called the attention of their neighbours, causing them to receive a «nickname» that distinguished them from the others.
With this contextualization, we suggest that the name was kaxariri, as registered in some research papers. Thus, their name would be understood as «the group of the box of riri», that is, the group that used «a box as a musical instrument that produces riri». This phrase is a result of the Portuguese borrowing, caixa ‘box’, with an onomatopoeic expression added, riri.
f) Pakawara
The term pacaguara is conﬁrmed as a structure that has two items guará ‘wolf ’ that comes from ‘eater’39 and paca which refers to «animal», both of Tupi origin. This name can be found in the written literature with some variations, for example, pacaguara, pakaguara, pakawara, pacawara, pacavara and pacauara. For the name of this group, pacaguara, we suggest the translation ‘animal who is a greedy eater’ or ‘eater of the pacas’.
As far as the names of the Pano groups are concerned, there are four denominations about which we have to comment on. These names are Mayo, Mayoruna, Parquenahua and Huariapano. We will discuss these names in the following section.
3.6 The names Mayo, Mayoruna and Parquenahua
The lexical item mayo in Chacobo means «to kill» if we consider this item as originating in Pano. It is known that for this term another origin is also considered.
If we interpret mayoruna in the same way as mayo, that is, as a Pano term, we can say it is a compound of two lexical items, mayo and runa. Thus, the name of the group would be «kill-runa». However, it is possible also that this last term is really runo, that can be translated as ‘serpent’ in Chacobo and in other Pano languages. If we take the name of the as mayoruno it would result in ‘killer serpents’.

39. There is the word capivara in Tupi that can be translated as ‘grasseater’ (capi = ‘grass’; vara = ‘eater’).

32

Maria S. Aguiar

Another hypothesis would be that this expression is derived from mayo-ronoa. We can suggest that ronoa, «sucuri» (a type of snake) in Chacobo, became rona due to the linguistic accommodation [oa] > [a] and the rising of [o] > [u] in the ﬁrst syllable. So, we postulate that the name of the group was mayorona with the meaning ‘killer sucuri’. We propose, ﬁnally, that this term be translated as «killer of/with sucuri». However, we have to admit that all these possibilities are very forced to be effectively the origin of the group name. We afﬁrm that mayo and runa are decidedly non-Pano terms.
As far as the name parquenahua is concerned, it is a junction of two terms of distinct origin, which differ from the other group names. The terms are parque, from Spanish and nahua, from Pano and which has already been discussed. The meaning would be ‘group of the park’.

CONCLUSION
The conclusion to which we arrive about the names of the Pano indigenous groups is that they are only nicknames taken on by the groups and by the researchers. We deﬁne them in this way due to the fact that they were attributed to the groups in the past and no action has been taken to review them. In practice, we have to admit them as the true names.
As far as their originality is concerned, the Pano groups can be organized into two distinct classes. One brings together those groups that are structured as clans and the other class, those that are not constituted into clans. The ﬁrst would not have a traditional name for their group. They would only have names speciﬁc to the clans, whilst the other group would have a name originating from within the culture.
The class of the groups formed by clans, for which there is no traditional generic name, are Katukina, Kaxarari, Shanenawa, Setebo, Cashibo and others. These groups were forced to take on a name as a consequence of history and of the demands of the society that surrounds them.
The class consisting of the groups that traditionally have originating names are those formed by the people who have only one story of how they appeared, similar to the stories of the appearance of the clans. These groups use the names of plants, natural phenomenon and animals. These denominations are closely linked to the story of creation of each one. In this class are the Kontanáwa, whose name is related to the jaci palm; Varináwa, linked to the sun; Isconáwa, linked to the «japós» and the Nukini, who are the best example of an originating name.
It is important to say that various groups, at the height of rubber production (1912), were torn apart and forced to join other indigenous groups. Naturally, these groups differed culturally which resulted in the fact that many ceased to be an indigenous group with speciﬁc traditions, becoming, instead, a type of agglomeration of peoples.

Names of Pano groups and the endings -bo, nawa and huaca

33

To exemplify these cases, we can cite, amongst other groups, the Jaminawa-Arara formed by the descendents of the Jamináwa and the Shawandáwa (cf. Seeger & Vogel (1978) apud Gondim, 2002) and the group Apolima-Arara formed by the Jamináwa, Shawandáwa, Amahuaca, Shipibo and Ashanica (Aguiar 2007) and the Yawanawá group which is formed by the Shawandáwa, Iskonáwa, Varináwa, Rununáwa, Kamanáwa, Txashonáwa and Saináwa (Almeida 2002).
The Jamináwa group was one of the Pano groups that most gathered different ethnic groups. It is made up of Kununáwa, Mastanáwa, Xixináwa, Bashonáwa and Jamináwa (Ferreira 2001). When these groups were formed, they adopted the name that referred to the dominant group, deﬁned as such by the number of members or by the political force it had. This allows us to see that in terms of originality, it is not worthwhile to seek for a name in these cases. At the present time, we should only open the way for a discussion of the name of these groups.
As far as the great uniformity found in the names of the Pano groups, one explanation is that many of them were given by indigenous groups that were also Pano and which took as the motivation a characteristic of the group. Except in some cases, these groups had their original names, as appears to be the case of the Shawandáwa, translated as arara (macaw).
To attribute names, these Pano indigenous groups or «relatives» used anthroponyms that, besides being the characteristic of that group, contained terms with the idea of a whole and for this «should have» contained the endings -bo and nawa or, more speciﬁcally, huaca.
In the process of attributing names, there occurred cases of registers of more than one name for the same group as for example, Sharanahua and Marinahua; Shipibo and Chama; Yawanawá and Yawavo; Panobo and Pelados; Shawandáwa and Arara, also Ararapina, Ararawa and Araraná; Cashibo and Cashino and others.
There are a few Pano groups that chose their own names. These are the ApolimaArara, Nukini, Nawa40 and Katukina. Of these, the Nukini name came from a motivation originating in the group.
Regarding the attributed or announced name, we can point out that there is the possibility that, of the groups whose name is translated by «men», «good ones» or «folk», this form of denomination was used to say «we are people and that is enough for you». In fact, a discussion is lacking with the groups themselves. Only those who chose their names do not need this discussion.

40. Nawa is a ressurgent group that lives in the Mâncio Lima, Acre region, on the banks of the Novo Recreio River. This group needed to take on a name and by the stories told by the elderly their name in the past had indeed been nawa.

34

Maria S. Aguiar

Verifying these names with the groups could show us some very relevant data concerning the appearance and disappearance of some of the groups, especially in the Vale do Juruá region. In this region, the existence is known of groups referred to, by the colonist as «wild» and by society, as «isolated» (Padilha 2002: 44). A speciﬁc example is that of the Saináwa group which since 1987 is mentioned by the oldest indigenous peoples of the region. This group probably has already joined some other group of the region, a fact that has happened to others as well.
An example of this is that there was an indigenous Pano group named Rununáwa that lived in this same region in the past. This group simply disappeared. There may be Rununáwa descendents amongst the Kaxinawá since the Kaxinawá group uses the snake, runu, as an only theme in its drawings. It represents courage, force and wisdom to the groups. Possibly, this group came under the inﬂuence of the Rununáwa.
Concluding this discussion, we point out the importance of considering the conditions under which the Pano groups were named, according to the literature. Next, after considering this question, we suggest, as most important, the need to ensure that the groups review their names and opt to alter them or not, and thus be named according to their own desires.

REFERENCES
ABREU, J. Capistrano de (1914): Rã-txa hu-ni-ku-i. A língua dos caxinauás. Rio de Janeiro, Tipologia Leuzinger.
AGUIAR, Maria S. de (1993): «Los grupos nativos katukina». Amazonía peruana: Estudios sobre lenguas indígenas. Lima, 12 (23). Lima, CAAAP, 141-152.
— (2007): «The Brazilian Panoan Languages», in Leo Wetzels (ed.): Language Endangerment and Endangered Languages Languages. Linguistic and Anthropological Studies with Special Emphasis on the Languages and Cultures of the Andean-Amazonian Border Area. Leiden, CNWS Publications (Indigenous Languages of Latin America/5), 39-50.
ALMEIDA, Líbia Luiza dos Santos de (2002): «Magia das cores. Yawanawá», in Povos do Acre: História Indígena da Amazônia Ocidental. Rio Branco, FEM, CIMI, 38-40.
ARMENTIA, Fr. Nicolás (1898): «Vocabulário del idioma shipibo del Ucayali». Boletín de la Sociedad Geográﬁca de La Paz, t. 1, pp. 43-91. La Paz.
BASSETO, Bruno Fregni (2001): Elementos de ﬁlologia românica. São Paulo, UNESP. COLINI, Giuseppi A. (1884): «Gli Indiani Dell’Alto Amazzoni». Bolletino della Societá
Geográﬁca Italiana, IX: 528-555 and 708-717. CUNHA, Antonio Geraldo da (1986): Dicionário etimológico Nova Fronteira da língua
portuguesa. 2.ed. Rio de Janeiro, Nova Fronteira.

Names of Pano groups and the endings -bo, nawa and huaca

35

ERIKSON, Philippe (1992): ««Uma singular pluralidade: a etno-história Pano», in Manuela Carneiro Cunha (org.): Historia dos índios no Brasil. São Paulo, Companhia das Letras, 239-266.
FERREIRA, Fátima (2001): Levantamento da situação atual dos índios Jamináwa. Rio Branco, Fundação Elias Mansour.
FERREIRA, Vitória R. S. (2000): Língua Matis (Pano): uma análise fonológica. Campinas, Unicamp.
GONDIM, Sérgio Augusto de Albuquerque (2002): «Cosmologia da terra. Arara», in Povos do Acre: História Indígena da Amazônia Ocidental. Rio Branco, FEM, CIMI, pp. 42-43.
ILARI, Rodolfo (1999): Linguistica românica. São Paulo, Ática. INTERNET: <http://orbita.starmedia.com/~i.n.d.i.o.s/remo1htm>: 02-04-2008. KEY, M. Ritchie (1968): Comparative Tacanan Phonology: with cavineña phonology and
notes on Pano-Tacanan relationhip. Paris, Mouton. LOOS, Eugene (1969): The phonology of Capanahua and its grammatical basis. Santa Ana
(Linguistic and Related Fields, 20). MONTAG, Richard (1973): «La estructura semántica de las relaciones entre frases verbales
en cashinaua», in Estudios panos II. Série Lingüística Peruana, n. 11, Yarinacocha, ILV, 107-159. NAVARRO, M. (1927): «Vocabulario castellano-pano-castellano con sus respectivas gramáticas quechua y pana», in Bernadino Izaguirre (ed.): Historia de las Missiones Franciscanas, 15-282. PADILHA, Lindomar (2002): «Naua – Marca da resistência», in Povos do Acre: História Indígena da Amazônia Ocidental. Rio Branco, FEM, CIMI, 44-45. PROST, Gilbert R. (1967): «Chacobo», in Esther Matteson (ed.): Bolivian Indian Grammars I. Norman, Summer Institute of Linguistics of the University of Oklahoma, 285-359. SEEGER, Anthony and Arno VOGEL (1978): Relatório da viagem do Alto Rio Juruá, Município de Cruzeiro do Sul, estado do Acre, em Janeiro-Fevereiro de 1978, Ms. SHELL, Olive A. (19852): Las Lenguas Pano y su Reconstrucción. Estudios Pano III. Instituto Lingüístico de Verano. Série Lingüistica Peruana, n. 12. TASTEVIN, R. P. Constantin (1924): «Chez lês indiens Du Haut Juruá». (Rio Gregório), Missions Catholiques, t. LVI. — (1925): «Le ﬂeuve Muru. Ses habitants. Croyances e moeurs kachinaua», in La Geographie, XLIII, 403-422 and XLIV, 14-35. TESSMANN, Günter (1930): Die Indianer Nordost-Peru. Hambourg, Friedrihsen, De Gruyter & Co, 301-11301-11, 378-978-97, 475-544. — (1999): Los indígenas del Perú Nororiental: investigaciones fundamentales para un estudio sistemático de la cultura. Quito, Abya-Yala.

36

Maria S. Aguiar

TOWNSLEY, Graham (1994): «Los Yaminahua». Federica Barclay & Fernando Santos Granero (ed.): Guía Etnográﬁca de la Alta Amazonía, v. 2. Quito, FLACSO-IFEA, pp. 239-58.
VALENZUELA, Pilar M. (2000): «Característica morfosintáticas del idioma Shipibo-Konibo del Ucayali». Actas del I Congreso de la ALFAL-Norte de Europa. Maio del 2000. Groningen, Holanda, in <elies.rediris.es/elies13/valenzuela.htm>.
VILLAREJO, Avencio (1959): La selva y El hombre: estudio antropocosmológico del aborigen amazónico. Lima, Ausonia.
ZINGG, Philipp (1998): Diccionário Chacobo-Castellano Castellano-Chacobo: con bosquejo de la gramatica chacobo y con apuntes culturales. La Paz, Comunicación Visual.
Fecha de encargo: 02-09-2007 Fecha de recepción: 02-06-2008

Comentario

UniverSOS 5, 2008 37-387

Comentario de William F. H. Adelaar
Universidad de Leiden, Holanda

La autora explora el campo complejo de la nomenclatura de las tribus indígenas, en este caso, de aquellas que pertenecen a la familia pano. Nos hace descubrir que los nombres por los que se conocen las tribus de la familia pano son en su mayoría apodos aplicados por tribus vecinas igualmente de expresión pano. Ella hace el esfuerzo de identiﬁcar el signiﬁcado de algunos de estos gentilicios a través de su conocimiento de las lenguas pano habladas en Bolivia, en Brasil y en el Perú. La mayoría de los nombres de tribus pano llevan las terminaciones bo, nawa o waka con variaciones dialectales, fonéticas y ortográﬁcas. Además, la autora nos hace conocer algunos gentilicios de carácter único, cuya origen pano no es evidente.
El tratamiento unido de elementos variables a través de una serie de lenguas cercanamente emparentadas puede traer cierto riesgo, como se ve en el caso del elemento βu que signiﬁca ‘huevo’ y no ‘plural de gente’ en la lengua katukina pano de la familia pano. Es dudoso que se trate del mismo elemento bo encontrado en las otras lenguas pano, ya que po o pə también signiﬁca ‘huevo’ en la lengua vecina katukina kanamarí, que no pertenece a la familia pano (por ejemplo, en takara-pə ‘huevo de gallina’). Concluimos que podría tratarse de un caso de difusión léxica.
Acerca del elemento nawa, la autora expresa duda en relación con su posible interpretación como ‘gente’, considerando que en katukina pano signiﬁca ‘marca’ o ‘cicatriz’. Preﬁere derivar el uso de nawa como terminación para ‘gente’ de un signiﬁcado más especializado ‘cicatriz’. Sin embargo, la cantidad de gentilicios en nawa es tan grande y diversa, que la interpretación ‘cicatriz’ o ‘marca’ parece algo rebuscado en estos casos. A ﬁn de cuentas, se trata de una variedad de lenguas emparentadas, pero por lo tanto distintas.
En el caso de la terminación waka, el orden de los elementos se releva problemático en las interpretaciones ofrecidas. En las lenguas pano, un determinante parece anteceder al elemento determinado en la mayoría de los casos. Sin embargo, la autora interpreta amahuaca como amo-waká ‘luz del agua’ (y no ‘agua de la luz’) en base al katukina pano. Como alternativa nos propone ‘capibara del agua’ o ‘capibara envenenada’ en base a las lenguas pano del Perú y de Bolivia. Asimismo, atsa-waka sería ‘mandioca del agua’o ‘mandioca venenosa’. Todas estas explicaciones parecen proceder de un orden determinadodeterminante y no determinante-determinado, tal como se esperaría.
Para el gentilicio matses, explicado como ‘persona’ en la lengua de la etnia correspondiente, se propone una reinterpretación en base al concepto ‘frío’ expresado por una forma similar en chacobo, en panobo y en amahuaca. Aquí también la interferencia de lenguas geográﬁcamente alejadas nos parece algo arriesgada.

38

William F. H. Adelaar

En el caso de los gentilicios de origen no-pano tratados por la autora es posible proponer alternativas plausibles. Para el gentilicio Karipuna, una etimología basada en las lenguas tupí-guaraní se revela problemática. Al mismo tiempo, la expresión Karipuna se encuentra en las lenguas caribes como autodenominación en varias formas locales (Kariña, Carijona, Garífuna, etc.). Sea cual sea la etimología ﬁnal de este término, una discusión del término Karipuna no puede eludir el problema de su uso en el ambiente caribe.
En relación con el término Pakawara, de origen tupi-guaraní, la analogía con capivara ‘él que come hierba (capim)’ nos lleva a acudir a una explicación de la índole ‘él que come pacas’. El término pak(a), que se reﬁere a un mamífero nativo, existe tanto en tupi-guaraní como en español. La autora sugiere una traducción como ‘animal comilón’, que en este caso no nos parece acertada. La referencia a guará ‘lobo’, sea o no sea derivado del verbo ‘comer’, tampoco contribuye a la identiﬁcación de aquél gentilicio.
Finalmente, los conocedores de la lengua quechua se extrañarán por la ausencia de alguna alusión a esta lengua en la discusión relativa al gentilicio Mayoruna. Como se sabe, Mayoruna se deja traducir sin mayor problema como ‘gente del río’ en quechua. Esto no excluye, sin embargo, que podríamos encontrarnos frente a una forma modiﬁcada de algún gentilicio de origen pano. Compárese el caso de Aguaruna, que a primera vista parece de origen quechua, pero probablemente no lo es.
Terminamos este pequeño comentario reiterando nuestras felicitaciones con el trabajo pionero que viene llevando a cabo la autora. Nos ayudará a entender mejor el mecanismo complejo y poco transparente de la nomenclatura y la selección de gentilicios en el mundo indígena pano.

Comentario

UniverSOS 5, 2008 39-4349

Comentario de Xaverio Ballester
Universitat de València, España

El trabajo de Maria S. Aguiar aborda, de manera suﬁcientemente exhaustiva, la cuestión de la etnonimia documentada para los pueblos hablantes del grupo lingüístico de la Sudamérica central deﬁnido como pano. Tempranamente los estudios antropológicos revelaron que de modo general los pueblos primitivos –empleando el término, por supuesto, in bonam partem– utilizan regularmente apelativos genéricos del tipo ‘compañeros’, ‘gente’, ‘hombres’, ‘nosotros’, ‘pueblo’ o aﬁnes para referirse a ellos mismos, es decir, en realidad no se llaman de ningún modo, al menos de ningún modo particular. Estudios de esta misma índole han revelado asimismo la conveniencia de distinguir, por un lado, entre las denominaciones que los nativos se dan a sí mismos como tales o endoetnónimos y, por otro lado, las denominaciones –o diríase apodos– que les dan otros, normalmente sus vecinos, o exoetnónimos, denominaciones que en bastantes ocasiones incluyen apelativos despectivos o denigratorios, razón por la cual, amén de por su origen foráneo, tradicionalmente suelen ser rechazados por aquellos. Ilustrativo ejemplo de la dualidad que comentamos, lo ofrecería el nombre de los esquimales, exoetnónimo algonquino que signiﬁcaría ‘comedores de carne cruda’ (Malherbe 1983: 227 y 308), mientras que ellos se denominan a sí mismos simplemente inuit, es decir, ‘hombres’ (Batista 1962: 216; Malherbe 1983: 228 y 308; Marquer 1984: 8ss.; Trapero y Llamas 1998: 155; Bernárdez 1999: 79), denominación que en el entorno más próximo a estos pueblos se ha impuesto como la socialmente correcta.
De esta precautoria necesidad de distinguir entre la denominación propia y la ajena1 tiénese buena cuenta en el trabajo de Aguiar y que se inscribe igualmente en la línea de corrección política de otorgar, incluso frente a un tradición ya bien asentada a veces, la decisión ﬁnal de cómo deban ser llamados los propios interesados, opción que, por supuesto, suele mayoritariamente coincidir con la variante endoetnonímica. Ejemplo, esta vez más cercano en tiempo y espacio, de tal política de corrección etnonímica nos lo da también este testimonio de Dietrich (2003: 161):
los representantes políticos de las diferentes etnias exigen hoy en día que se usen las diferentes autodenominaciones, así que los matacos se llaman wichi, los tobas qom, los mocovíes también qom, términos que en cada una de estas lenguas signiﬁca ‘gente’.
1. «names will be classiﬁed within two modalities: those of Pano origin and those of non–Pano origin».

40

Xaverio Ballester

En todo caso, en ese mismo básico patrón endoetnonímico se inscribirían al menos los etnónimos pano[an]os Cacataibo ‘hombres verdaderos’, Matses ‘gente’, Nawa ‘nativos’, Sharanahua ‘buenos amigos’ y Yoranawa ‘los del pueblo’.
Una muy interesante subclase de endoetnónimos es la que, de modo general y sin entrar en debates técnicos sobre particularismos léxicos, podríamos deﬁnir genéricamente como totémicos en razón de su relación, por decirlo con palabras de Aguiar, con la «historia de cómo aparecieron» (story of how they appeared) dichos pueblos; etnónimos que no en vano suelen contener, como es aquí justamente el caso, nombres de plantas, fenómenos naturales o animales. Nada se opone, pues, a considerar perteneciente a esta hipocategoría endoetnonímica un grupo de apelativos que Aguiar acierta, creemos, al atribuir a clanes más que a tribus propiamente dichas y al señalar su estrecha relación con sus mitos de creación. A esta subclase pertenecerían muy probablemente –al menos en su origen– los [endo]etnónimos citados por Aguiar de Cashibo ‘los murciélagos’, Chacobo ‘los cerdos’, Conibo ‘los anguilas’, Panobo ‘los armadillos’, Shetebo ‘los halcones’, Shipibo ‘los monos’ –todos con esa marca -bo de plural para nombres (Loos 1999: 236)– amén de Karipuna ‘los del armadillo’, Kaxinawa ‘los del murciélago’, Nukini ‘los del gato montés’, Poyanawa ‘los del ave’, Rununawa ‘los de la serpiente’, Shanenawa ‘los del pájaro azul’, Shawandawa (o Sawanawa) ‘los del guacamayo’, Txashonawa ‘los del venado’, Tutxinawa ‘los del [loro] tui’, Yawanawa ‘los del cerdo salvaje’, y ahora ya casi con total certeza los Kama[n]nawa ‘los del gato montés’, Nainawa ‘los del cielo’, Satanawa ‘los de la nutria’, Varinawa ‘los del sol’, Waninawa ‘los de la palma pupunha’, ya que Aguiar comenta que son endoetnónimos sin la menor sombra de duda2 y que en realidad representan nombres de clanes. Nótese que la potencial presencia mayoritaria de endoetnónimos de referencia totémica apuntaría a una cultura tradicional con tal atributo antropológico en estos pueblos.
Mucha, muchísima mayor variedad semántica es la que ofrecen los exoetnónimos. Seguimos considerando válido un previo ensayo nuestro de clasiﬁcar los principales tipos de etnónimos de origen foráneo o vecinal, a saber,
por un lado, los de origen geográﬁco o local (ecográﬁcos), con metonimias varias de ciudades y ríos sobre todo, pero también orográﬁcos de modo general [...] Por otro lado [...] los apelativos de origen antropológico o humano [...] por lo general de carácter descriptivo, sea en alusión a costumbres incluyendo aquí aspectos morales o de actividad (etográﬁcos), a su apariencia (ﬁsiográﬁcos) o a su forma de hablar (glotográﬁcos).
Según Aguiar en el caso del grupo panoano las motivaciones etnonímicas más relevantes son «oral expression, body markings, artifacts, and the needs of non-indigenous people», lo que no resulta difícil relacionar con nuestras propuestas glotográﬁca (oral ex-

2. «These names, without a shadow of a doubt, were given by the group itself».

Comentario

41

pression), ﬁsiográﬁca (body markings) y etográﬁca (artifacts, and the needs of non-indigenous people). Faltaría, pues, notoriamente como motivación –al menos como motivación relevante– la ecográﬁca, pero ya advertíamos en su momento del carácter «reciente» de muchas denominaciones de este tenor: «parece –escribíamos– sobre todo un etnónimo típico de sociedades neolíticas ya organizadas [...] se trataría, pues, de exoetnónimos modernos, especial y lógicamente aquellos aludiendo a núcleos urbanos», razón por la cual el etnónimo ecográﬁco no es especialmente de esperar en el caso del grupo panoano, de cultura históricamente proneolítica.
De los citados por Aguiar cumpliría citar como ecográﬁcos los etnónimos Apolima[-Arara] ‘los de Apolima’, Matis ‘los de la cordillera’ o Parquenahua ‘los del parque’; como etográﬁcos los etnónimos Amahuaca ‘los del capibara venenoso’, Atsahuaca ‘los de la yuca envenada’, Caceteiro[s] ‘garroteros’, Mastahuaca ‘los que envenenan con socado’, Morunahua ‘los del [árbol] bibosi’, Jamináwa o Yaminahua ‘los del hacha’, Vitxinawa ‘los del escudo de cuero’; como ﬁsiográﬁcos los [Apolima-]Arara ‘los del [guacamayo] arara’ por el uso ornamental de las plumas de estas aves, Korubo ‘los grisáceos’, Marubo ‘los calvos – los pelados’, Remo[s] ‘remos’; como glotográﬁcos Chama a partir de un grito de guerra (cf. el etnónimo de los Ambrones, motivado también supuestamente por un grito guerrero; Villar 1991: 350) y Sainawa ‘los del alarido’.
Para la correcta integración en las correspondientes categorías de ciertos etnónimos, sobre todo los que hacen referencia a la fauna y mucho más aun al mundo vegetal, necesitaríase una mayor información sobre usos y creencias de los respectivos pueblos. Hemos incluido, por ejemplo, en el apartado etográﬁco el nombre de los Morunahua ‘los del bibosi’, porque Aguiar advierte en nota que las ﬁbras de este árbol se extraen para hacer vestidos. Una actividad utilitaria de este tipo, ya para alimentación, artefactos o vestidos, de los referentes implicados en los nombres de los Kontanawa ‘los de la [palma] jaci’ o Kununawa ‘los de la [seta] orella-de-pau’ implicaría, así pues, su clasiﬁcación etográﬁca; un habitáculo cercano a esta ﬂora por los pueblos implicados supondría –en la hipótesis menos probable– su interpretación como etnónimos ecográﬁcos y, en ﬁn, un mitologema, por ejemplo, relacionando tales elementos con los antepasados de estos pueblos sugeriría su pertenencia a la categoría de endoetnónimo totémico.
Así pues, la general bondad del trabajo de Aguiar se maniﬁesta en su acomodo a los datos [pre]establecidos por los estudios tipológicos previos sobre la cuestión, aunque la autora no parezca haberlos tenido especialmente presentes al abordar la materia. Únicamente menor congruencia y mayor conveniencia de una segunda opinión merecerían, antes de ser incluidos en uno u otro grupo semántico, un exoetnónimo como Pakawara ‘los del animal voraz’ o etnónimos como Kaxarari ‘los de la caja [que suena] ri-ri’ (sic), Mayo ‘los matar’, Mayoruna ‘los serpientes asesinas’ o Pisquibo ‘los calm[ad]os’.
Esto respecto a la tipología semántica. Ahora tratemos algunas interesantes pero complicadas cuestiones morfológicas y también algún otro asunto de detalle. Así, a propósito de Claudius –mejor que Claudio– escribe Aguiar «He was thus nicknamed Claudio, “the

42

Xaverio Ballester

one who limps”, from the verb in Latin claudico “to walk with a limp”, claudus [...] an “unequal”, and claudus [...] “cripple”». En realidad una raíz *claud- ‘cojo’ e ‘incompleto – defectuoso‘, entre otros sentidos metafóricamente derivados, está en la base del verbo claudico ‘cojear’ y muchos otros sentidos secundarios (‘vacilar – ﬂaquear – ser defectuosos – claudicar...’). Tanto el andrónimo Claudius como el ginecónimo Claudia proceden, por supuesto, directamente de claudus y no del secundario verbo denominativo claudico.
De la pluralidad de signiﬁcados (‘azul – verde’, ‘cerdo salvaje’, ‘cicatriz – marca’, ‘forasteros’, ‘gente – hombre’, ‘enemigo’, ‘nativo’...) asignados a nawa o variantes aﬁnes, un más antiguo signiﬁcado ‘gente’ es el que explicaría mejor, nos parece, no sólo los otros signiﬁcados como desplazamientos semánticos o metasemias (‘nativo’, ‘forasteros – enemigo’) sino también su empleo como componente en tantos y tantos etnónimos. Obviamente no puede a priori taxativamente excluirse el que algunos signiﬁcados más distantes puedan deberse en realidad a casos de pura casual homonimia, es decir, de formas que pese a unos distintos origen y signiﬁcado acabaron convergiendo en una única forma, como es el caso, por ejemplo, de temple en inglés ‘templo’ y ‘sien’, procediendo una forma, vía el francés, del latín templum ‘templo’ y la otra, en última instancia, del latín tempora ‘sienes’.
Por otra parte, en el análisis de lenguas de culturas de caza y recolección tampoco conviene perder nunca de vista la potencial acción de dos características antropológicas tan conspicuas para estas culturas como el totemismo –que puede, por ejemplo, hacer del cerdo salvaje un pariente y ‘gente’ como nosotros– y el tabú –que puede, por ejemplo, prohibir el empleo del nombre tradicional para el cerdo salvaje (nota bene: [jawá] ‘cerdo salvaje’ en algunas hablas de este grupo según la propia Aguiar3) y sustituirlo por otro término, término a menudo semejante, término a menudo parental. Hay que combatir siempre la falacia del lingua gratia linguæ, del querer explicar la lengua sólo por la lengua. Intuimos que un más profundo conocimiento, una mayor atención a la cultura general de estos pueblos podría elucidar algunas de estas cuestiones. Las lenguas son ecología en su más amplio sentido, las lenguas no existen sin hablantes.
En cambio, en su inquisición el signiﬁcado originario de nawa Aguiar acaba decantándose por una primitivo valor de ‘cicatriz – marca’.4 Para comenzar, reconozcamos que le asiste a Aguiar todo el derecho a la hora de apelar al argumento de su «sentido más especíﬁco» (most speciﬁc meaning) para avalar su hipótesis. En efecto, la mayor concreción, materialidad, visualidad y especiﬁcidad de un signiﬁcado suele denunciarlo como más primitivo y así, por ejemplo, el mayor ﬁsicismo –y visualidad, desde luego– de ojo como órgano de la visión lo hace, como de hecho sabemos, preceder sus otros valores metafóricos de ‘agujero’, ‘fuente’ o ‘centro’, o bien metonímicos de ‘atención’, ‘perspicacia’ o ‘visión’. Ahora bien, esta tendencia se invierte en los procesos de copias, es decir, en las

3. «[yawá] […] “wild pig” in various Pano languages». 4. «We suggest that nawa had as the ﬁrst meaning the idea of “mark”».

Comentario

43

transferencias interlingüísticas donde a menudo una palabra genérica como inglés look ‘aspecto’ o español puesto acaban con un valor mucho más especíﬁco en respectivamente español ‘aspecto físico’ o valenciano ‘pequeño comercio’.
Pero junto a la virtual impugnación del argumento de la mayor especiﬁcidad quedarían en pie otras potenciales objeciones. En efecto, ese valor supuestamente original de ‘cicatriz – marca’ tan sólo estaría documentado en la lengua catuquina y además en concurrencia con el signiﬁcado de ‘gente’. Por otra parte y siempre en el supuesto de que no se trate de una pura homonimia, para Aguiar la hipótesis opuesta –la de que ‘gente – pueblo’ sea el valor originario de nawa- le parece improbable por la diﬁcultad de cómo se alcanzaría el signiﬁcado de marca.5 Ahora bien, Aguiar no aduce aquí ninguna particularidad cultural concreta del pueblo catuquina salvo el defendido arcaísmo de esta habla y su unilingüismo6 y se limita a trazar en abstracto una hipótesis aplicable a tantas otras culturas o pueblos. En consecuencia, puestos a conjeturar en abstracto, podría darse el caso simplemente de que unos especíﬁcos tatuajes con ﬁguras humanas con ‘hombres’ o ‘gente’ pasaran a denominar –la parte por el todo– al tatuaje en sí u otro tipo de marca. En todo caso y dicho sea esto a favor de Aguiar, la concatenación de signiﬁcados ‘azul/ verde – marca – gente – nativo – forastero’ sugiere que el empleo del tatuaje –verosímilmente de color azul siue verde– pueda haber servido de marca diferencial entre los considerados nativos o indígenas y los forasteros, entre nuestra gente y el enemigo.
En ﬁn, la etimología de nawa en relación con un no – nu ‘nosotros’ en la recogida propuesta de Tessmann (1990: 70) tiene muy buen fundamento tipológico y además permitiría segmentar la forma como na-wa, es decir, como incluyendo dos ancestralísimos temas demostrativos *na- y *ua- representados en la mayor parte de los conjuntos lingüísticos del planeta. En todo caso, la propuesta de un valor cercano al de ‘gente’ para nawa resulta –ha de reconocerse– la más natural y, desde luego, la más económica por su capacidad explicativa en tan amplios horizontes, mientras no se encuentren más poderosos argumentos en su contra.

REFERENCIAS
BATISTA Y ROCA, José María (19625): «Los pueblos de África», en P. Bosch Gimpera (dir.), Las Razas Humanas. Barcelona, Instituto Gallach, II, 162-309.
BERNÁRDEZ, Enrique (1999): ¿Qué son las lenguas? Madrid, Alianza Editorial.
5. «to take “people” and “folk” as the base meaning of nawa, seems to us not to be probable, for it is difﬁcult to see how, starting from this semantic content, it is possible to point to the creation of the meaning “mark” and “scar”».
6. «because of the use of the traditional language, since the language of the Katukina group is practically the only one for its members».

44

Xaverio Ballester

DIETRICH, Wolf (2003): «Las lenguas indígenas de América del Sur en la obra de Antonio Tovar», en E. Ridruejo & M. Fuentes (coords.) y C. González–Espresati (col.), I Simposio Antonio Tovar sobre Lenguas Amerindias. Valladolid, Universidad de Valladolid, 155-169.
LOOS, Eugene R. (1999): «Pano», en R. M. W. Dixon y A. Y. Aikhenwald, The Amazonian Languages. Cambridge, Cambridge University Press, 227-250.
MALHERBE, Michel (1983): Les langages de l’humanité. Une encyclopédie des 3.000 langues parlées dans le monde. París, Seghers.
MARQUER, Paulette (19843): Las razas humanas, trad. J. Puig. Madrid, Alianza Editorial.
TESSMANN, Günter (1999): Los indígenas del Perú Nororiental: investigaciones fundamentales para un estudio sistemático de la cultura. Quito, Abya–Yala.
TRAPERO, Maximiano y Elena LLAMAS POMBO (1998): «¿Es guanche la palabra guanche? Revisión histórica, ﬁlológica y antropológica de un tópico». Anuario de Estudios Atlánticos 44, 99-196.
VILLAR, Francisco (1991): Los indoeuropeos y los orígenes de Europa. Lenguaje e historia. Madrid, Gredos.

Comentario

UniverSOS 5, 2008 45-5405

Comentario de Alain Fabre
Universidad de Tecnología de Tampere, Finlandia

La autora ha emprendido la tarea ingrata, pero altamente meritoria, de desbrozar la maraña de los gentilicios empleados para referirse a los diversos grupos pano, centrándose principalmente en las etimologías de los morfemas -bo, nawa y huaca, usados como suﬁjos para designar muchos grupos de esta familia lingüística. Discute también el origen de algunos otros gentilicios. Aguiar distingue entre nombres de origen pano y los demás, «Romance-Tupí» y tupí. Debemos a Aguiar (1993)1 el primer estudio que, con criterios lingüísticos, distingue entre katukina1 (fam. del mismo nombre) y katukina2 (fam. pano), hasta entonces fuente de mucha confusión, así como una presentación actualizada de las lenguas pano habladas en territorio brasileño (Aguiar 2007). La literatura registra un sinnúmero de denominaciones aplicadas a grupos pano, o supuestamente tales, listas que para colmo superponen varios estratos temporales. Así, Loukotka (1968) totaliza 61 nombres, sin tener en cuentas variantes referidas a un mismo grupo. Shell (1975), reﬁriéndose a los trabajos generales de Mason y McQuown, lista un total aproximado de 80 nombres. En su cuadro panorámico de las lenguas pano, Loos (1999) incluye 30 lenguas, de las cuales el autor da once por extintas. Como no soy especialista en lingüística pano, mis observaciones sobre aspectos de lenguas particulares quedarán a un nivel muy superﬁcial.
En §1, la autora presenta una discusión general sobre el arte de nombrar y apodar, después de la cual §2 aborda el problema de las motivaciones para los antropónimos pano, punto que no se puede tratar sin los aportes combinados de la antropología y la lingüística. Uno de los campos más fructíferos de la antropología estudia precisamente los temas ligados a la percepción de la alteridad y del grupo propio. Es interesante notar que, de una manera paralela, esta temática es ampliamente debatida en las organizaciones indígenas. Como se sabe, es muy frecuente, sobre todo en sociedades tradicionales de cazadores-recolectores y horticultores de roza y quema, la falta de una autodenominación. A menudo basta un pronombre personal de primera persona plural, exclusiva si existe tal categoría en la lengua, frente a una expresión como ‘los otros’. Otro término usual como autodenominación es ‘personas’ u ‘hombres’, términos ambiguos si los hay. Varios antropólogos han observado que entre los pano es muy frecuente tener nombres para clanes y/o mitades, sin disponer de un nombre que abarque todo el grupo. En situación de elicitación, que a menudo acaba por acorralar a los indagados para obtener el dato esperado, suele recabar varias denominaciones, pero hay típicamente poco consenso entre los consultantes acerca de las extensiones e intensiones de los términos. Nosotros
1. Las referencias bibliográﬁcas del artículo de Aguiar no se repiten en las de este comentario.

46

Alain Fabre

los lingüistas también debemos siempre estar alertas sobre la validez y/o naturalidad de cualquier dato obtenido por elicitación. Incluso autodenominaciones ‘oﬁciales’ resultan muy ﬂexibles y abiertas. Hablando de los huni kuin, autodenominación ‘oﬁcial’ de los kashinawa, Deshayes y Keifenheim (1994) sienten la necesidad de recurrir a menudo al «insulto» kashinawa, impuesto desde afuera, pero menos ambiguo en ciertos contextos, ya que huni signiﬁca simplemente ‘hombre’ y kuin ‘correcto, de buena(s) costumbre(s)’ (Montag 1981). Valga aquí también como ilustración del problema la anécdota contada por Erikson (2004). Comentando una expresión equivocada proferida por él ante sus huéspedes matis, el investigador se disculpó diciendo: «es que yo no soy matis», a lo cual su interlocutor replicó: «¿si no eres matis, qué serás?, ¿acaso un pedazo de carne?». Así, el término supuestamente más especíﬁco y excluyente (matis) llega a solaparse con el más general (humano), como si la línea recta del continuo, con sus polos opuestos, se incurvara para formar un círculo, a modo del famoso ciclo de las quintas de la teoría musical. En otra ocasión el mismo investigador vuelve a este tema:
A questão dos etnônimos, na área pano, é na verdade insolúvel, e tanto mais instrutiva justamente por isso. A razão disso é que a identiﬁcação se dá ou no nível mais imediato (grupo local, segmento de grupo local: uni no sentido de ‘parentes’) ou, ao contrário, no nível mais genérico possível: o da área pano (todos os que têm tatuagens [...]). É como se se tentasse anular as etapas intermédias, de modo a deixar a porta aberta para alianças que transcendem o nível «étnico», que tanto preocupa os observadores ocidentais [...] (Erikson 1992).
Para las organizaciones indígenas también, tener una autodenominación general cobra sentido, pues implica más cohesión social en la defensa de sus derechos y representación en el espacio nacional e internacional. A veces se puede observar el surgimiento de nuevas autodenominaciones, incluso cuando supuestamente ya las hay. Traigo a colación un ejemplo reciente del Chaco paraguayo, donde existe un grupo étnico conocido desde afuera como chorote, sin distinción de subgrupos, o como manjui, término referente a un subgrupo del interior, en contraposición con otras entidades ubicadas cerca del río Pilcomayo, sobre la frontera argentina. Ahora bien, el nombre manjui les ha sido impuesto por sus vecinos nivacle, de la misma familia lingüística. De acuerdo con cierta antropóloga argentina, los manjui tendrían dos autodenominaciones para sendas variedades de su idioma. Aparentemente, estos nombres fueron obtenidos por vía de elicitación, y los «manjui» del Paraguay parecen desconocerlos. Ahora bien, en el año 2005, hallándose presentes dos investigadores paraguayos, algunos maestros bilingües decidieron buscarse una autodenominación. En reunión con dirigentes locales y ancianos, no hubo consenso inmediato, ni por el nombre étnico ni por las dos variedades lingüísticas en presencia. Según la relación de los dos investigadores citados, optaron los del subgrupo del interior por llamarse lumnanas, y su idioma lumna wos ‘idioma de la gente del norte’. Sin embargo, solo algunos de los presentes en la asemblea realmente adoptaron la nueva denomina-

Comentario

47

ción. Los relatos son muy ambiguos al respecto: «Ante la situación de la pérdida de la autodenominación, los líderes de esta etnia coincidieron en luchar juntos para lograr la reapropiación de la palabra y de la cultura. Dentro de este objetivo, han organizado una Asamblea en el mes de enero de 2005, donde se dialogó sobre la autodenominación» (Bareiro 2006). ¿Estaríamos, pues, frente a la busca de una autodenominación «perdida», que probablemente nunca existió (lectura occidental)? o ¿se estaría buscando un modo de volver a ser dueños de su propio mundo y apropiarse el derecho a (re)escribir su propia historia (lectura indígena que brota de una situación de enfrentamiento desequilibrado tras una historia ininterrumpida de colonialización)? No es mera casualidad la coincidencia temporal de los acontecimientos referidos en estas comunidades del Chaco paraguayo con la creación por algunos maestros bilingües de un metalenguaje nativo para enseñar las operaciones matemáticas básicas, y la numeración hasta mil.
Es también necesario subrayar que los nombres de lenguas no siempre corresponden a nombres de grupos étnicos, lo cual acarrea muchas diﬁcultades para la clasiﬁcación. Aguiar subraya, con razón, que los nombres bajo los cuales conocemos a los grupos étnicos, provienen mayormente de otros grupos, tanto indígenas como mestizos y otros neoamericanos. Lo peculiar de la situación pano radica en el hecho de que, en su gran mayoría, los antropónimos son, sin embargo, de origen pano. Inﬂuyen en eso, sin lugar a dudas, la conﬁguración particular del territorio pano que, con excepción del corredor ucayalino, eje de grandes migraciones étnicas, y de pequeños grupos pano del norte de Bolivia y de la zona fronteriza entre este país y el Brasil, los grupos panos ocupan una zona étnicamente bastante homogénea.
Dado el hecho sumamente humano de destacar en los grupos ajenos sus rasgos de alteridad más visibles y/o raros, no es de extrañar que tales gentilicios resultan muchas veces injuriosos. Deshayes y Keifenheim (1994) notan que los kashinawa son llamado sainawa ‘gritones’, por sus vecinos pano. Para dar un ejemplo europeo conocido, para referirse a los alemanes, las lenguas eslavas usan el término ‘mudos’ (ruso nem-ets), de etimología transparente. Aguiar destaca asimismo, en su discusión del término nawa, una frecuente referencia a escariﬁcaciones, pinturas corporales y tatuajes como posibles marcas deﬁnitorias para subgrupos pano, fenómeno ampliamente corroborado y desarrollado por antropólogos panólogos como Deshayes y Keifenheim (1994), Erikson (1986, 1993, 1996), Keifenheim (1992, 1996a y 1996b, 1997), Lagrou (2002).
En §3, Aguiar nota que -bo (presente en un mínimo de diez nombres) y nawa (presente en vieintisiete nombres) suelen unirse mayormente a nombres de animales y plantas y que -bo es pluralizador. Shell (1975) reconstruye *-bo‹ ‘suﬁjo colectivo’ para el proto-pano. En cuanto al signiﬁcado de nawa, puede ser tanto ‘pueblo/persona’ como ‘enemigo’, pero también ‘escariﬁcación’. De acuerdo con Aguiar, aparece a menudo en nombres de clanes. Shell (1975) considera esta palabra como patrimonio lexical pano, y lo reconstruye como *nawa. Se recordará la importancia de las escariﬁcaciones, tatuajes y otros adornos corporales en la identiﬁcación de los grupos pano. De ahí que no debe

48

Alain Fabre

sorprendernos demasiado el nexo (metafórico) persona-escariﬁcación. Aguiar propone que el signiﬁcado primitivo sea ‘escariﬁcación’, por ser el más especíﬁco. Con razón, la autora dice que el paso de ‘escariﬁcación/marca corporal’ a ‘persona’ es más lógico que la evolución inversa. Para terminar con los nombres de origen pano, la autora discute los nombres en <huaca> ~ <waka>, de los cuales señala tres. En su nota al pie no 31, escribe que «Panobo is characterized as the oldest Pano language as it has various signs which show that other languages were derived from it». Esta aﬁrmación me parece ambigua, en tanto que sugiere al lector que se trataría de una protolengua; o ¿quiere decir que el panobo (junto con variedades probablemente muy parecidas wariapano y pano propiamente dicho) sería una de las primeras lenguas pano de las cuales tenemos un vocabulario y una descripción gramatical (el «pano» de Navarro 1927)? La discusión del nombre atsahuaca como ‘water manioc’ o ‘poisoned manioc’ lleva a la autora a conclusiones altamente especulativas: «[...] this name suggests the occurrence of a conﬂict between the groups from which an event involving people being poisoned came about». Habría, quizás, otra explicación más simple, sugerida en Deshayes y Keifenheim (1994: 151) a propósito de los kashinawa, entre los cuales la palabra atsa signiﬁca también ‘yuca, mandioca’. Estos autores escriben que la variedad amarga (muka atsa) era desconocida de los kashinawa y fue introducida entre ellos por misioneros católicos. Como se sabe, y al contrario de la yuca dulce, la variedad amarga, para ser aprovechada como alimento o bebida, necesita un proceso de elaboración bastante soﬁsticado, destinado a vaciarla de las substancias venenosas que contiene. Es muy posible que el uso de la yuca amarga haya sido percibido como rasgo distintivo de los grupos que la usaban, de ahí el empleo de esta palabra para referirse a grupos humanos a modo de otros tantos nombres de plantas y animales. Entre otros nombres de origen pano, Aguiar discute las etimologías y motivaciones posibles de las palabras matis, matses y nukini. Hablando de este último nombre, la autora aclara que debe ser el único grupo pano conocido bajo su autodenominación. ¿Podría deberse a un contacto reciente? En §3.5, Aguiar pasa revista a seis nombres de origen no pano. Llama la atención el grupo Apolima-Arara, tratado con más detenimiento en Aguiar (2007), formado por cinco grupos pano diferentes, de los cuales, según la autora, el 30% aún habla su lengua ancestral. Los Apolima-Arara, como nota Aguiar, buscan reconocimiento oﬁcial. De ahí surge cierta necesidad de estrechar lazos de solidaridad entre entidades étnicas, hasta entonces diferenciadas, para lograr esta meta. ¿Cuál será, en deﬁnitiva, la solución lingüística adoptada por este «nuevo» grupo étnico para deﬁnirse en conjunto (si es que no descarta la lengua como emblema de su autodeﬁnición)? ¿Adoptarán el portugués, el shawandawa (lengua mayoritaria) o cada uno seguirá hablando la suya propia? Para terminar, en §3.6, Aguiar analiza los nombres mayo, mayoruna y parquenahua. La interpretación que la investigadora propone para mayoruna me parece también muy especulativa. De hecho, parece quechua, mayo ‘río’ (en grafía tradicional) y runa ‘hombre, persona’. Dada la toponimia quechua de gran parte de la selva peruana, no sería imposible que un grupo ribereño haya recibido el apodo de ‘hombres del río’, pero tal explicación podría resultar demasiado fácil, sobre

Comentario

49

todo si se tiene presente el gran número de obras descabelladas que buscan etimologías quechua a gran parte del subcontinente. Tampoco el origen español de la primera parte de parque+nahua es muy convincente, porque el antropónimo es mucho más antiguo que la fundación de varios parques nacionales en la selva peruana. Con buen juicio, Aguiar cierra su trabajo con referencias al frecuente origen de los gentilicios pano en apodos y nombres de clanes. Otros nombres habrían surgido bajo presiones exteriores. La autora hace también alusión a situaciones de contactos interétnicos debidos al reagrupamiento de varios grupos en un mismo territorio. Con mucha razón termina por incentivar a los propios interesados a considerar y decidir por sí mismos bajo cuáles nombres quisieran ser conocidos por la sociedad envolvente.

BAREIRO, Víctor (2006): La etnia manjui-lumnanas del Chaco, Biblioteca Paraguaya de Antropología, vol. 56. Asunción, CEADUC.
CALAVIA SÁEZ, Oscar (2000): «O Inca Pano: Mito, história e modelos etnológicos». Mana, 6/2, 7-35.
— (2001): «El rastro de los pecaríes: variaciones míticas, variaciones cosmológicas e identidades étnicas en la etnología pano». Journal de la Société des Américanistes, 87, 161-176.
CHAMORRO, Andrea (2006): Lumnanas (gente del monte). Los manjui, Biblioteca Paraguaya de Antropología, vol. 52. Asunción, CEADUC.
DESHAYES, Patrick y Barbara KEIFENHEIM (1994): Penser l’autre chez les Indiens Huni Kuin de l’Amazonie. París, L’Harmattan.
ERIKSON, Philippe (1986): «Altérité, tatouage et anthropophagie chez les Pano: la belliqueuse quête du soi». Journal de la Société des Américanistes, LXXII, 185-210.
— (1993): «Une nébuleuse compacte: le macro ensemble pano». L’Homme 126/128, 45-58.
— (1996): La griffe des aïeux. Marquage du corps et démarquages ethniques chez les Matis d’Amazonie. París/Lovaina, Peeters.
— (2004): «Qu’est-ce qu’un ethnonyme? L’exemple matis (Amazonie, Brésil)», Cahiers ALHIM, 10. <http://alhim.revues.org/document112.html>.
GOMES, Graciela de Jesus, Gláucia Vieira CÂNDIDO y Lincoln Almir AMARANTE RIBEIRO (s. f.): Língua karipuna pano: um estudo introdutório. <http://paginas.terra. com.br/educacao /GICLI/ArtigoKaripuna.pdf>.
KEIFENHEIM, Barbara (1992): «Identité et altérité chez les Indiens Pano». Journal de la Société des Américanistes, LXXVIII/II, 79-93.
— (1996a): «Wir, die Weißen und die Wilden. Fremd- und Eigenbilder der KashinawaIndianer im Wandel», Historische Anthropologie, 4. Jahrgang, Heft 3.
— (1996b): «Nawa: un concept de l’altérité ches les Pano». Journal de la Société des Américanistes, LXXVI, 79-94.

50

Alain Fabre

KEIFENHEIM, Barbara (1997): «Futurs beaux-frères ou esclaves? Les Kashinawa découvrent des indiens non contactés». Journal de la Société des Américanistes, 83, 141-158.
LAGROU, Elsje Maria (2002): «O que nos diz a arte Kaxinawá sobre a relaçäo entre identidade e alteridade?». Mana, 8/1, 29-61.
LEPRI, Isabella (2005): «Identidade e alteridade entre os Ese Ejja da Bolívia setentrional». Mana 11/2, 449-472.
LOOS, Eugene E. (1999): «Pano», en Robert M. W. Dixon y Alexandra Y. Aikhenvald (eds.), The Amazonian languages. Cambridge, CUP, 227-250.
LOUKOTKA, CÙestmír (1968): Classiﬁcation of South American Indian languages. Los Ángeles, UCLA.
MONTAG, Susan (1981): Diccionario cashinahua. Tomo I. Yarinacocha, ILV. SHELL, Olive A. (1975): Las lenguas pano y s su reconstrucción. Yarinacocha, ILV.

Comentario

UniverSOS 5, 2008 51-561

Comentario de Gustavo Solís Fonseca
CILA_UNMSM, Perú

Comienzo este comentario con algunas referencias a la contabilidad de «idiomas» al interior de la familia pano, constituida según algunos por al menos 28 «lenguas», de las que 15 estarían vigentes. El número de nombres de lenguas pano es casi 100 en J. A. Mason (1950); pero la cantidad de «nombres» resulta mayor según M. R. Key (1997), quien menciona 250 nombres de entidades lingüísticas en el grupo referido. En el caso particular del Perú, en la lista de «lenguas» pano suele contarse a las siguientes entidades: Amahuaca, Capanahua, Cashibo-Cacataibo, Cashinahua, Mayoruna (Matsés), ShipiboConibo, Yaminahua. Frente a este listado, el registro de «nombres» de lenguas es abrumadoramente bastante extenso.
La cuestión de fondo es precisar si se trata de una contabilidad de lenguas, o si estamos solo ante una contabilidad de «nombres». En todo caso, es un asunto de no poca importancia y complejidad que merece dilucidarse para una mejor comprensión de la realidad lingüística de la familia de lenguas pano. Incidentalmente, conviene llamar la atención sobre la cuestión del correlato no lingüístico de la abundancia de nombres y de «lenguas» en el seno del grupo genético mencionado.
La sorprendente profusión de «lenguas» ha sido una preocupación de los estudiosos, pues la elevada cantidad de «idiomas» en la familia ha sido siempre materia de desconﬁanza. La inseguridad sobre el número de leguas pano realmente existentes ha sido una piedra en los zapatos de los especialistas y vista como un caos, por lo mismo un reto a enfrentar con miras a esclarecer la realidad. Una primera respuesta en la dirección de introducir un «orden» en el supuesto caos ha sido revisar las clasiﬁcaciones de lenguas de la familia para establecer relaciones genéticas más precisas. Los trabajos de d’Ans et. al. (1972) y Grimes (1988) evidencian intentos en tal sentido. Así, a partir del estudio de d’Ans se constituyen los siguientes grupos lingüísticos pano: a): Grupo ucayalino, claramente señalable, integrado por: shipibo, cashinahua y panavarro; b) grupo integrado por cashibo y las demás lenguas que conformarían el Pano sureste o Pano de las cabeceras. A su vez, Grimes y Grimes clasiﬁcan a las lenguas pano en grupos ubicados deícticamente en el territorio suramericano, estableciendo 10 grupos.
La abundancia de nombres de lenguas va aparejada a una relativa regularidad en las denominaciones de los idiomas, evidenciada en la forma de los nombres, los mismos que están conformados en la mayor parte de los casos por una raíz nominal más un suﬁjo, sea -bo (o variantes), -nawa (o variantes) y waka, y nombres más bien singulares, pero pocos en número, que no tienen esas marcas especíﬁcas señaladas previamente. El trabajo de

52

Gustavo Solís Fonseca

Maria Sueli de Aguiar remarca precisamente la relativa regularidad en la formación de los nombres de grupos pano.1
1. CUESTIÓN TERMINOLÓGICA
Consideramos deseable especializar el término antropónimo para referirse a los nombres de las personas, es decir de los miembros de un pueblo para individualizarlos e identiﬁcarlos de manera única como a entidades especíﬁcas. La tradición onomástica usa precisamente la palabra antroponimia para designar a la rama de la Onomástica que se ocupa del nombre de las personas. De otro lado, en ausencia de una clara vigencia del término respectivo para pueblo, etnia o nación, es deseable especializar el término etnónimo para referirse a los nombres de los grupos étnicos, pueblos, o nación (en sentido etimológico). En analogía con el duplete toponimia y topónimo, lo conveniente será el uso de antroponimia y antropónimo, así como de etnonimia y etnónimo.
En el trabajo se usa antroponimia para lo que aquí se propone como etnonimia; y antropónimo como equivalente de etnónimo. Siendo así, podemos señalar que la discusión es sobre etnónimos, es decir, es una cuestión de etnonimia, antes que de antroponimia.
2. CLAN Y/O PUEBLO
La palabra grupo y las expresiones en las que ﬁgura esta forma son ambiguas en el texto de María S. de Aguiar. La emisión «grupo» de la secuencia «grupo pano» es semánticamente poco clara, pues no se deﬁne qué es un grupo. Esta es una primera necesidad de esclarecimiento. Vamos a asumir en este comentario que por grupo entenderemos aquí, en una forma restringida, la referencia a dos clases de formaciones sociales que están implicadas en la discusión. La primera es la formación social que se llama clan, la cual es de vigencia bastante generalizada en la Amazonia Baja, al menos en el Perú, y que caracteriza muy nítidamente a la familia Pano de lenguas, de la que se dice, en tanto grupo inclusivo, que se constituye por sociedades del tipo que los especialistas denominan clanes. En lo que respecta al grupo pano, el número de clanes que lo componen es indeterminado, pues las referencias cuantitativas siempre son hechas apelando a expresiones cuantiﬁcadoras

1. Incidentalmente, cabe anotar que el estudio de las denominaciones en general requiere desarrollarse teóricamente. Un aspecto de la insuﬁciencia teórica es la ambigüedad de algunas entradas de la terminología para describir y captar las realidades de cada universo de denominación y de la denominación en general. La insuﬁciencia también se maniﬁesta en la falta de especiﬁcidad de los fenómenos y factores involucrados en la nominación, e incluso en la inseguridad sobre el objeto de la onomástica y los objetos particulares de las ramas de esta disciplina relativamente vasta.

Comentario

53

imprecisas, tales como «muy numerosa» o «numerosa». La otra formación social a la que se reﬁere en el texto ambiguamente con el termino «grupo» es, según mí parecer, aquella que solemos identiﬁcar en el marco legal internacional (a partir del Convenio 169 de la OIT) con el nombre de «pueblo» o equivalentes sinonímicos. Como se sabe, el término pueblo es sinónimo legal (si cabe la expresión) de las formas nación (nacionalidad) o etnia, consideradas éstas en su aspecto etimológico.
En el caso especíﬁco del trabajo, «grupo» se reﬁere casi siempre a las formaciones del tipo de clanes, y en menor medida a entidades sociales del tipo de pueblos (en el sentido que le da OIT a este término), y a nación o etnia en el sentido etimológico. Es decir, los grupos a los cuales se hace referencia son, tratándose de la familia Pano de lenguas, en unos casos clanes y en otros pueblos o naciones. Los nombres en discusión serán, entonces, nombres de clanes o de pueblos, usados por extensión como nombres de las hablas respectivas de tales grupos.

3. LA FUERTE IDENTIDAD CLÁNICA ENTRE LOS PANO
Los miembros de los clanes pano tienen una alta conciencia de su identidad clánica, muy por encima de cualquier otra identidad, si acaso asumen más de una (de membresía de familia lingüística, regional, peruana, por ejemplo). Pero como es obvio, la alta conciencia de identidad clánica es una cuestión histórica, pues ésta puede ser alta en un momento dado, pero en otro baja o incluso devenir en un proceso de abandono de identidad. Varios grupos clánicos han abandonado su identidad clánica especíﬁca para subsumirse en otra, en ciertos casos fortaleciendo a otro clan, debilitándose o desapareciendo. Por ejemplo, los clanes shipibo y cashibo de la zona del río Ucayali en el Perú han asimilado a miembros de otros clanes, tales como cunibo y cacataibo, respectivamente.
Lo que este proceso de asimilación clánica da cuenta es la vigencia de eventos de formación de pueblos como conjuntos de clanes a partir de la asimilación de ciertos otros clanes, en una suerte de etnogénesis de un pueblo o de una nación con más poder, con más territorio, con mayor número de miembros, etc.; y con una identidad que corresponde no a la particular del clan sino a una más inclusiva, en cuyo marco pueden subsistir elementos de un imaginario particular, al lado de otro que se construye como referente de una nueva formación social y de una nueva identidad. Las denominaciones ‘étnicas (con guión) shipibo-conibo y cashibo-cacataibo son ilustrativas de las nuevas formaciones sociales que son los pueblos respectivos: shipibo-conibo, constituido a partir de la conﬂuencia de los clanes shipibo y conibo, y cashibo-cacataibo, que en tanto nombre del pueblo respectivo da cuenta de la conﬂuencia de los clanes cashibo y cacataibo. Nótese, incidentalmente, que la conﬁguración formal de los nombres incorpora el recurso del guión para incluir a los otros componentes de la nueva formación social. Es más, el pueblo shipibo-conibo

54

Gustavo Solís Fonseca

también es históricamente la suma de los miembros del clan shetebo, quienes se subsumen en esa entidad mayor que se llama shipibo-conibo, pero el nombre del pueblo no tiene más guión para señalar que también cuenta con el aporte shetebo.

4. LA MOTIVACIÓN DE LOS ETNÓNIMOS
Las denominaciones de «lenguas» pano provienen de los nombres de los grupos humanos respectivos que pueden ser clanes o pueblos. Tales nombres son formas sustantivales, la mayor parte de ellas conformada por una raíz nominal y un suﬁjo que alude semánticamente a sentido plural. Así, cashibo es el conjunto de la gente cashi, cuyo sentido plural se marca con la agregación del suﬁjo -bo, o de -nawa en el caso del etnnónimo cashinawa. Maria S. de Aguiar agrega una tercera categoría de nombres con la marca -waka. La raíz del nombre alude a la entidad totémica con la cual se relacionan las personas del grupo y el mismo conjunto grupal en tanto asumen que el nombre especíﬁco los identiﬁca. Por ejemplo, el nombre pano-bo contiene la forma sustantival pano que se dice se reﬁere a un tipo de «armadillo», el cual es el símbolo totémico del grupo panobo. La idea de conjunto o de identidad global de todos los pano que se asocian con dicho tótem se marca con el suﬁjo -bo. En resumen, el nombre pano tendrá el signiﬁcado étnico «el pueblo armadillos». Este signiﬁcado deviene de la asunción por cada individuo de su identidad como miembro de un clan, pero también de la identidad en conjunto de todos aquellos que asumen su pertenencia al mismo clan. Otros grupos pano apelan a un suﬁjo diferente que funcionalmente también identiﬁca a un clan o pueblo étnico. Tal suﬁjo es -nawa, que para algunos signiﬁca «extranjero».
Aguiar señala cuatro motivaciones en la constitución de los etnónimos pano. Estas cuatro motivaciones son categorías inclusivas mayores de motivos más especíﬁcos que están en la génesis de los nombres de los grupos clánicos: a) expresiones orales, b) tatuajes corporales (body marking), c) artefactos, y d) necesidades de los no indígenas.
En el aspecto lingüístico el sistema etnonímico se conﬁgura adoptando la forma de palabras de la lengua y probablemente también de frases. Cuando se conﬁgura como palabras, el etnónimo aparece conformado como una secuencia de morfema raíz nominal más un suﬁjo, éste es uno de tres posibles: -bo, -nawa y -waka. Hay además una cantidad de etnónimos que no se conﬁguran como secuencias de raíz y suﬁjo, pues son nominales que no incorporan -bo, -nawa ni -waka.
Hay entonces en pano cuatro categorías de nombres etnonímicos: a) categoría -bo. b) categoría -nawa, c) categoría -waka, y d) categoría ni -bo, ni -nawa, ni -waka.

Comentario

55

5. PROCEDENCIA LINGÜÍSTICA DE LOS ETNÓNIMOS
Los etnónimos pano tienen varia procedencia en cuanto a lengua de origen se reﬁere: a) nombres de origen pano, que son la inmensa mayoría; y b) nombres de origen no pano. Estos últimos pueden ser de origen en lenguas romance, en idiomas tupí, y seguramente hay algunos nombres que provienen de otras lenguas amerindias, como es el caso del nombre mayoruna (alternativo de matsés) del cual es plausible decir que proviene del quechua (mayu = río; runa = gente).

6. ETNONIMOS E IDENTIDADES SOCIALES
Los etnónimos pano en referencia pueden ser organizados, en cuanto a la entidad social a la que se reﬁeren, en dos grandes grupos:
a. Nombres de grupos organizados como clanes b. Nombres de grupos organizados como etnias o pueblos
Gran parte de los nombres presentados y discutidos en el artículo son emisiones que funcionan como nombres de clanes; pero una parte menor tiene como referencia a formaciones del tipo de pueblos (en el sentido del convenio 169 de la OIT). Estas últimas son resultado de procesos de etnogénesis bastante recientes, como son los casos shipiboconibo, cashibo-cacataibo o yaminahua. Al ﬁnal, es razonable decir que la cuestión de los nombres de grupos pano implica dar cuenta de su veracidad como nombre de clan, vigente o históricamente existente; y cuando no se trata de un clan, de su referencia a una entidad asimilable con pueblo o nación. No hay al parecer ni la memoria ni la constancia de una entidad sincrónica diferente a las que aludimos.
Si bien las entidades a las que se nomina son grupos humanos; la expresión ‘grupo’ es vaga y hay la necesidad de precisión. Las entidades nominadas son formaciones sociales, pero éstas son especíﬁcas, pues concretamente se trata ya sea de clanes o de pueblos o etnias que se aﬁlian lingüísticamente a la familia de lenguas pano. Las formaciones sociales llamadas clanes son numerosas al interior de la familia, las cuentas varían bastante, con referencias de más de 50 e incluso de 80 entidades de este tipo; de allí que los correlatos en términos de entidades lingüísticas han llevado a enumerar un alto número de nombres de lenguas, aunque en este aspecto hay discrepancias motivadas por la ambigüedad del término lengua versus dialecto, y la desconﬁanza sobre si la contabilidad es solo de lenguas o si también están incluidas formaciones lingüísticas del tipo de dialectos de una misma lengua. En todo caso, las entidades que se llaman clanes tienen nombres especíﬁcos y su número es alto tratándose de la familia de lenguas pano. La pregunta en el trabajo es ¿cuál es la motivación de estos nombres de clanes?, además ¿qué signiﬁcan los nombres de los grupos pano, que entendemos son nombres sea de clanes o de etnias?

56

Gustavo Solís Fonseca

La pregunta sobre la motivación requiere ser precisa, pues está por un lado la motivación del agente nominador; también la motivación del sistema en la medida en que todo sistema nominativo tiene un componente que es el motivo. El agente nominador puede ser externo al grupo, pero también es posible que sea interno; en este caso resultará que el nombre es una autodenominación. De otro lado, hay que imaginar las posibilidades de diversidad de agentes nominadores, sea entre los internos como también entre los externos. Por ejemplo, en un estudio de problemas de clasiﬁcación de lenguas en la Amazonía sur del Perú, sus autores llaman la atención sobre los nombres de los grupos indígenas y de la manera cómo estos nombres surgen. Dicen al respecto que encontraron nombres (d’Ans et al. 1972, p. 4):
– que los indígenas se aplicaban a sí mismos – unos indígenas aplicaban a otros indígenas – los blancos y mestizos aplicaban a indígenas
La variada posibilidad de interpretación de los nombres dependiendo de la diversidad de los interpretadores y de sus motivaciones es una razón adicional de complejidad de la denominación. Aquí hay un campo amplio para la sistematización de la práctica relacionada con la nominación de los grupos étnicos o formaciones sociales entre los grupos humanos indígenas y, en general, en cualquier grupo.

REFERENCIAS Y FUENTES GENERALES
AGUIAR, Maria Sueli de (1994): Fontes de pesquisa e estudo da familia Pano. Campinas. UNICAMP.
D’ANS, André y Elsa VAN DEN EYNDE (1972): «Léxico arahuaca (Pano)». Documento de Trabajo, 6. CILA-UNMSM. Lima.
D’ANS, André, María CAVARÍA, Nilda GUILLÉN y Gustavo SOLÍS (1972): Problemas de clasiﬁcación lingüística en el sureste peruano. Doc. No. CILA_UNMSM. Lima.
GRIMES, Bárbara F. (1988): Ethnologue. Languages of the World. SIL Inc. Eleven Edition. USA.
KEY, Mary R. (1997): South American Indian Languages. Vol 1. Provisional. Unpublished Proofs. Intercontinental Dictionary Series.
MASON, J. Alden (1950): «The languages of South American Indians», en Julian H. Steward (ed.), Handbook of South American Indians, vol. 6. Washington DC.
QUEIXALOS, Francisco y Odile RENAULT-LESCURE (eds.) (2000): As linguas amazonicas hoje. IRD, ISA, MPEG. Sao Paulo. Brazil.
SOLÍS FONSECA, Gustavo (2003): Lenguas en la Amazonía Peruana. MINEDU-FORTE-PE. Lima.

Comentario

UniverSOS 5, 2008 57-6537

Comentario de Pilar M. Valenzuela
Chapman University, EE. UU.

The present discussion on Pano ethnonyms is to be placed within the framework of the «United Nations Declaration on the Rights of Indigenous Peoples», which in its Article 13 refers to the indigenous peoples’ right «to designate and retain their own names for communities, places and persons». The article at hand opens a dialogue among scholars on the names by which the various Pano groups are commonly known, departing from an analysis of their etymology and socio-historical context. This may contribute to scholars being more receptive to the demands of several indigenous groups which, as pointed out by the author, may ﬁnd the names they have been given infelicitous or outright pejorative. In these comments, «ethnonym» will refer to both the name of an ethnic group and their ethnic language, since these commonly receive the same designation. First, I will address issues of a general ethno-political nature, and next I will focus on aspects that are speciﬁc to Pano.
Although evident to most ﬁeldworkers and advocates, the right of a Native group to create, restore, maintain, or change their own ethnonyms is not always welcomed among scholars. For example, recently a renowned typologist questioned my use of the term «Shiwilu» to refer to the language/people most commonly known as «Jebero». My decision was mainly based on the strong preference for the term «Shiwilu» by the speakers of the language and community leaders. However, for the language expert whose work relies on the examination of published grammars, and who does not interact with members of the ethnic groups, this level of sensitivity may seem unnecessary and unpractical. Even though one might disagree with this colleague’s views, it must be recognized that ethnonym changes can interfere with the identiﬁcation of indigenous languages and populations, and even contribute to their «invisibility». As illustration, it is not uncommon for linguists to include in the opening paragraph of their studies phrases such as «This work is devoted to the description of language X, also known as Y and/or Z in the literature». The use of alternate orthographic conventions (which might have political implications) only increases the sense of «confusion». These practical issues become more signiﬁcant in comparative enterprises that deal with several languages/peoples simultaneously. Nevertheless, it is not acceptable, in my opinion, to prioritize practical considerations to the detriment of the linguistic rights of peoples, which are a central component of their basic human rights (Phillipson, Rannut & Skutnabb-Kangas 1995). Even if there is agreement on the need to discuss the adequacy of ethnonyms with the affected ethnic groups, some practical questions remain. For instance, at which instances should these discussions take place? What

58

Pilar M. Valenzuela

should be done if a consensus is not reached? This process can be particularly challenging in the case of peoples with relatively scattered populations, various types of contact with the dominant societies, afﬁliation to different organizations, and when established on opposite sides of international borders (as an example, there are Yaminahua populations in Peru, Brazil, and Bolivia). Furthermore, scholars and Indigenous group members may place different weight on certain criteria, such as the distinction between scientiﬁc versus folk etymologies, systematic application of the grammar rules of the language, or use of a given orthography.
An additional consideration to bear in mind is that, as any other human group, Indigenous peoples are constantly re-creating their own identities. Consider, for example, the process of ethnic-racial reclassiﬁcation that several Amazonian peoples are undergoing. These are groups of Indigenous origin that, after having undergone assimilation and being considered part of the non-Indian peasant population, unexpectedly reclaim an Indigenous identity thought already to have disappeared (Chirif 2007, Viatori 2007, Julou 2000). These groups of «Post-traditional Indians» (Perz, Warren, and Kennedy, 2008) might feel the need to modify or (re-)create the ethnonyms that they wish to adopt, based on the new realities. Also, recall the case of the Apolima-Arara cited by Aguiar.
The increasing ethno-political awareness achieved by members of Amazonian Indigenous peoples may also pose unexpected needs to re-examine group names that had previously gone unquestioned. This type of situation arose during the preparation of Koshi Shinanya Ainbo: el testimonio de una mujer shipiba, a book originally created in Shipibo. Although an important task of the editing team was to change the numerous Spanish loanwords in the original text for their Shipibo counterparts, there was one instance where the team decided on doing just the opposite; i.e., introduce a Spanish loanword in the Shipibo text, instead of the Native equivalent originally employed by the narrator. This situation involved the noun iná, which the protagonist employed to refer to the different Native Amazonian peoples, a meaning the term normally has among the Shipibo. That is, when expressing in her language the equivalent of «we, the Indigenous peoples of the Amazon», the protagonist used the phrase «noa, inábo» (noa ‘we’, iná ‘Amazonian Indian’, -bo plural). However, during the editing process, one of the collaborators strongly opposed this use of iná, arguing that the same noun has the additional meaning of «wild animal». In fact, iná is also employed with this second meaning in the book, when the protagonist refers to the tapir, peccary, or deer that was sacriﬁced at the Ani Xeati ceremony or female puberty rites. The Shipibo-Spanish dictionary deﬁnes iná as «1: offspring of a tamed animal or bird; 2: savage Indian (Loriot, Lauriault & Day 1993: 197). Given the collaborator’s views and feelings, the team decided to change the Shipibo term for the Spanish loanword indígena, which after adaptation to the phonological rules of Shipibo resulted in inríjina (Valenzuela 2008). Differently from its rejection in the Andes, the generalized acceptance of the term indígena among the Native peoples of the

Comentario

59

Peruvian Amazon is clearly associated to their higher levels of ethnic-racial awareness and the achievements of the indigenous movement of the region. The point that I wish to make is that Indigenous identities are dynamic, and that challenges regarding ethnonyms and other types of group names will persist even if/after the proposed discussions between scholars and Indigenous groups have taken place.
Last but not least, although linguists and anthropologists have much to contribute to the discussion on Indigenous peoples’ ethnonyms and human rights in general, it is the Indigenous peoples themselves who play the protagonist role in such processes. To a large extent, it has been thanks to the increasing political awareness of Indigenous groups and their participation in their own organizations that concrete changes have taken place. A good example is the eradication from the literature of the term Chama to refer to the Pano groups of the Ucayali: Shipibo, Conibo, and Shetebo. According to Morin (1998: 287-288), this term was introduced by Tessmann (1928), and was uncritically repeated by several other social scientists; Tessmann might have heard it from the Mestizos of the region, who until today make use of it, often to make the Shipibo feel inferior. As mentioned by Aguiar, the Shipibo consider it pejorative and offensive. An explanation of the way this term is interpreted by the Shipibo can be found in Valenzuela & Valera (2005: 182-183). It seems that the use of the term Chama decreased signiﬁcantly during the 1970s; crucially, this coincided with the political organization of the Shipibo in strong federations like FECONAU, Federación de Comunidades Nativas del Ucayali (Morin, op. cit.). Nowadays, important scholarly sources such as the Ethnologue (Gordon 2005) use as language entries names like Shipibo-Conibo, Asháninka / Ashéninka, Yora, Yine, or Yanesha’ (rather than Chama, Campa, (Parque)nahua, Piro, or Amuesha, respectively). Admittedly, more research, dialogue, and changes are still in order.
Like other Indigenous groups around the world, Pano peoples tend to refer to themselves as ‘Core People’, Huni Kuin or its variants (Cashinahua, Kensinger 1998; Amahuaca, Dole 1998; Shipibo-Conibo), or simply ‘People’, Uni (Cashibo-Cacataibo). This term is found in contraposition to Nawa, ‘the Others, the Outsiders’ (Náa in Amahuaca, Hyde 1980: 59; Nçç in Cashibo-Cacataibo, Shell 1975: 155), with whom relationships might be conﬂict-ridden. The term Nawa can refer to other Indigenous groups (either less or more assimilated to the dominant society), or to different groups of non-Indians. The complexity of the category Nawa is discussed by Bertrand Ricoveri (1994, in Morin 1998: 290-292), as well as in Valenzuela & Valera (2005: 179-181). It is also common to use speciﬁc names to identify clans or other segments of a population. These speciﬁc names usually involve a root that refers to an animal, plant, or element of the environment, to which the pluralizer {-Bo} ~ {-Bu} is added. As pointed out in Aguiar’s article, the current names of most Pano groups can be easily recognized due to the systematic patterns they exhibit, which involve the pluralizer mentioned above or the noun root Nawa. These elements can be reconstructed for Proto-Pano, as has been demonstrated by Shell (1975).

60

Pilar M. Valenzuela

Additionally, several of the forms that precede {-Bo} ~ {-Bu} and Nawa are also included in the cognate sets offered by Shell (op. cit.). The Pano origin of the ethnonyms under discussion supports the assumption that these might have been coined by other peoples speaking a language of the same family.
Several of the Pano ethnonyms have been accepted by the corresponding groups, in spite of the fact that the meanings are not always felicitous. Sometimes, the adoption of these ethnonyms is relatively recent and can still be recalled by ethnic group members. For example, it has been reported that the Amahuaca, who accept their ethnonym, recall hearing it for the ﬁrst time from military personal that arrived in their territory (Dole 1998: 133). In some instances, members of the corresponding ethnic group do not question the ethnonym by which they are known (and which may derive from a clan name), and even resort to narratives in attempting to explain its origin; this is the case of the Shipibo, the ‘Tamarin Monkeys’ (see Morin op. cit.), and the Amahuaca (see below). In other instances, an ethnic group accepts an ethnonym even though they are not able to interpret its etymology; this latter case corresponds to my experience with the Chacobo. In note 8, Aguiar states that chaco is translated as ‘pig’ by Zingg (1998: 93), and therefore she interprets the ethnonym Chacobo as ‘The Mean Ones/Pigs’. This is incorrect; as recorded by Zingg (op. cit.) the word for ‘pig’ in this Southern Pano language is chacho, from Spanish chancho. The loss of /n/ can be explained straightforwardly by a phonological rule attested in Chacobo, which deletes nasals in coda position, and applies to words of Pano origin as well as Spanish loans (Valenzuela & Iggesen 2007).
As for the etymology and use of Huariapano/Wariapano, absent in the article, consider the following:
waria «dale-dale», tubérculo comestible de color blancuzco; pano «armadillo gigante» (Priodontes maximus). A ﬁn de diferenciar el nombre de la lengua del de la familia lingüística, Tessmann [1930] opta por el término «panobo» (< pano + plural) para referirse a la primera, reservando el nombre «pano» para la categoría más inclusiva. Más recientemente, tanto Shell [1975] como Parker (en Parker et al. [1992]) señalan que los hablantes a los que personalmente tuvieron acceso llamaban a su lengua [wa.rja.’pa.no]. En este trabajo, emplearé el nombre «wariapano» ... (Valenzuela 2000, p. 50, footnote 1).
Finally, Pano ethnonyms and other group names may present an additional, less common, strategy of internal origin, which is not treated in the article. These are compounds that involve the noun /ßaki/ ‘Child’ as second element. For example, the Isconahua are also known as Iscobaque(bo) or «Children of the Paucar Bird». According to the Ethnologue, Amahuaca dialects registered in Brazil include Inuvaken and Viwivakeu (the portion in bold in the last name can be interpreted as /Baki-Bu/). An alternative hypothesis to the one proposed by Aguiar is that ethnonyms such as Amahuaca and Atsahuaca might

Comentario

61

also involve the ending /ßaki/ ‘Child’. The change from /Baki/ to /waka/ might be accounted for by the presence of [w] as a reﬂex of */B/ in certain Pano languages, including Amawaka and its neighbors, as well as by the non-existence of the vowel /i/ in Spanish and Portuguese, which might have led to its replacement by /a/. The following citation from Dole (1998) regarding the Amahuaca’s self-interpretation of their ethnonym seems to support this hypothesis: «Los mismos amahuaca pronuncian su nombre como Amin Waki, Hijos de la Capibara, explicando que antiguamente la capibara o ronsoco podia cantar en su lengua» (p. 133).
In sum, Aguiar opens the discussion on a very rich topic regarding the linguistic rights of the Pano peoples. In this process linguists and anthropologists can play the role of consultants and facilitators. As linguists, our main contribution should be to remain faithful to the comparative method of historical linguistics (Campbell 1999), and strive to arrive at scientiﬁc etymologies. By rigorously following this methodology, we can avoid overgeneralization of terms or meanings found in a single language (cf. nawa ‘mark, scar’ apparently only in Katukina). Application of the comparative method also implies examining the sound correspondences across languages, such as Matses and Matis, before discarding the possibility of a common etymology for their ethnonyms (that is, is there a recurrent correspondence between Matses /ts/ and Matis /t/?). Also, it is imperative to rigorously register the sources for every possible etymology, in a precise way (cf. the interpretation of Shetebo), and include statements (such as «Panobo is characterized as the oldest Pano language» in note 34) only when these can be supported by historical linguistic research.

REFERENCES
CAMPBELL, Lyle (1999): Historical linguistics: An introduction. Cambridge, Mass, The MIT Press.
CHIRIF, Alberto (2007): «Perú: A casi 40 años de La Sal de los Cerros». Servindi, <http:// www.servindi.org/archivo/2007/1554>, retrieved 05/28/2008.
DOLE, Gertrude E. (1998): «Los Amahuaca», in Fernando Santos and Frederica Barclay (eds.), Guía Etnográﬁca de la Alta Amazonía, vol. III, 125-273.
GORDON, Raymond G., Jr. (ed.) (2005): Ethnologue: Languages of the World, Fifteenth edition. Dallas, Tex., SIL International.
HYDE, Sylvia, with the collaboration of Robert RUSSELL, Delores RUSSELL, and María CONSUELO DE RIVERA (1980): Diccionario Amahuaca. Edición preliminar. Yarinacocha, Perú, ILV and Ministerio de Educación.
JULOU, Ronan (2000): «Les “prédateurs” d’histoire ou la reconstruction du passé par les Indiens Jebero». Bulletin d’Institut Français d’Études Andines, 29, 2, 189-214.

62

Pilar M. Valenzuela

KENSINGER, Kenneth M. (1998): «Los Cashinahua», in Fernando Santos and Frederica Barclay (eds.), Guía Etnográﬁca de la Alta Amazonía, vol. III, 1-124.
LORIOT, James, Erwin LAURIAULT, and Dwight DAY (1993): Diccionario shipibocastellano. Yarinacocha, Perú, ILV and Ministerio de Educación.
MORIN, Françoise (1998): «Los Shipibo-Conibo», in Fernando Santos and Frederica Barclay (eds.), Guía Etnográﬁca de la Alta Amazonía, vol. III, 275-435.
PARKER, Stephen, Arquímedes SINUIRI NUNTA, and Antonio RAMÍREZ CAIRUNA (1992): Datos del idioma huariapano. Documento de trabajo n. 24. Yarinacocha, Perú, ILV and Ministerio de Educación.
PERZ, Stephen G., Jonathan WARREN, and David P. KENNEDY (2008): «Contributions of Racial-Ethnic Reclassiﬁcation and Demographic Processes to Indigenous Population Resurgence: The Case of Brazil». Latin American Research Review, 43(2), 7-33.
PHILIPSON, Robert, Mart RANNUT, and Tove SKUTNABB-KANGAS (1995): «Introduction». Linguistic Human Rights: Overcoming Linguistic Discrimination. Berlin, Mouton de Gruyter, 1-22.
SANTOS, Fernando and Frederica BARCLAY (eds.) (1998): Guía etnográﬁca de la Alta Amazonía, vol. III. Quito, Ecuador, Ediciones Abya-Yala and Smithsonian Tropical Research Institute.
SHELL, Olive A. (1975): Las lenguas pano y su reconstrucción. Estudios Panos III, Serie Lingüística Peruana n. 12. Yarinacocha, Perú, ILV and Ministerio de Educación.
TESSMANN, Günter (1928): Menschen ohne Gott: Ein Besuch bei den Indianern des Ucayali. Stuttgart, Strecker und Schröder.
— (1999 [1930]): Los indios del Perú Nororiental. Trad. Gunda Wierhake. Quito, Ecuador, Ediciones Abya-Yala.
UNITED NATIONS (2008): United Nations declaration on the rights of Indigenous Peoples. <http://www.un.org/esa/socdev/unpﬁi/documents/DRIPS en.pdf>, retrieved 7/20/2008.
VALENZUELA, Pilar M. (2000): «Cuando los otros no son los mismos: Ideología y análisis gramatical, un caso desde la Amazonía Peruana». Lexis: Revista de Lingüística y Literatura, Departamento de Humanidades, Pontiﬁcia Universidad Católica del Perú, vol. XXIV, 1, 49-81.
— (2008): «El testimonio de una mujer shipiba: Una experiencia de colaboración intercultural. Conferencia plenaria», in Luis Miranda (ed.), Actas del V Congreso Internacional de Investigaciones Lingüístico-Filológicas. Lima, Perú, UNESCO, Academia Peruana de la Lengua, Universidad Nacional Mayor de San Marcos y Universidad Ricardo Palma, 111-134.
VALENZUELA, Pilar M. and Oliver IGGESEN (2007): «El desarrollo de un marcador suprasegmental en chácobo (pano)», in Andrés Romero-Figueroa, Ana Fernández Garay and Angel Corbera Mori (eds.), Lenguas indígenas de América del Sur: Estudios

Comentario

63

descriptivo-tipológicos y sus contribuciones para la lingüística teórica. Caracas, Publicaciones Universidad Católica Andrés Bello, 187-199. VALENZUELA BISMARCK, Pilar y Agustina VALERA ROJAS (2005): Koshi Shinanya Ainbo: El Testimonio de una mujer shipiba. Lima, Fondo Editorial Facultad de Ciencias Sociales, Universidad Nacional Mayor de San Marcos. VIATORI, Maximilian (2007): «Zápara Leaders and Identity Construction in Ecuador: The Complexities of Indigenous Self- Representation». Journal of Latin American and Caribbean Anthropology, vol. 12, 1, 104-133. ZINGG, Philipp (1998): Diccionario chacobo-castellano. La Paz, Ministerio de Desarrollo Sostenible y Planiﬁcación, Ministerio de Educación, Cultura y Deportes y Confederación de Pueblos Indígenas de Bolivia.

Réplica

UniverSOS 5, 2008 65-7605

Réplica de la autora

Firstly, I would like to thank all the professors who kindly read my article. I am pleased for their reading and also for their relevant comments, which are very signiﬁcant to the development of my studies and research. As for the answers, I tried to consider all their points of view and whenever necessary I use linguistic data in the text. When it is relevant, I present these data with their translation so that my explanations become clearer.
TO PROFESSOR WILLEM ADELAAR
The expression Bu can be analyzed under two linguistic perspectives, a morphologic and a syntactic one. In its morphologic aspect, it occurs adjunct to Noun + human (from now on N + human). That is, Bu is a plural morpheme (+ N), as in (1) [huni] «man» and (1’) [huni-Bu] «men». So, I state that the expression Bu, according to data I have collected in the Katukina language so far, acts as plural for humans.
In its syntactic aspect, this expression is manifested as a clitic positioned at the end of a sentence, as we see in (2) [hatu anipa-Bu] «They (+ human) are big». This expression may adjunct to the verb or to the verb tense to recover the subject (N human) of the sentence. An example is found in a context such as (3) [pˆßˆ anipa-ma aaBai-Bu] «(They - human) have made a not big tapiri».1 While it is a clitic, it may occur with the presence of the subject as in (4) [nukˆ tSUStSa-Bu] «We are dirty». Based on similar data presented here, I interpret Bu as an element which recovers traces of the formal subject when it happens in the VP (Verbal Phrase) of the sentence, thus giving the sentence the meaning N + human + plural. Therefore, in its syntactic aspect, it is a clitic that licenses null subject in the Katukina language when this subject is plural + human. Also, this clitic may be replaced by the third person plural «they».
As for Bu meaning ‘egg’, I totally disagree. Only once I made the Katukina laugh for a mistaken combination with Bu meaning ‘egg’. It happened in a native community. I was spontaneously talking when I used Bu with kaman, a non-human N. As a result, I obtained a «new word». It was the ﬁrst time my attention was caught by that possibility. But, so as to understand the reason the Katukina laughed, one needs to know that the popular name for testicle is egg.2 The word I used Bu meaning plural was kaman, which
1. Tapiri is a kind of house built for temporary use. 2. Differently from the Anglo-saxonic languages, in which the derogatory term for testicles is «balls», in
colloquial Brazilian Portuguese it is used the expression «egg».

66

Maria S. Aguiar

means ‘dog / onça’. I was surprised because kaman + Bu is not understood as «dogs» but as «dog’s testicles», in popular language, «dog’s eggs». Only in this case it is understood as «eggs». Even so, I think this context leads to a wide range of interpretation but I will not face it at this moment. Anyway, my hypothesis is that kaman-Bu is a linguistic expression that brings an empty category and/or has a ﬁgurative, thus not literal, sense. Besides this, there is another expression meaning «egg» in Katukina, [BatSi]. Consequently, I would like to say that Bu cannot mean «egg» in the Katukina language.
In order to deepen the reﬂections on Bu as a pluralizer afﬁx and a lexical item, I will discuss the limit of syllables an expression has so that it is regarded as a lexical item in Katukina. This language is organized with two types of items, one is formed by two syllables and oxytone and the other is formed by a segment or at most one syllable, lexical and grammatical, respectively. Thus, Bu is grouped with the grammatical items. It also happens with the conjunction [-nun], the interrogation [-Ra] and others.
Due to this last remark, besides stating that Bu is an N + human pluralizer element, I emphasize that Bu cannot be a lexical item because it is not formed by two syllables.
As from this observation, I am able to deduce characteristics of the Pano languages as a group. If we suppose they can be classiﬁed according to the maximum and the minimum number of syllables of their lexical items and also to the minimum and the maximum number of syllables or segments of their afﬁx items, that is, if I consider the number of syllables and the tonicity of the BLI (Basic Lexical Item) in the languages Pano, this might be a direction to deﬁne primary links among them. Initially, I would have two groups: in the ﬁrst, the BLI would be formed by two syllables. In the second, the BLI would be produced by one syllable. Having this on mind, the Katukina would belong to the group whose minimum words are disyllabic. In other words, the BLI is different from the ALI (Afﬁxal Lexical Item) because it is formed, at least, by a phonologic segment or at most one syllable.
This is a relevant point to the studies on Katukina because we know that if a datum has more than two syllables then it is a BLI + ALI or a compound (BLI + BLI). For this reason, I want to restate that Bu in Katukina can only be an ALI which, in its turn, plays the grammatical role of a pluralizer and not a BLI possibly meaning ‘egg’. -Bu in the Katukina language is part of grammatical morphemes for phonological criteria too, as we observe in the interrogation, ergativity, conjunction and others cases that only occur sufﬁxed to a BLI.
As for the elements [-po] and [-pa], I do not have much to say about them. In the Katukina language I only found [-pa], which sufﬁxes to two adjectives only, [RUa-pa] ‘beautiful’ and [ani-pa] ‘big’.
Another important aspect is the word order in the Pano languages sentences. They belong to the SOV order. This implies that the sintagm’s internal order is determineddetermining. As a consequence, the anthroponym amawaka, which is also amoaca and /or amahuaca, is mistaken if translated by ‘light of the water’. Thus, I admit that the

Réplica

67

terms amahuaca, atsahuaca and mastahuaca must be better analyzed. Perhaps the aahuaca is, originally, [aminBakˆ] ‘son capivara’ or [amin + Bakˆ], ‘capivara + son of ’. I admit that matses and karipuna must be reanalyzed because my research is a ﬁrst attempt. In pakaguara, for example, it is better (paca + eater) ‘pacaeater’. Mayoruna, and perhaps it has a Quechua origin, might mean «people from the river» but so far these observations are not very clear. I now present some of the Katukina items mentioned in this text in a more detailed way:

[hu´ni] BLI Name, singular, «man».

[a´ni] BLI Adjective, «big».

[-pa] ALI Classiﬁer to the adjectives «beautiful» and «big».

[ha´tu] BLI Pronoun, third person plural,«they».

[-Bu] ALI Plural morpheme to human, third person clitic, plural.

[pˆßˆ] BLI Name, singular, tapiri.

[-ma] ALI Negation morpheme.

[a´a]

BLI Verb, to make.

[Ba´i] BLI Past verb tense.

[nu´kˆ] BLI Pronoun, ﬁrst person plural, «We».

[tSUS´tSa] BLI Adjective, «dirty».

[Ba´tSi] BLI Name, «egg».

[ka´man] BLI Name, «onça/dog».

[Ru´a] BLI Adjective, «beautiful».

[-nun] ALI N coordination morpheme.

[-Ra]

ALI Interrogation morpheme.

TO PROFESSOR XAVERIO BALLESTER
Actually these people do not refer to themselves by using any particular name. I believe the names become fundamental when one recognizes the existence of the other. Names turn out to be important once there is relationship and reference to the other. Thus, people’s names are given by those with whom they ﬁrstly establish social relations. However, it is important to note that this procedure varies from culture to culture. But if it is a native group they do not really need to know their own name. As a result, I am inclined to believe that these groups’ names have an exoethnonymic nature. Consequently, those groups who subdivide themselves will have names meaning ‘people’ and ‘man’. Only those who follow a myth about their creation will have an endoethnonymic name. We commonly see the Pano indigenous groups being referred to with exoethnonymic names and I think this happens for colonialist matters. Let’s see the case of the Shanenáwa, for example. They were named katukina because of other circumstances which, back to 1987, happened to them.

68

Maria S. Aguiar

If the researchers are interested in studying these groups’ names we would probably know many endoethnonymic names. By doing so, we would obtain the stories about their origins, their mythological antecessors and other central issues related to the motivation of their beginning. And that includes ﬂora, fauna and also cosmos. However, this study is only possible if we believe it is relevant to everyone involved in it: the researchers, the ones who are researched and those who study this research too.

TO PROFESSOR ALAIN FABRE
We still need to research deeply before stating which of the Pano languages is older and which one is younger. However, if we take data from Panobo and compare them with the other Pano languages, I see strong signs that it has terms which precede the other languages. For example, Panobo has terms with two phones [n] + [d] = [nd], as we see in [nda´i]. Meanwhile, in languages such as Katukina and Poyanáwa the same term has only one phone, [na´i] and [da´i], respectively. Another sign is that the data of the Wariapano language are quite similar to those of Panobo. This information must be better analyzed, of course, but we cannot neglect these signs.
Using bitter manioc is a common habit among native and non-native from South America. For this reason, I admit that the expression atsahuaca, meaning ‘poisoned manioc’, is a mere speculation and it should be better studied. If we believe that the languages Pano follow the order determined-determining, we had better consider ‘poison of the manioc’, that is, the ‘bitter of the manioc’. It is still not a satisfactory result and we need to research this more carefully in the future.
As for the Matis, their name seems to be a phonetic adaptation of the word matˆ «people». This adaptation might have happened due to inﬂuences from the Portuguese language, which does not have the sound [ˆ] and adapted it to [i]. Then [ˆ] > [i], besides applying the grammatical rule concerning the use of plural in Portuguese, that is, when a N ends up with a vowel one should add /-s/. Maybe this transformation matˆ > mati > matis happened.
The natives from the group Apolima-Arara use the Portuguese language among them but they currently develop didactic materials in the shawandawa language so that they can work on literacy programs aiming both children and adults, as they decided in 2003.
The expressions mayo and runa might be the Quechua for ‘people’ and ‘river’ but it this is not actually safe as suggests Adelaar when he comments runa and relates it to the expression aguaruna.
In order to justify what I propose to the name parquenawa I admit that this name does not have its origin in the group. I believe it was suggested to or accepted by the group.

Réplica

69

TO PROFESSOR GUSTAVO SOLÍS
Onomastics deals with people’s names and one should use them properly. For example, if anthroponimic, then Anthroponomy. If ethnonimic, then Ethnonimics. I think this point is well established. But whenever we refer to the names commonly given to those groups we should consider Ethnonimics instead of Anthroponomy.
Something very interesting questions occurred to me while I discussed these names here. Are they ethnic or clan names? Do they refer to only one indigenous group? Or is it the same name which refers to many groups? What are these names which researchers use? Actually, what I mean by group is a human group isolated from urban centers and, in some cases, people who dwell in the surroundings of a city and usually do not have western habits. In the text, I use names for those who I call indigenous groups. Anyway, the fundamental aspect is more than certifying whether this is a group and that is not or even the kind of group. It really bothers me when indigenous groups are referred to by a name the literature gives them when their members state that this name is not their actual name.
I am convinced we need to raise discussions about their being a group or not, if a clan, if a nation. And I think we also have to focus on other studies, be they established or not. These are things we have to do. But it is not the central theme in this study and for me the analysis of the names given to the Pano languages is much more relevant. The name of the languages spoken by the people in these communities is also the name of their group. Thus, groups are here deﬁned by linguistic criteria. And these criteria have been used by the researchers since they started studying the Pano languages. However, the possible translations to these names and their origins are only two of the aspects we need to understand. In order to know if the name I use is that of an indigenous group, subgroup or even an authentic indigenous group, it is important to know if the language they speak is dependent on another language. If so, to what extension is this linguistic dependence? Apart from this, one must know whether a group’s language is a dialect or a subdialect.
According to my researches, I see some relations among the Pano languages. For example, almost all the terms in Poyanáwa which start off with [d], in Katukina occur with [n], [daí] and [naí], for «sky». Does it authorize me saying that one is a dialect and the other is the referent language? Another intriguing point concerns linguistic policies. If we consider the Romanic languages, how many of them are to be regarded languages and how many are dialects? The people who speak Mirandês in Portugal, for instance, demand their right to considerer it a language. Imagine the languages admitted as Pano, languages which still require deeper studies. Of course, each community will claim for a language, not a dialect. So, I believe I can only approach the names used to refer to people who speak the Pano languages.

70

Maria S. Aguiar

TO PROFESSOR PILAR VALENZUELA
It is always important to have on mind that it is the groups themselves who are going to state and admit the name they want to be called. On the other hand, it is interesting to observe that many of them do not feel they have this right. Therefore, I believe is due to the researchers an effort, when it is the case, to reduce eventual colonialist procedures. The case of the Shanenáwa may be happening again with other indigenous groups. I must brieﬂy relate this fact so that the endoethnonymic question is better presented.
In 1987, Don Alberto told me that some time ago he and his group had asked the authorities to remain in any area so that they could establish a community. According to him, when the period to cut down the Seringueira tree was over they would be expelled from the Seringueira lands. After going to the capital of Acre, Rio Branco, many times they ﬁnally had a place for the group. But there was a plaque there. On it, it was written: «Reserve of the Indigenous People Katukina». Because no one could read what was written on the plaque, the message did not affect anyone in the group at all. One day, some missionaries arrived and they called the people Katukina. Surprised, the natives decided to go back to the authorities to say that their name was not Katukina. The answer was: «If you keep up disturbing us by saying you are not Katukina, then you will have to get out of the place and leave it for those who say they actually are Katukina». Don Alberto said they had better own the land than discuss their nation’s name at that moment. By hearing this, I told Don Alberto they would not lose the land anymore and that now they could recover the name they had in the past. At the end of our conversation, he told me that if they did not lose the land he really would like to have their old name, Shanenáwa. Safe that they would not be expelled from the place where they lived, he asked me to divulge the meaning of their name: blue bird. This bird represents the origins of the group members. We also know the case of the Shipibo, who had been called Chama, in literature, for a long time, even though they felt very embarrassed about that. In short, not always the same attention given to the languages and behavior of native groups is given to their names.
I agree we need to research more as for the point that the language Panobo is the same as Wariapano. Furthermore, we must deepen studies on which language is older or younger. A succinct observation about the expression wariapano: waria ‘edible potato’, pano ‘giant tatu’ which derives from [wa.rja.’pa.no]. In chacobo, one may propose the following sequence: [tSantSo] > [tSatSo] > [tSako] > [tSako-Bo]. The Isconahua group is also called Iscobaque (bo): [is´ko] «a kind of bird»; [Bakˆ] ‘son of ’ and [Bo] «plural». Iscobaque means ‘children of the bird called isco’. If I defend the idea that [Bo] or [Bu] only refers to humans, my argument is that once we deal with mythologies, the diverse beings in their culture (animals, plants and humans) have different meanings from those in our culture, considering the mythological elements.
As for the name amahuaca, I think it is interesting to regard the possibility [aminwaki] or [amin + wakˆ] or [amin] + [Bakˆ] ‘capivara children’ than the other possibilities.

Sección 2a
general

