Language Use on the Tubarão-Latundê Reserve, Rondônia, Brazil
Stan Anonby
SIL International 2009
SIL Electronic Survey Report 2009-005, April 2009 © Stan Anonby and SIL International All rights reserved

2
Contents
Abstract 1 Introduction and purpose 2 Geographic location 3 Population distribution 4 Previous scholarship 5 History of people 6 Evidence of use and maintenance of Aikanã 7 Evidence of shift to Portuguese
7.1 Econom y 7.2 Religion 7.3 Education and literacy 7.4 Attitudes toward language and literacy 7.5 Interaction with Brazilians 7.6 Interaction with other Indians 7.7 Language vitality 7.8 Dress 8 Conclusions References

3

Abstract

This survey report presents an overview of the findings of a sociolinguistic survey conducted by Stan Anonby and Jose Al cantara in April 2004 am ong several language groups living on the Tubarão-Lat undê Reserve, Rondônia, Brazil. Data was collected in two villages: Gleba and Rio do Ouro.

1 Introduction and purpose

This survey report presents the results of a st udy of language use on the Tubarão-Latundê Indian

Reserve in southern Rondônia, Brazil. The m ain purpose of this study was to investigate the

potential for the literary developm ent of these langua ges. This study reveals that all three of the

following groups are losing their language in

some dom ains and shifting to the use of

Portuguese.

The Tubarão-Latundê Indian Reserve is inhabite d by people from several tribes; the three m ain linguistically-unrelated ones are:

1) Aikanã [tba]; also known as Tubarão, Ma ssaká, Cassupá, Kasupá, Kukupa, Corum biara, Kolumbiara, Mundé, Winzankyi, Huari, Uari, and Wari (Gordon 2005, Rodrigues 1986). Often called Tubarão, for the Aikanã, this is the nam e for the people who live in Gleba village.

2) Kwazá [xwa]; also known as Koaiá, Koaya, Co aiá, Quaia, Arara, Tsãrã csinuténaheré, Tsãrã csuhuinaheré, and Tainakãw. Kwazá is an unclassified language.

3) Latundê [mbg]; also known as Yalapm unxte or Lacondê. Latundê is considered a dialect of Northern Nambikuara, also called Mamainde.

Since the overwhelm ing m ajority of the populati on is Aikanã, and since som e of the Kwazá consider themselves Aikanã (van der Voort 1998) , the term in popular usage is extended to all Indians living on this reserve. This paper will follow this practice, so the term “Aikanã” may also be taken as referring to Kwazá, Latundê, or a ny other Indian living on the Tubarão-Latundê Reserve.
Most scholars classify Aikanã as a language isolate. Ethnologue (2005) and Voegelin and Voegelin (1977) follow Mason (1950), who considered ‘Masaca’ an Arawakan language. Kwazá is also a language isolate. Latundê, a variety of Northern Nam bikuára, is part of a larger Nambiquaran language family.

There are two highly intelligible dialects of Aikanã spoken in Rio do Ouro and Gleba, respectively. The Rio do Ouro dialect is known as Massaká, and the Gleba dialect as Tubarão (Clementino, personal com munication). Tubarão m ay be m ore conservative, retaining vowel initial f ricatives like v and h (Cirilo, personal com munication). Tubarão is def initely higher status, and people from Gleba do not accept the dial ect of Rio do Ouro. W hen pressed to make a distinction, people will use the term s Massaká and Tubarão. However, m ost people from both villages usually refer to the language they speak as Aikanã.

4
2 Geographic location
Originally, most of the Indians discussed in this report lived west of the Pim enta Bueno River in Rondônia state, an area of rich forests (Price 1981:36). There is still a small village near this area called São Pedro, inhabited by Aikanã and Kwazá, but most of the Indians now live east of the Pimento Bueno on the Tubarão-Latundê Indian Reserve. This reserve is located west of the city of Vilhena, near the Cuiabá-Porto Velho highway. There are three villages on the reserve: Rio do Ouro, Gleba (also known as Tubarão), and Barroso (see map 1). Of the three, Gleba has the most mixed population. It is easily accessible, with th e small city of Chupinguaia only 19 kilom eters away on a fairly good road. Rio do Ouro village ha s the largest population, is almost exclusively Aikanã, and is 20 kilom eters from Gleba by poor road. Barroso village has the sm allest population, m ost of which are Latundê, and it is 25 kilom eters from Gleba on a road that is usually passable only by motorcycle.

Chupinguaia

Rio do Ouro

Map 1. Geographic location of villages and areas mentioned in this report.

5

3 Population distribution The Indian population discussed in this paper are living in the following locations:

Rio do Ouro village

67

Gleba village

48

Barroso village

34

São Pedro village

18

Vilhena city

15

Chupinguaia city

7

Total

189

(Personal communication with teachers; Povos Indigenas, 2000:589.)

If the population were to be broken up into et hnic groups, the divisions would be roughly as follows:

Aikanã 175

Kwazá 25

Latundê

19

Total

219

This second chart does not give as accurate a pict ure as the first one, because of the num ber of mixed m arriages. For exam ple, the num ber of pure Kwazá would be clos er to eight (Cirilo, personal com munication), and the num ber of Kwazá speakers would be closer to seven (http://nativenet.uthscsa.edu/archive/ng/94/0331.html). The reason for the higher total population may be because some Indians, whose parents are from separate tribes, were counted twice.

There are fifteen Aikanã living in the city of Vilhena, and seven Kwazá living in the town of Chupinguaia. David Price (1981:37) m entioned there were som e Aikanã near the city of Porto Velho. There are also a few Kwazá in Porto Vel ho and Pimenta Bueno (van der Voort, 1998). A few Aikanã also live in the Rio Guaporé Indian Reserve, where they share the land with nine other Indian tribes (Povos Indigenas, 2000: 590). The indigenous population outside of the reserve is increasing. The net result is that a larger and larger percentage of them prefer to speak Portuguese.

4 Previous scholarship

The Indians m entioned in this report have not been studied extensively. In 1916, Marechal

Rondon passed through the area, as he was installing the telegraph line, and m

ade som e

observations. The fam ed anthropologist, Levi-Str auss, m ade a trip to study the Indians in

southern Rondônia in the 1930s. In 1942, Lieutenant Zack, of the Indian Protection Service,

mentioned the Kwazá. Anthropologists Melatti a nd Price looked at the area in the 1970s. In

1984, Am erican linguist Harvey Carlson visited the Tubarão-Latundê Reserve and took som e

notes on ' Koaiá' and Aikanã. Ione Vasconcelos, f rom the Universidade de Brasília, did research

6
among the Aikanã, which was published in 1993 a nd 1996. Hein van der Voort lived with the Aikanã and Kwazá for a period of 14 m onths, between 1995 and 1998, and is working on a description of the Kwazá language and Kwazá text transcriptions (van der Voort, 1998). In 2002, Stella Telles wrote a dissertation on the phonology and grammar of Latundê/Lacondê.
5 History of people
For m any years, the Aikanã, Kwazá, and Latundê lived in contact with various neighboring tribes, including the Kanoê, Mekens/Sakirap, Tupa rí, Salamãi, and other groups that have now been absorbed into the local population. Although the languages they spoke were not m utually intelligible, they fought, forged alliances, had join t festivals, and interm arried. Because of these exchanges, their cultures becam e quite sim ilar, to the point that they are lum ped together and called the “Marico Com plex” by anthropologist Denise Maldi (1991). Som e of the com mon cultural traits include their baskets of m arico fiber, hive-shaped hom es for approxim ately ten families, fermented corn drink, cannibalism, and clan divisions (van der Voort, 1998).
In 1940, the Indian Protection Service opened a post on the Igarape Cascata, and tributary of the Pimenta Bueno. Aikanã, Kanoê, probably Monde , and possibly other Indians were brought together on this post. Measles and flu ep idemics decim ated the population and, by 1956, the Indians had scattered into the forest. Som e of these are likely still living without contact with Brazilian society (Price 1981:36), and others (a bout 25 Aikanã and Kwazá) still live in these original lands west of the Pim ento Bueno Ri ver at São Pedro Reserve. In 1973, m ost were moved east to poorer land at their present lo cation, the Tubarão-Latundê Reserve. In 1977, a small Latundê village was discovered on the rese rve but, in early 1980, they contracted m easles and m ost of them died (Price 1981:37). The fewe r than twenty Latundê, who rem ain, live in Barroso village in the Tubarão-Latundê Reserve.
6 Evidence of use and maintenance of Aikanã
Rio do Ouro is the village where Aikanã is spoken the most. The adults talk in Aikanã with one another, children talk to parents in Aikanã and vice versa. The children speak both languages when playing, but Aikanã is dom inant. The to tal num ber of fam ilies in Rio do Ouro is over fifteen. We were inform ed that leadership m eetings are in Aikanã, with a quick explanation in Portuguese for those who don’t understand. At their Indian festas (traditional gatherings which they have been trying to revive lately), both languages are used. We spent one morning hauling a tapir out of the jungle with several Aikanã, ages eleven to seventy. All discussion was 100% in Portuguese; from the time they came to our house to ask for help, to the time we were butchering it in the village. As a counter exam ple, when a group of young m en were working at getting the truck out of a mud hole, they spoke a lot of Aikanã to each other.
In Rio do Ouro, subsistence agriculture is a mainstay of the economy. Although the soil is sandy in Rio do Ouro, they seem to grow a wide vari ety of crops. They also do a lot of hunting. They told us they kill an average of one tapir a w eek. These traditional pursuits are m ore likely to remain domains in which Aikanã is used.
Generally, there seem s to be a very positive attitude toward speaking Aikanã, but that is not extended to reading the language. Many expresse d preference for speaking Aikanã, and som e

7

parents said that they didn’t want their children to lose the language. One m other in Gleba, who is monolingual in Portuguese, claimed to be making an effort to teach Aikanã to her boys.

7 Evidence of shift to Portuguese
7.1 Econom y
In the 1930s, rubber extraction was a large part of the econom y in southern Rondônia. In its heyday, the Aikanã and Kwazá worked rubber tapping for rubber barons and were paid in coffee, sugar, and firearm s. By the 1970s, the Indians had become more independent, and were selling their own rubber in the surrounding cities (van der Voort 1998). The indigenous languages were used most likely in the actual tapping and proce ssing of the rubber in the reserves. W hen selling the product on the outside or interacting with r ubber barons, Portuguese was used. The houses in the village of Rio do Ouro are still spread out to coincide with the rubber tap lines and the trees are still scarred from the rubber tapping, but rubber has ceased to play an econom ic role in the area today.

Traditional lifestyle plays a role in keeping Portuguese at bay, but in Gleba, at least, there is little of this. There are very few subsistence agricultu re plots. The people in Gleba either buy their food in the city or receive it from their relatives living in Rio do Ouro. Reasons given include the land being poorer, m ore retirem ent m oney com ing into the village, and the people’s lack of enthusiasm for fieldwork (Cirilio, personal communication).

The main sources of cash in both villages, like most villages in Brazil, are retirement remittances

for the elders and the sale of Indian handicrafts. These, as well as alm

ost all cash-related

activities, are conducted in Portuguese. Involvem ent in the m arket econom y is increasing in

importance in lockstep with the Portuguese language.

Logging is a part of the econom y in the Tubarão-La tundê Indian Reserve. The dealings with the loggers are conducted in Portuguese. Only a fe w leaders receive any m oney from the logging, but there are other benefits, such as being ab le to use equipm ent to fix up the roads. W e personally benefited when a logger took his bulldozer and pulled our vehicle out of a mud hole.

There have been Aikanã engaged in m ining on the Cinta Larga Reserve, where they communicate in Portuguese. Som e have m ade a lot of money, while others have m ade next to nothing and complained of being treated like slaves.

About 10% of the people have m oved away from the villages perm anently, and are integrated into the econom y of the local towns. W e were to ld there were fifteen Aikanã living in Vilhena and seven Kwazá living in Chupinguaia. These people speak Portuguese almost exclusively.

7.2 Religion
UNIEDAS missionaries (Indians from the Terena tribe) began working in the area in 1980 and, as a result, m ost people living in the Tubarão- Latundê Indians reserve today would consider themselves Protestants. The Terenas m inistered exclusively in Portuguese. Keyla, the daughter of the first missionary, still lives in Gleba and is a spiritual leader there.

8
A Protestant m issionary fam ily, belonging to the ALEM m ission, live in Rio do Ouro village, where the husband, W arrisson, is a schoolteacher and his wife, Ana, is a church leader. They have worked in the reserve for twelve years, and speak only Portuguese.
Church in Rio do Ouro is well attended, with alm ost the entire village showing up f or both Thursday and Sunday services. The young people are the most enthusiastic, and some walk from as far away as 5 kilom eters. The services are in Portuguese. After Sunday m orning church, the people usually play volleyball while Ana prepares a m eal f or the whole village. Af terward, during the informal recreational time, quite a bit of Aikanã is used.
In Gleba and Rio do Ouro, church services have been in Portuguese for over twenty-four years. The Indians have rebuffed efforts by the A LEM m issionaries (who rem ain m onolingual in Portuguese) to use Aikanã in church. When Ana first came to Gleba twelve years ago, the people told her they wanted church in Portuguese and not in Aikanã. They specifically said, “W e don’t want a linguist. W e want som eone who will do church in Portuguese.” Ana has worked on composing some songs in Aikanã, but when she sang them to the Indians, they said they sounded ugly. Ana has asked people to pray in Aikanã, but they always refuse.
In a service we attended in Rio do Ouro, Ana chos e five people at random to read portions of the Bible (the older Portuguese version). All were r ead fluently and without stum bling. Ana told us that, to this day, the Indians have never asked fo r anything in Aikanã – they seem to feel that church must be in Portuguese.
7.3 Education and literacy
School is taught up to grade four in all the v illages and the m ajority of Aikanã and Kwazá are literate in Portuguese. In Rio do Ouro, there are two teachers, a Brazilian who teaches in Portuguese, and a bilingual teacher who explains the subjects in Aikanã to the fourteen or so children. Three villagers are finishing high school; two from Gleba, and one from Rio do Ouro.
To see how well they could read and write Ai kanã, I asked a group of young people from Rio do Ouro to write two sentences in their language. After considerable deliberation, one of them finally wrote something four lines long with no punctuation. I asked som eone else, the one who seemed m ost interested, to read it, but he wasn’t able to. This was in sharp contrast with the fluency the Aikanã showed when reading diffi cult Portuguese from the Bible. Everyone we spoke to agreed they are much more literate in Portuguese than in Aikanã.
7.4 Attitudes toward language and literacy
The Aikanã seem ed to be a very positive about Portuguese. Several talked to us about how necessary it was for them to im prove their language skills in order to inte ract with whites. In Gleba, the Indian teacher’s assistant, hired to teach Aikanã, admits he only teaches in Portuguese because that is what his students want (Cirilio, personal communication).
Most Aikanã have copies of the Almeida Bible (an older Portuguese translation). Although many admitted they did not understand m uch of it (one Indian teacher said she understood 20%), they seem satisf ied with the version they have. The Ai kanã we talked to did not express interest in

9
having Scripture in their language. They we re noncom mittal about working together on translation, and were much more enthusiastic talking about the village soccer team.
The only people we m et who seem ed interested in any Aikanã language developm ent were ALEM m issionaries, W arresson and Ana Cirilio. Th ey expressed a desire to learn to speak Aikanã because they were em barrassed to have to adm it to their peers that they only spoke Portuguese. Finally, they pointed out that they didn’t think the Aikanã understood the Portuguese Scripture they had available, and felt they w ould understand it better if they could read it in Aikanã.
7.5 Interaction with Brazilians
People from Rio do Ouro travel to town about on ce a month to shop or get medical attention. By contrast, in Gleba, people travel to town daily. Trips to Vilhena are more difficult to arrange than those to Chupinguaia, because it is harder to arrange the overnight lodging they need. The Aikanã usually wind up staying at a logger’s hom e or at the “Casa do Indi o,” a place outside of town that provides lodging for sick Indians.
The Indians are well liked by the Brazilians livi ng in town. Com munication with Brazilians is always in Portuguese. The two groups regularly co mpete against each other in soccer gam es and there are even som e Aikanã who play on Brazilian teams. Several people pointed out to us that there were very few Aikanã girls of marriageable age. They volunteered that the only way for the young men to find wives would be to m arry white girls. The problem they could see was that white Brazilian girls would not want to live in an Indian village.
There are m any m ixed m arriages in Gleba, but none in Rio do Ouro. Invariably, the language used in the home is Portuguese, and the children do not speak Aikanã.
7.6 Interaction with other Indians
Research by anthropologist Price showed th at the Indians of southern Rondônia have customarily m arried across language barriers easily. Caspar rem arks, “Interm arriage between friendly tribes seems to be an old usage” (1953:243), and wordlists show an impressive degree of linguistic borrowing. Interm arriage probably becam e even m ore com mon during the rubber boom, as depopulation m ade it necessary for people to find spouses wherever they could (Price 1981:36).
In Gleba today, about half of the m arriages are mixed, either white/Indian, or two Indians from different tribes. Though those from Gleba discri minate against people from Rio do Ouro, there are many marriages between young people from the two villages. W ith only one exception, all marriages in Rio do Ouro are between Aikanã.
The Latundê Indians of Barroso village have th e lowest prestige, and are som ewhat culturally and econom ically subjugated by the Aikanã a nd the Kwazá. Due to the tiny populations of Kwazá and Latundê, it is next to im possible for th em to m arry within their tribe. Thus, the survival of these languages, and even the people as a distinct group, is very tenuous.

10
7.7 Language vitality
Although the indigenous language is strongest in Rio do Ouro, it is not a stable diglossic situation. There is no specific domain for each language, but rather, Portuguese and Aikanã seem to mix rather freely.
Neither the missionaries nor their children living in the village speak Aikanã. The health worker in Rio do Ouro is a Rikbaktsa Indian m arried to an Aikanã. Neither she nor their children can speak Aikanã, so all health services are in Portuguese. Several people predicted that m ixed marriages would be common in the future, because there are very few Aikanã girls.
Today, Rio do Ouro village has difficult access to th e city, but there are plans for a highway to pass within three kilometers of Rio do Ouro. W e saw the surveyors working on that road and, as of 2007, we heard it is m ostly paved. Presently, the people at Rio do Ouro have a lot m ore contact with Portuguese speakers, and their Aikanã vitality will likely decrease.
The fact that m issionaries have been able to live in Rio do Ouro for so long without learning Aikanã is an indication of their high level of bilingualism. We met only one older m an, around 70 years old, who seemed to understand very little Portuguese, but we were able to communicate in Portuguese with others of that age bracket.
Language vitality is weaker in Gleba. Of the fi fteen fam ily units in the village, only seven of them are pure Aikanã who don’t speak Portuguese in the hom e. The rest of the households are mixed: three Aikanã/Sabane, one Aikanã/Br azilian, one Aikanã/Latundê, one Aikanã/Terena, one Aikanã/Negarote, and one Aikanã/Kwazá. The Aikanã/Kwazá family speaks Aikanã in the home, but the rest of the fam ilies speak only Portuguese. In Gleba, com munity m eetings are bilingual, because about half of the community doesn’t understand Aikanã.
Estimates as to the num ber of Kwazá speakers vary from seven to twenty five. In São Pedro Indian Reserve, there is only one Kwazá speaker (van der Voort 1998). Very few children speak the language. There m ay be one m onolingual Kwazá elder living in Chupinguaia (Cirilio, personal communication). A handful of Kwazá are trilingual in Aikanã and Portuguese.
In Barroso village, there is one Aikanã/Kwazá family that speaks Portuguese and one Kwazá family that, in all probability, speaks their own language. The rest of the population prim arily speaks Portuguese.
It seems likely that the Aikanã and Kwazá, who live in the cities of Vilhena, Chupinguaia, Porto Velho, and Pimenta Bueno, speak more Portuguese than Aikanã.
7.8 Dress
The Aikanã men and women we observed were ar e all well dressed, m uch like the Brazilians in the surrounding towns. One m issionary said he had stopped bringing in bags of used clothes to Gleba about six years ago, because the Aikanã had complained that they were all out of style. This is an exam ple of how f ar the people in Gleba have acculturated to the wider Brazilian culture.

11

8 Conclusions
This survey has shown that the Aikanã are losing their language in som e dom ains and are gaining bilingualism in Portuguese. Given the dir ection of language shift and the low level of interest in indigenous literacy, it would be unw ise to embark on a language-development project at this stage. The Aikanã woul d likely view any such endeavor solely as the responsibility of outsiders.

References
Aihkenvald, Alexandra Y. and R. M. W . Dixon, Other sm all fam ilies and isolates, in The Amazonian Languages, edited by R. M. W . Dixon and Alexandra Y. Aikhenvald, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Grimes, Barbara. Ethnologue: Languages of the World. 15th edition. Dallas, TX: SIL International: 2000.

Maldi, Denise. 1991. O com plexo cultural do Marico : sociedades indigenas dos rios Branco,

Colorado e Mequens, afluentes do Medio Guaporé.

Boletim do MPEG, Serie

Antropologia, Belem: MPEG, v. 7, n. 2, p. 209–269, dez.

Mason, J. Alden. 1950. The Languages of South Am erican Indians . Handbook of South American Indians 6.157–317, Bureau of Am erican Ethnology Bulletin 143. W ashington, D.C.

Price, David. 1981. Cultural Survival. (Jason Clay, ed.) In the Path of Polonoroeste: Endangered Peoples of Western Brazil Occasional Paper # 6. Cambridge.

Ricardo, Carlos Alberto, ed. 1996. Povos Indígenas no Brasil: 1991–1995. São Paulo POVOS INDIGENAS.

Ricardo, Carlos Alberto, ed. 2000. Povos Indígenas no Brasil: 1996–2000. São Paulo POVOS INDIGENAS.

Rodrigues, Aryon dall’Igna. 1986. Linguas brasileiras: para o conhecim ento das linguas indigenas. São Paulo: Loyola.

Rondon, Candido Mariano da Silva. 1916. Conferencias realizadas nos dias 5, 7 e 9 de outubro de 1915 pelo Coronel Rondon no teatro Phenix de Rio de Janeiro. ComisSão de Linhas Telegraphicas Estrategicas de Matto Grosso ao Amazonas, Rio de Janeiro: Typ. Leuzinger, n. 42, p. 217ff.

Voort, Hein van der. 1997 Alguns aspectos da lingua Koaia, pesente, mente denominada Kwazá. Boletim da Abralin, s.l.: Abralin, n. 20, p. 35–54, Jan. 1997.

Voort, Hein van der. http://socioambiental.org/pib/epienglish/kwaza/kwaza.shtm. Accessed 30 April, 2008.

12
Voort, Hein van der. Indios redescobertos. Parabolicas, São Paulo: POVOS INDIGENAS, v. 4, n. 28, p. 6, abr. 1997.
Voort, Hein van der. 1996. Linguistic fieldwor k am ong the Indians in the South of Rondônia, Brazil. Yumtzilob, Tijdschrift over the Americas, s.l.: s. ed., v. 8, n. 4, p. 359–386.

