VERSAO
prelim inar

An Outline of the Grammatical and Phonological Structure of Terena - Part 1 John Bendor-Samuel 1961
SUMMER INSTITUTE OF LINGUISTICS
OArquivo LingOTstico e uma serie de trabalhos que se encontra atualmente nos arquivos do SIL e da FUNAI (Fundagao Nacional do Tndio). Estamos colocando amaioria deles a disposigao da comunidade academica na lingua em que foram originalmente escritos, podendo ser, eventualmente, publicados na original ou em outra lingua. Damos permissao aqueles que se interessarem para usar este material em trabalhos de pesquisa, contanto que incluam a seguinte informagao:

I

The Arquivo LingUTstico is a series of workpapers archived in SIL and FUNAI

(Fundagao Nacional do Tndio) files. Most of the papers are being made avail­

able to the scientific community in the language in which they were origi­

nally written. They may eventually be published in that language or

in

another one. Permission is given for the material in thepapers to be used

in research, provided the following information is given:

Bendor-Samuel, John. 1961. An Outline of the Grammatical and Phonological Structure of Terena - Part 1. Arquivo Lingtlistico N<? 090. Brasilia, D.F. SIL.

AN OUTLINE OF THE
GRAMMATICAL AND PHONOLOGICAL STRUCTURE OF TERENA
fW i
by John Bendor-Samuel
May 18, 19 61
FROM THE LIBRARY OF
Mary Ritchie Key

Chapter One

Introduction

1.1

The Terena language and people

The Terena language is spoken by between four and five thousand people living in the South-west corner of Mato Grosso in an area bounded by the towns of Campo Grande, Corumba and Dourados. There are some eleven Terena villages in this area varying in size from a few families to one thousand inhabi­ tants. In addition Terenas live in some of the Brazilian towns in the area, e.g. Aquidauana.

References to the Terena people are found in historical literature.'*' There have also been a number of ethnographic
2 and sociological studies of the Terenas in this century but this is believed to be the first overall description of the
3 Terena language.
t The Tere n a language is generally classified as A r a w a k a n . 4 There appears to be some linguistic evidence for this but a full-scale comparative study of Terena and of other Arawakan languages is needed to determine the nature of this relation­ ship.

1.2 The scope of this study
This outline is the outcome of a period of some fifteen months between January 19 59 and April 1961 spent at the village of Uniao. Uniao is a small Terena village lying to the S o u t h ­ east of Miranda.
The purpose of this outline is to give a sketch of the main structure of the Terena language, covering both phono­ logical and grammatical aspects. Such an outline does not claim to be exhaustive and it is much to be hoped that others will provide fuller studies of many aspects only touched on briefly in this volume.
1.3 The general theoretical basis of this outline
The basic approach adopted in this study is that language structure may best be described by means of a double hierarchy of levels of analysis set up by the linguist, the p h o n o l o g i ­ cal hierarchy and the grammatical hierarchy. Both hierarchies depend on the phonic data which represents the speech-event.
In the phonological analysis the phonic data are assigned to phonological categories, while in the grammatical analysis the same phonic data are assigned to grammatical categories. Both sets of categories constitute an interlocking hierarchy. These two analyses are independent of each other. However, congruences between the two analyses are stated and further­ more, it is a basic assumption in this study that at places where choices are made in either analysis, it is advantageous to have a greater rather than a lesser degree of congruence between the phonological and grammatical statements. Thus, for instance, it is assumed that the establishing of the prosodic

3 features of nasalization and y o d i zation as features of the word 5.3, quite apart from the consideration of the p h o n o ­ logical system, is to be preferred to other possible analyses of the phonic data at this point, 5.3.4, since it is parallel with the grammatical analysis which sets up categories of first and second person, chapter 17.
The phonological and grammatical structures are con­ sidered abstractions to which the phonic data may be referred. The various categories established for the s tatement of both structures have no status apart from these two systems in which they are terms and should not be equated w i t h the categories utilized by other linguists for the statement of the structure'2 of other languages, though naturally terms are used as far as possible in a manner similar to their use by others. As ab­ stractions they are in contrast to the speech-event; thus, while sentences are spoken, sentence-types are not.
The statement of both the phonological and grammatical structure sets up a series of hierarchical levels at which the analysis is made. At each level of analysis there is a lin­ guistic unit, and this unit gives its name to that level. Thus, in the grammatical system, the clause is the linguistic unit at the clause level of analysis.
Each linguistic unit is stated to have both a function and a structure.^ Its function is its occurrence in some other linguistic unit, generally of a higher level in the h ier­ archy though not exclusively. Its structure, on the other hand, is stated in'- terms of a number of elements, each of which is a unit at some level of the analysis, generally a lower level. In this way, for example, the structure of the

4
clause Is stated in terms of a number of elements, for the most part expressions, each of which is a grammatical unit at some level, while its function is stated in terms of the sentencetype.
In a similar manner four levels of analysis are set up for the statement of the grammatical structure, s e n t e n c e - t y p e , clause, expression and word. The structure of the sentencetype is described in terms of the clause, the structure of clause in terms of the expression, and the expression in terms of the word. Conversely, the function of the w ord is described in terms of the expressions of wh i c h it may be a part, and the expressions in terms of the clause and the clause in terms of the sentencetype.
However, it is not enough to state that a linguistic unit consists of various elements each of which is a unit at some level. For instance, there is more to the structure of the clause than the fact that it consists of one or more expressions. Individual clauses vary not only in the individual expressions which they contain but also in the relationship which these ex­ pressions have to one another within that clause. Many clauses may be vastly differently structured none-the-less. To state the grammatical structure of the unit at each level it is necessary to describe the relationships between the elements wh i c h together make up the grammatical unit at that level. This is done by using such terms as head piece, subordinate piece and expansion, etc. These terms should be distinguished from the main elements of the analysis which give their names to the levels of analysis. For instance, both the sentence-type and the clause are said to consist of a head piece and a subordinate piece; b u t in the case of the sentence-type both head and subordinate pieces are chiefly pi atises. while in the case of the clause the h ead and subordinate

5
pieces are chiefly expressions. It remains true that the sentence-type consists of clauses and the clause of expressions, while head piece subordinate piece, etc., are set up at each level in order to describe the relationships b e t w e e n the various e l e ­ ments within the particular linguistic unit of that specific level.
Though it is true that in the m a i n the structure of any unit may be described in terms of elements which are units at a lower level of analysis, not infrequently some of the elements of a unit are closely parallel to some unit at a higher l e v e l 0 Thus at the expression level, the noun expression may include elements which are structured like a clause. Such elements which are similar in structure to units at a higher level of analysis are termed, constructs. However, since these elements are in a certain specific relationship to the rest of the noun expression there is no danger of confusion be t w e e n clause and expression levels. This framework of levels, units, and ele­ ments in this way provides for structures to function at any level of analysis.
To sum up— the descriptive framework employed here consists of: 1. a series of levels of analysis at each of wh i c h there is
a linguistic unit, 2. each unit has an internal structure w h i c h is described in
terms of a. elements which are themselves units at some level, b. relationships be t w e e n those elements. In the presentation of this analysis the main method e m ­
ployed is to work down the phonological and grammatical h i e r ­ archies. Full details are given in the next sections.

A study of this nature has certain limitations. It is necessarily generalized. It is not a study of one ideolect or indeed of one type of speech. In this there is a certain danger since some of the statements w ill not necessarily be true for all styles of speech and for all T e rena speakers; the more detailed analysis of a definitively limited body of data is needed to take care of such v a r i a t i o n s .
Then, too, it gives the impression that language is static. Like most linguistic descriptions it ignores changes and cries, 'stop1, to the ever-changing processes of language. It is to be hoped, however, that even the frozen forms of a language do not lack something of the fascinating subtlities of living speech.
Following an introduction to the phonological outline and a similar introduction to the grammatical outline, the transcription used in this study is presented. T hen chapters 2 to 7 constitute an outline of Terena phonology while the second part of this study, chapters 8 to 17 provide an outline of T e r e a n grammatical structure. At the conclusion of this a Terean text is given wit h an analysis and a Bibliography is also provided.

1.4 Introduction to the p h o n o l o g i c a l outline
This outline of Terena phonology attempts to provide a statement of the phonological structure of Terena to which the great majority of sentences and words may be referred. However it does not claim to be in any sense an exhaustive treatment. There are, indeed, many aspects of Terena ph o n o ­ logy which require more detailed study than is provided here. In particular the chapters on the phonological clause and sentences are sketches rather than detailed descriptions. Then, too, the phonological sentence is chosen as the highest unit of description and no attempt is made to state p h o n o l o g i ­ cal features at a higher level.
Perhaps this outline should be regarded rather as a skele­ ton upon which later studies may p u t a m o r e decent covering of fleshi
This phonological analysis is stated in terms of six levels of analysis which are set up for this purpose. At each level there is a phonological u nit w h i c h is structured in terms of one or more units of a lower level. These levels and units are: the phonological sentence, the phonological clause, the phonological phrase, the phonological word, the syllable and the phonematic unit. At each level b e t w e e n the phonological sentence and the phonematic unit a prosodic feature marks the unit. All these elements are elements of the phonological an­ alysis and must not be confused w i t h elements established at another level of analysis.
These various elements f u n ction together as members of a hierarchical system extending from the phonematic unit to the phonological sentence. Each phonological sentence consists of at least one phonological clause. E a c h phonological clause

8
consists of at lease one phonological phrase and is marked by the prosodic feature of intonation. Each phonological phrase consists of at least one phonological wor d and is marked by the prosodic feature of stress. Each phonological word c o n­ sists of at least one syllable and is marked by a prosodic feature of the word. Each syllable consists of at least one phonematic unit and is mark e d by a prosodic feature of the syllable.
There is considerable mobility up and down the phonological hierarchy, in that a single word may function as phrase clause and sentence, narked at each level w ith the appropriate p r o s o­ dic feature* Theoretically, a single phonematic unit marked by the various prosodic features could function in this way as a phonological sentence; however, only one instance of this is possible since all except one word consist of at least two phonematic units, and all except two words consist of at least two syllables. Generally, too, the phonological clause c o n ­ sists of more than one word.
Each of the phonological units from syllable to sentence is in a sense defined by v i rtue of its structure. However, the phonematic unit and the prosodic feature are not given any such description as they are not broken down into further elements. (It would, of course, be p o s sible to break them down into p h o ­ nological features corresponding to various phonetic f e a t u r e s „) Since they are not described in terms of their internal s t r u c ­ ture, some description of them would seem necessary in this introduction.
7 Prosodic features are phonological elements having pho­ netic exponents w hich either extend over or have implications over more than one place in the syllable in that they delimit

9
a structure from preceding and following structures. In this outline prosodic features are stated for the phonological clause, phrase, wor d and syllable.
Phonematic features are phonological elements having pho­ netic exponents which m a y be referred to one place only in the syllable. Phonematic units are of two types, consonantal units and vocalic units. These are referred to as C and V units.
Phonematic units should not be identified with the phonemes set up to handle the phonological analysis by many linguists, nor- are prosodic features identical to the supra-segmental phonemes sometimes set up. There will, of course, be many simi­ larities bet w e e n the phonetic exponents of these two pairs of phonological categories, but it would be confusing to make any one for one identification between them.

1.5 Introduction to the grammatical outline
Like the phonological outline, the grammatical outline does not go beyond the sentence level. It provides a frame­ work to which Terena sentences may be referred but largely ig­ nores features which extend over m o r e than one sentence.
Following the approach outlined in 1.3, the grammatical analysis established five grammatical levels: sentence-type, clause, expression, w o r d and morpheme. The sentence-type is described in terms of the clauses w h i c h function in it, and these in turn are described in terms of the expressions which function in them,etc. The method followed is to work down the grammatical hierarchy, though in presentation the clause pre­ cedes the sentence-type since it seems clearer to present the clause before the sentence-type.
While the main theoretical assumptions underlying this outline have been mentioned already, one or two further points remain. It w i l l be seen that the c lassification and de s c r ip­ tion of both the clause and sentence-type are based upon their internal structure in the main, rather than on their function as elements of a higher unit. This is, of course, in part a consequence of setting the sentence-type as the top limit of description. In the case of the sentence-type it would be possible to set up a classification which is based more on the function of the sentence-type in larger pieces, e.g. whether preceded by another sentence-type or not, etc. Then classes of sentence-type could be set up and this approach could be carried through to the clause l e v e l , , w h e r e clauses could be classified according to their function, and then clause-classes could be described in terms of their structure. This is, in effect, what is attempted at expression and w ord levels. E x ­ pressions, for instance, are classified on the basis of their

function into noun expression, verb expression, etc., and then the internal structure of each is stated. Similarly words are divided into noun, verb, and particle, and only afterwards is their internal structure described. Since there are expression classes and word classes based on function as well as a c l assi­ fication on the basis of internal structure, it may be asked why are there not clause classes and sentence-type classes also based on function.
The main reason this is not done is because it seems that situational rather than linguistic factors determine to a large degree the sequences of sentence-types within the discourse. There are, of course, important inter-sentence features, e.g. the use of connectives, but these do not determine the s t r u c ­ ture of the sentence-types. Furthermore, there is the real danger that if sentence-types are set up on the basis of s i t u a ­ tional criteria or other extra-linguistic notional criteria, largely notional categories like, 'statement', 'question' will obscure the structure of the language. That correlations b e ­ tween linguistic structures and situational features are d e ­ sirable is not denied; but such are better made after the lin­ guistic structure has been analysed rather than used to form the basis of the linguistic analysis whether consciously or unconsciously.
In this outline from time to time correlations b e t w e e n linguistic structures and categories on the one hand and fea­ tures which would seem likely to play a role in any adequate analysis of the context of situation on the other hand are d e ­ scribed. But these never form the basis of the linguistic an­ alysis. Similarly the only classification of sentence-types made on the basis of function is the establishment of the major and minor sentence-types on the grounds of whether a sentencetype may initiate a s p e e c h - e v e n t . Since the sentence-type*are

12 classified according to their internal structure, i.e. according to the clauses which function in them, it seems best to classify clauses according to their internal structure rather than their function. At the expression and w o r d levels, however, it does seem appropriate to utilize a functional distinction before the internal structure is given. At clause level this would only lead to a great deal of reduplication.

Y.S,

The transcription employed is a phonemic one. At places
where p h o n e t i c details are of interest: a p h o n e t i c transcription
is used, and this is distinguished from the usual phonemic transcription by the use of brackets.
The transcription employs the following symbols which are set out for convenience in tabular form.

CONSONANTS labio­ dental

stops

p

fricatives

laterals

nasals

m

semi-vowels v

alveolar
t sh 1r n

palatalalveolar
s hy

velar

VOWELS

Front

central

close

1

half-close

e

open

glottal
back u

These symbols have the following values. Stops: There are four stops each wit h a different point of
articulation: p is bilabial, t is alveolar, k is velar, and ' is glottal.
All stops are voiced after supra-segmantal N, but otherwise are voiceless. t is aspirated before i, otherwise all stops are aspirated. Fricatives: There are four fricatives:
s is an alveolar sibilant, (tongue tip up) s is a palato-alveolar sibilant (tongue tip down) h is an alveolar fricative (tongue tip down and the rest hy is an alveolar fricative of the tongue as for the
following vowel

14
Some speakers have pal a t a l friction wit h hy. All fricatives are voiced after N, otherwise voiceless.
Laterals: There are two laterals: 1 is an alveolar lateral r is an alveolar flap
Nasals: There are two nasals: m is bilabial, n is alveolar, palatalized before i
(except when this vowel results from a second personc o n struc­ tion) . In a few words a palatal nasal occurs in other en v i r on­ ments and this is symbolized as n.
Semi-vowels: There are two s semi-vowels: y is a palatal frictionless continuant, v is a labio-dental continuant w i t h o u t friction when preceding a back vowel but with some friction else­ where.
Semi-vowels are nasalized w h e n p receding N.
Vowels: There are five vowels: i is a close front u n rounded vowel, but back whe n fol­ lowing h of preceding the syllables hi or he, e is a half-close front unrounded vowel, but back whe n following h or preceding the syllables hi or he, a is an open central unrounded vowel, o is a half-close back rounded vowel, u is a close bac k rounded vowel.
All vowels are nasalized w h e n prec e d i n g N. In a few other words the final vowel is nasalized and this is symbolized by

15
Supra segmental: N symbolizes nasal closure at the same point of articulation as the following consonant.
is type A stress, i.e. following long consonant, raised pitch and loudness, 'is type B stress, i.e. vowel of the syllable is long, low pitch (falling) and loudness. ' is secondary stress and only mark e d in 4.3.8. Non-Terena symbols: Occassionally, Portuguese symbols are used for the spelling of Portuguese words w h i c h have not bee n assimi­ lated into Terena. Such symbols include: b,f,g.
Punctuation: . marks the end of a sentence, , marks the end of a clause when this is not the end of a sentence. Capitals are used initially for the names of persons and places, - is used to mark clitics, and also complex words which do not have glottal junction.

Chapter two

The phonological sentence

2.1 General

The phonological sentence is the h ighest unit employed in this description of Tere n a phonology. In structure the phonological sentence consists of one or more phonological clauses. Phonological sentences with from one to three clauses are commonly found; examples of more than five such clauses are rare.

2.2 The phonetic exponents of the phonological sentence

The phonological sentence corresponds to a stretch of speech which begins and ends wit h a full pause. Commonly there is both inspiration and expiration of breath between two phonological sentence during the continued utterence of one person, though any change of speaker may take the place of this feature.
A further phonetic feature marks out the phonological sentence, voicelessness. The final syllable of a phonological sentence is often partially or completely voiceless. This feature is to some extent idiolectical and tends to occur more frequently in certain types of speech, e.g. narrative. However, it is sufficiently widespread to be noted. Whe n the last syllable of the sentence is -ti this voicelessness is especially noticeable.
Certain pitch features also serve to delineate the phono­ logical sentence. When the phonological sentence consists of two or more phonological clauses marked by tunes 1 or 2, S 3.3.3, at times the pitch drops slightly over the whole phonological sentence, not just over the individual clauses. More often, however, the pitch remains more or less constant with the variations described in the next chapter. Furthermore, inasmuch

as the end of the phonological sentence always co-incides with the end of a phonological clause, and, as w i l l be described in the next chapter, since the tunes accompanying the clause include a clause final pitch feature, these pitch features frequently mark the end of a phonological sentence as w e l l as a clause. In the case of tune, for instance, the clause final pitch fall usually marks the end of a phon o l o g i c a l sentence.
2.3 Congruences between the phonological sentence and grammatical elements
In the material examined, the beginning and end of phono­ logical sentences corresponds to the b eginning and end of gram­ matical sentences. The only exceptions to this may be accounted for as due to interruptions from some other speaker or caused by some extra-linguistic phenomena.
However, this congruence is not complete since sometimes one phonological sentence includes more than one grammatical sentence.
Symbolization // marks the boundary of a phonological sentence / marks the boundary of a phonological clause when this does not coincide with a p h o n o logical sentence boundary.
Examples
// ya ne'e yotinemaka nslmoa.// 'At night-fall I arrived there.' One phonological sentence and clause and one grammatical sentence.
//empemoahiko neko kerente itukovoti ko'ituketi ya ne'e./ Ina ki/onu, Gideao, ki/onu.// 'I asked the believers w h o w o r ked there. Then they said to me, 'Gideon', they said to me.' One

phonological sentence but two grammatical sentences, both con­ sisting of more than one clause.
//ekq/opovaane neko hoyeno./ ukopeane kenS'ohikopo neko hoyeno.// 'They buried the man. Then the men came back again from there. One phonological sentence but two grammatical sentences.

19

Chapter three

The phonological clause

3.1 General The phonological clause functions as (part of) the p h o n o ­
logical sentence. In structure it consists of at least one phonological phrase. Generally there are several phrases in one clause. Up to six is very common and fro m seven to ten is not infrequent.

3.2 Phonetic exponents of the phonological clause The phonological clause corresponds to a stretch of speech
delineated by, (i) a tentative or full pause at both its b e g i n n i n g and end, and (ii) an intonational pitch pattern which is treated in this analysis as a prosodic feature of intonation.
The tentative pause is generally noticeably briefer in duration than the full pause. Quite often there is expiration of breath at the end of the phonological clause and, less frequently, inspiration as well. The features of the length of the pause and of inspiration and expiration vary c o n s i der­ ably with the tempo and style of speech. At the b eginning of a study, for instance, the pauses m a y be longer than later on when the narrator is fully absorbed in his account.
The phonological clause may terminate with closure of the glottis. This does not correlate with any other phonological or grammatical feature so that it seems best han d l e d as free fluctuation between clauses ending wit h glottal closure and those without that feature. The tempo and style of speech may account for the presence of the glottal closure. Certainly there is a tendency for some speakers to end the clause by closing the glottis especially at the beginning of a story. Probably this feature can be regarded as non-significant, thouqh

a closer study of different speakers and styles of speech might reveal some more definite pattern.
3.3 The prosodic feature of intonation 3.3.1 General
Whenever any stretch of speech which corresponds to the phonological clause is heard, variations of pitch over the clause are noticed. These variations are limited in number and at the phonetic level are considered pitch patterns a c c om­ panying the utterance. These pitch patterns are said to accom­ pany the clause rather than some lower element of the p h o n o ­ logical hierarchy since they correspond to features generally regarded as intonation. Intonation is here treated as a p r o ­ sodic feature because its phonetic exponents are stated for the clause as.a whole rather than for some one segment of the clause and because it delimits one clause from another.
To handle the various pitch patterns observed at the phone­ tic level, a number of tunes are set up. E v e r y clause is marked by one or other of these tunes, of w h i c h there are five. S ec­ tions 3.3.2 - 3.3.6 give details of each tune in turn; however, certain general characteristics may first be mentioned.
Within each tune there are variations of pitch determined by the occurrance of the prosodic feature of stress, S 4.3.2. The tunes, however, account for the changes of pitch over the clause as a whole. Furthermore, the pitch patterns of the tunes override the normal pitch determined by stress features w h e n these are different. Tunes 1, 2, and 3 share a common feature in that over the clause the pitch either remains level or drops slightly. N o significant differences b e t w e e n these three tunes have been found in this respect, though a more d e t ailed study might do so.
Some clauses include an additional w o r d w h i c h is marked by a pitch feature which is diffprpnf- frnm

21
It seems more convenient to describe these four further pitch features as tune extensors rather than to set up additional tunes. Section 3.3.7 gives details of these extensors.
It will be noticed that the tunes are numbered rather than named since the tunes function with many different types of clause. There is no one to one correspondence bet w e e n state­ ments and one tune, and say, commands and another tune, though the various tunes do differ in semantic function. For instance, clauses marked by tune one are often statements but to call this tune a 'statement' tune would be misleading since clauses which are commands and questions are also marked by this tune. Section 3.3.8 outlines the semantic function of the tunes.

22

3.3.2 Tune 1

In tune 1, except for the variations in pitch associated

with stress, S 4.3.2, pitch is ma i n t a i n e d level or

drops

slightly over the whole clause till the final phonological

phrase. The final phonological phrase is marked by high pitch

of the syllable wit h full stress and low pitch on all suc c e ed­

ing syllables. The pitch on these syllables may either fall

to low on the syllable immediately after the stressed syllable

and remains at the same low pitch for any further syllables, or

else, less frequently the pitch steps dow n till the final low

syllable. Stress on any syllables preceding the stressed

syllable is in accordance with the normal phrase pitch as

described in S4.3.2, b u t apart from this the tune

1 pitch

pattern overrides the phrase pitch irrespective of the type of

stress.

The occurrence of tune 1 almost always marks the end of a

phonological sentence, especially in narrative speech.

Examples

kahya'a / upu. 'He want e d m a n d i o c a . '

in tune i, except ior tne variations in pitcn associdtea

with stress, S 4.3.2, pitch is m a i n tained level or

drops

slightly over the whole clause till the final phonological

phrase. The final phonological phrase is marked by high pitch

of the syllable with full stress and low pitch on all su c c e e d­

ing syllables. The pitch on these syllables may either fall

to low on the syllable immediately after the stressed syllable

and remains at the same low pitch for any further syllables, or

else, less frequently the pitch steps d own till the final low

syllable. Stress on any syllables p receding the stressed

syllable is in accordance with the normal phrase pitch as

described in S4.3.2, b u t apart from this the tune

1 pitch

pattern overrides the phrase pitch irrespective of the type of

stress.

The occurrence of tune 1 almost always marks the end of a

phonological sentence, especially in narrative speech.

Examples

kahya'a f upu. 'He wanted mandioca. '

koepeko neko sini, 'They killed that tiger.'

ainavo pitivoko akoti veNkeaku veNko. 'Both were cities where I had not been before.1
iNpi/1a/'ovoti Korumpake vo'oku ako aunaNti ya-ra Nkoyeku. 'I can get medicine at Corumba be c a u s e I am not w e l l . 1

3.3.2 Tune 2 In tune 2, except for the variations in pitch associated
with stress, S 4.3.2, pitch is maintained level or drops slightly over the whole clause till the final phonological phrase. In the final phonological phrase either there is high pitch on the syllable marked by full stress and all succeeding syllables, or, the pitch on the stressed syllable and succeeding syllables remains as normal according to whether stress is of type A or B, S 4.3., except that the pitch of the final syllable is at the level of the last preceding high stressed syllable. In both instances pitch on any syllables preceding the stressed syllable is in accordance w ith the normal p attern associated w i t h stress.
The occurrence of tune 2 usually indicates that another clause will follow within the phonological sentence especially in narrative speech, in contrast to the occurrence of tune 1 which usually marks the end of a phonological sentence. In conversation this distinction is not quite so clear-cut, though in men's speech it still seems to hold good frequently. In women's speech the slight rise seems to occur more often at the end of the phonological sentence. There would seem- to be another distinction .'..between m e n and women's speech in that men's speech has a greater tendency towards the slight fall over the clause whereas in women's speech a majority of clauses remain level. A monotonic pitch pattern w ith maintained pitch on the final phonological phrase seems to characterize a good deal of women's speech.
Examples
kahya'a /upu. 'He wanted mandioca.'

24
ina ituko hyo'oreku kali tamuku. 'Then they made a little dog a bait.'
akoti eNjane pitivoko akone eNyone-ya. 'I didn't know the town at all.'

25
3.3.4 Tune 3 In tune 3, except for the variations in pitch associated
with stress, S 4.3.2, pitch is maintained level or drops slightly over the wh o l e clause till the final phonological phrase. The final phonological phrase is always marked by low pitch on the penultimate syllable followed by high pitch on the final syl­ lable. If full stress falls on any syllable preceding the p e n ­ ultimate syllable, it is in accordance w i t h the normal phrase pitch and in all other respects the phrase has normal pitch, S 4.3.2. The pitch on the final syllable is higher than that on other syllables in the phrase.
Clauses marked by tune 3 tend to be rather shorter than clauses marked by tunes 1 and 2. Furthermore the occurrence of tune 3 always marks the end of the phonological sentence.
Examples
v S kahya'a upu. 'Did he wan t m a n d i o c a ? '

_

/

i

^

kehya'a pthil ko'oyene. 'Do you w a n t to go n o w ? 1

pihotinemo kavanea ramako ya Mirandake iharotike. to sell mandioca flour in Miranda tomorrow?'

'Is he going

26
3.3.5 Tune 4 In tune 4, there is low or very low pitch on the syllable
of the initial phonological p h r a s e wh i c h is marked by full stress. When the initial phrase is followed by another phrase, all syllables following the stressed syllable remain low and the normal pitch pattern if resumed wit h the second phrase. When, however, there is no other phrase following the initial phrase, all syllables that follow the stressed syllable remain low until the last syllable in the phrase which has a mid or high pitch.
Clauses marked by tune 4 usually consist of only one or two phonological phrases, mos t commonly only one. Such clauses could be called 'response' clauses since they generally follow clauses which are questions or function as a comment on a p re­ ceding statement.
Examples

hainara

'That's right.'

enomone

'Exactly.'

S ako eN/"a, ki/onu. 'I don't know, he said to m e . 1

3.3.6 Tune 5 In tune 5 the normal pitch features associated with stress
are found, except that the pitch of the final syllable of the clause is high, appreciably higher than that of the high syl­ lable of the phrase or the final syllable in clauses marked by tune 3. Frequently this final syllable is very much lengthened and in such instances this high pitch is m a i n tained throughout the syllable. This feature of length seems to be proportionate in some instances to the emphasis desired by the speaker and in other cases to the distance the speaker is from the person addressed. Occasionally this feature of high pitch marks the penultimate as well as the final syllable.
Clauses marked by tune 5 usually only consist of a a single phonological phrase, though a wide variety of types of clauses is found; e.g. greeting, calls, commands and listing.
Examples

unati 1h u l l o . '

yarukapu. 'Come ini'

nanoe Iti.

'Where are y o u ] 1

ati.

'F e l l o w ! '

ako'o.

'Don1t ! '

iharoti. 'Goodbye.'

hoyeno, seno, kalivono. ... 'men, women, children...'

3.3.7

Tune extensors

3.3.7.1 General Quite often phonological clauses are found with a pitch
pattern similar in every respect to one of the five tunes already described except that an additional pitch feature marks the last phonological w ord of the clause. It is notice­ able that this final w o r d is usually a particle and has an exclamatory or interjaculatory function. This additional pitch feature is termed a tune extensor. Tune plus tune e x ­ tensor are regarded as functioning in exactly the same way as the same tune w ithout any extensor. Thus tune 1 plus an ex­

tensor is still termed tune 1. It would, in fact, be possible

to

-etve t-urve and extensor as a type of complex tune

in contrast to the simple tune; however, to set up simple and

complex tunes to handle this feature seems a little cumbersome.

A different treatment would be to regard the complex of tune plus extensor as another tune, b u t this wo u l d lead to the e s ­ tablishment of an unnecessarily large number of tunes.
Yet another possible analysis would be to treat the tune extensors as separate tunes and the combination of tune and e x ­ tensor would then be regarded as a sequence of two tunes. H o w ­ ever, tune and extensor function yith a single phonological

clause. For instance there is no pause between the two. F u r ­ thermore the tune extensors are very restricted in their dis­ tribution since they never occur alone as a tune with a separate phonological clause but only occur in conjunction with one of the five tunes. Altogether, it seems more satisfactory to treat the whole piece as one phonological clause marked by a single tune, the tune extensor being regarded as a type of e x ­ pansion of the single tune.

The following sections describe each of the four extensors in turn.

3.3.7

Tune extensors

3.3.7.1 General Quite often phonological clauses are found with a pitch
pattern similar in every r espect to one of the five tunes already described except that an additional pitch feature marks the last phonological word of the clause. It is noticeable that this final w o r d is usually a particle and has an exclamatory or interjaculatory function. This additional pitch feature is termed a tune extensor. Tune plus tune e x ­ tensor are regarded as functioning in exactly the same way as the same tune without any extensor. Thus tune 1 plus an ex­ tensor is still termed tune 1. It would, in fact, be possible to consider the tune and extensor as a type of complex tune in contrast to the simple tune; however, to set up simple and complex tunes to handle this feature seems a little cumbersome. A different treatment would be to regard the complex of tune plus extensor as another tune, b u t this wo u l d lead to the e s ­ tablishment of an unnecessarily large number of tunes.
Yet another possible analysis would be to treat the tune extensors as separate tunes and the combination of tune and e x ­ tensor would then be regarded as a sequence of two tunes. H o w ­ ever, tune and extensor function ™ith a single phonological clause. For instance there is no pause between the two. F u r ­ thermore the tune extensors are very restricted in their dis­ tribution since they never occur alone as a tune with a separate phonological clause but only occur in conjunction with one of the five tunes. Altogether, it seems more satisfactory to treat the whole piece as one phonological clause marked by a single tune, the tune extensor being regarded as a type of e x ­ pansion of the single tune.
The following sections describe each of the four extensors in turn.

3. 3.7. 2 Tune extensor A Extensor A occurs vith a single phonological word at the
end of a phonological clause marked by either tune 1 or 2, more commonly the former. In this tune e x t ensor pitch rises from low on the first syllable(s) to hig h on the final syl­ lable. The low first syllable(s) are usu a l l y about the same pitch as the final low syllable of tune 1. T h e high syllable is about the same pitch as that on the final syllable of tune 3.
It would be possible to consider that tune 1 or 2 plus this feature is equivalent to tune 3, except that tune 3 does not have either the low pitch or sustained h igh pitch immediately preceding the final high pitch as is the case w i t h tune ex­ tensor A.
Examples
enomone koene hoyeno ehe? Patricio o m o p aatimo mamaina haina? 'That's what the m e n did, eh?' 'Patricio w i l l bring his mother,
isn't that so?'
enepo epemapi, pore/oattimo xi'ixa, ehem? 'If he asked, you would give it to your son, wouldn't you?'
3. 3.7.3 Tune extensor B Tune extensor B occurs with a single phonological word at
the end of a clause marked by tune 3. In this extensor pitch falls from high on the first syllable to low on the final s yl­ lables. The first syllable is lower than the pitch of the final syllable of tune 3,and the final low syllable is usually about the same pitch as that of the final low syllable of tune 1.

The combination of tune 3 and extensor B is similar to tune 1 except that tune 1 does not have the high pitch feature preceding the final fall.
Examples

kehya'a iNpihea hana'iti uto mesakuke, ako'o?

'Do you w a n t me to put the big plates on the table or not?1

pihone Miranda, avo?

'Has he gone to Miranda, or not yet?'

3.3.7.4 Tune extens or C Extensor C occurs with a single phonological word at the
end of a clause marked by tune 1 or 2. In this tune extensor pitch is maintained h igh and level. Frequently there is c o n ­ siderable length on this final high syllable. Pitch is usually higher and the syllable longer than the final syllable of ex­ tensor A. This extensor has only been found with the particle om.
The combination of tune 1 or 2 and extensor C is not equivalent to any other tune though it has some of the features of tune 5, namely the length and high pitch on the final syllable.

3.3.8 The semantic function of the tunes Since the same p h o n o logical clause whe n marked by different
tunes is followed by d ifferent linguistic and extra-linguistic responses it seems useful to regard the tunes as having a cer­ tain semantic function. An example may illustrate this. The clause, ape eno /ane, 'there were many people', w h e n marked by tune 1 may be followed by clauses marked by tunes 1, 2, or 3 without a change of speaker. Such a clause may be regarded as a 'statement'. However, a change of speakers usually follows the same clause w h e n it is marked by tune 3 and usually clauses marked by tunes 4 or 1 follow, tune 3 very rarely does and tune 2 seldom. Clearly from bot h the situational and linguistic point of view such a clause is very different from the 'same' clause with tune 1. This clause marked by tune 3 could be r e ­ garded as a 'question'.
There is, however, no clear-cut one for one correspondence between the different tunes and various categories into w h i ch the different clauses may be grouped on linguistic and s i t u a ­ tional grounds. Tune 1 does not always accompany a 'statement', nor are all 'statement' clauses marked by tune 1, and similarly with tune 3 and 'question' clauses. On the other hand there are definite restrictions in the semantic function of the d i f ­ ferent tunes, since not every tune may accompany every type of clause. These various restrictions may have not been analysed exhaustively; however, some of the more frequent correspondences may be stated as follows. Tune 1 accompanies statement, question, command, and response
clauses, Tune 2 accompanies statement and response clauses, Tune 3 accompanies question, command, and greeting clauses, Tune 4 accompanies response, comment, exclamation and question
clauses,

32
Tune 5 accompanies calling, greeting, command, vocative, and listing clauses,
Tune 1 or 2 and extensor A accompany rhetorical and direct question clauses,
Tune 1 or 2 and extensor C accompany emphatic statement and command clauses,
Tune 3 and extensor B accompany 'doubtful' q u e s t i o n clauses, Tune 1 or 5 and extensor D accompany emphatic command clauses.
3.4 The phonological clause in the phonological sentence Phonological clauses accompanied by any tune may function
as a single phonological sentence, though clauses w ith tune 2 rarely do since they are usually followed by a clause markedby tune 1 or tune 3 w i t h i n the phonological sentence. All clauses which include a tune extensor always function either as a single phonological sentence or as the final clause in a sentence.
Tunes 4 and 5 mark clauses which always function as a single phonological sentence, without any other clause preceding or following them.
Clauses with tunes 1 and 3 often function as a single phonological sentence but not infrequently they are preceded by a clause with tune 2.
Example
'They buried that man, then the men came back again from there. 1

3.5 Congruences between the phonological clause and grammatical elements
The majority of phonological clauses correspond to some grammatical element. Some phonological clauses correspond to grammatical clauses, others to sentences. Almost always either the beginning or the end of the phonological clause co-incides with some grammatical b r eak-point and most frequently both do.
However, the congruence is not complete since not every grammatical clause or sentence corresponds to some phonological clause. Two grammatical clauses are often congruent to one phonological clause. Sometimes one phonological clause is only part of a grammatical clause, especially whe n the h e s i t a ­ tion form, ka'aye, is used.
Examples: /ina eNpemoa exea P a u l o Smits/ 'Then I asked if he knew Paul S m i t h . ' One phonological clause but two grammatical clauses. /ina oNposikoponoa ya okokuke/ nikokutike./ 'Then I looked for him at the stopping-place, at the h o t e l . 1 Two phonological clauses, one grammatical clause. /uhkeane Npiho ya Paranaiba/ 'From their I went to Paranaiba.' One phonological and grammatical clause.

Chapter four

The phonological phrase

4.1 General
The p h o n ological phrase functions as (part of) the p h ono­ logical clause. In structure two types of phonological phrase are distinguished, simple and complex. Complex phrases are infrequent averaging from between one and six per cent in dif­ ferent material examined, with an overall average of 3 percent. For this reason the statements of the following sections up to 4.4 are m a d e w i t h o u t reference to complex phrases and then in S 4.4 the complex phrase is described in detail. Section 4.5 gives details of the phonological phrase in rapid speech and section 4.6 describes the emphatic phonological phrase. Sections 4.7 details congruences between the phonological phrase and grammatical elements.

In structure the simple phonological phrase consists of a nucleus which is always a phonological word, with or without satellite phonological words. At the phonetic level it is noticeable that the word corresponding to the nucleus in this analysis is always marked by stress whereas other words corres­ ponding to the satellite elements of the phrase are not marked in the same way by stress. The satellite element of the phrase is usually one w o r d though sometimes there are £two such words.

4.2 Phonetic exponents of the phonological phrase
At the phonetic level various features, including length, pitch and loudness, all associated with the occurrence of stress, provide criteria for the setting up of this, the next smallest element in the phonological hierarchy.
Since the various phonetic features associated with stress extend throughout the phrase and these features also delimit

one phonological phrase from another, they are treated as the phonetic exponents of a single p r o sodic feature termed the prosody of stress. In general the simple p h o n o logical phrase corresponds to a stretch of speech marked by various stress features all of which can be referred to one occurrence of the stress prosody.

4.3 4.3.1

The prosodic feature of stress General

Stress is both a phonological and grammatical feature of Terena. Its main function is to serve as a grammatical sig­ nalling device. All words except particles may be stressed on two different syllables and the selection of one of these two syllables in any one utterance frequently has syntactic impli­ cations. The grammatical function of stress is desc r i b e d in section 16.
As an element of the phonological system, stress is con­ sidered a prosodic feature of the phonological phrase. Every phonological phrase is marked by the occurrence of the stress prosody. For ease of description it is convenient to consider that the stress prosody includes two sub-features, termed full stress and secondary stress. When the phonological phrase consists of the nucleus only, the stress prosody consists of the sub-feature of full stress only. When the phonological phrase includes satellite words, the stress prosody usually includes both-the sub-features of full stress and secondary stress.
The sub-feature of full stress always marks! the last word of the ponological phrase, while the sub-feature of secon­ dary stress, when it occurs, always marks the first word of the phrase. Sections 4.3.2 - 4.3.7 give details of full stress and section 4.3.8 of secondary stress.

4.3.2

The phonetic exponents of full stress

The sub-feature of full stress has various phonetic expon­ ents, all of which extend over one word. For this reason the sub-feature is described in terms of the word. These exponents are, loudness, length, and pitch and may be stated as follows:

1. The utterance of one syllable of a w o r d w i t h greater loud­ ness and articulatory force than other syllables of that word. When this syllable consists of a single V nucleus, S 6<,2.1, this feature usually begins w i t h the C margin of the p receding syl­ lable but reaches its peak on the single V nucleus.

2. Length focussing ,either aB on the C immediately following the nucleus of the syllable
marked by loudness, or, if that syllable is the third syllable of the word and followed by a V syllable, on the V nucleus of the syllable marked by loudness if that v o w e l is more open than the following vowel or otherwise on that second vowel, or,
b„ on the V which is the nucleus of the syllable m a rked by greater loudness.

3. One of the following pitch patterns:

a. a higher pitch on the syllable m a rked

bygreaterloudness

than on the preceding and following syllables,

or, b. a lower falling pitch on that syllable.

Pitch on syllables p receding the stressed syllable is usually

level and at about the same pitch as u n s t ressed syllables of

the preceding word,, The pitch on syllables following the stressed

syllable may step down on succeeding syllables or may remain

level though at a lower pitch than the stressed syllable.

Syllables following the falling pitch are generally considerably higher than the low point of the fall. There wo u l d appear to be some variations of pitch on non-stressed syllables but this has not been observed to correlate with other phonological or gram­ matical features and are, therefore, considered freely fluctuat­ ing and in that sense non-significant. However, a more detailed study might be able to state more definite patterns to these variations.
It should be noted, however, that when a phonological phrase occurs in final position in a phonological clause, the pitch pattern of the clause is determined by the tune accompanying that clause, S 3 03 0 Quite often that tune differs in some respect from the normal pitch pattern of the phrase.
The syllable marked by greater loudness and by the pitch features described above is termed the stressed syllable through­ out the rest of this chapter.

4.3.3 4.3.3.1

Stress patterns and classes Stress patterns of the word

The sub-feature of full stress always marks one of the first three syllables of the word. In every word there are two of the first three syllables which may be marked by stress and the selec­ tion of one of these two syllables is grammatically determined, S 16. Stress marks one of these two syllables more frequently than the other and this syllable is always the first of the two syllables which may be stressed in a given word. Words are therefore said to have a first stressed syllable and a second stressed syllable. The combination of these two for any one word is termed the stress pattern.
The various stress patterns of phonological words are found to correlate with grammatical features. The same stretch of

-38
speech that is referred to the phonological w o r d in the phonological analysis is referred to the grammatical w o r d in the grammatical analysis, S 5.5. It is found that in describing a given stretch of speech, whe n the categories set up for the statement of the phonological structure are compared with the categories set up for the statement of the g r ammatical structure, there is a close correlation between the stress patterns of the phonological words and the grammatical status of the grammatical words. For this reason in describing the stress patterns it is convenient to group the various statements according to the w o r d classes of the gram­ matical word to which the phonic material is referred. In the following sections p h o n o l o g i c a l words are referred to as 'verb1, 'noun' etc. This is not b e c a u s e of any confusion between the phonological and grammatical analyses but solely to simplify statements and avoid cumbersome t e r m i n o l o g y „ A p h rase such as, 'the stress pattern of v e r b s 0 .o' is much simpler than, 'the stress pattern of 'X' class of p h o n o logical w o r d wh i c h correlates with the verb class of the grammatical w o r d 00 o' In effect the stress system requires the grouping of p h o n o l o g i c a l words into classes and since these classes are identical in membership to the classes required by the w o r d class s y stem of the grammatical analysis the one set of labels is used.
For the majority of words the stress pattern is stated by indicating the syllables on which stress may fallo For instance, a verb whose first stressed syllable is the second syllable, and whose second stressed S y l l a b l e is the third syllable, is said to have a 2-3 stress pattern. However, in the case of verbs of class A it is necessary to make a slightly diff e r e n t statement, S 403.5. All words except particles have a stress pattern, S 4.307. The following sections give details of the stress

patterns; 4.3.4 of class G verbs, 4 . 3 C5 of class A verbs, 4.3.6 of nouns; Section 4.3.7 describes stress on particles. However certain general features may first be mentioned.
In general, the stress pattern of any word is determined by the root functioning in the p a r t i c u l a r word, irrespective of the class of the word concerned. Thus a verb which contains a noun root has a stress pat t e r n determined, largely, by the pattern of the noun root. As w i l l be seen in the following sections, there are modifications to this general tendency b u t in the main this principle accounts for the stress pattern of Terena words.
Another general principle sometimes runs counter to this. Words which include a vo w e l cluster of dissimilar vowels resulting from the junction of the first and second, or second and third syllables never have a stress pattern that would result in the first stressed syllable and the second stressed syllable being involved in the one vowel cluster, except when such words are of only two syllables. W h e n vowel clusters occur in the first three syllables, irrespective of the stress pattern of the root, the following pattern is foundo lo When the vowel cluster involves the first and second syllables
a. First stress falls, (i) if of type A, (see next section) on the second syllable, (ii) if of type B, on the first syllable if this is more open than the second, otherwise on the second syllable,
b„ Second stress falls on the third syllable,, 2„ When the vowel cluster involves the second and third syllables
a. First stress falls on the first syllable, b. Second stress falls on the third s y l l a b l e 0 For instance a word h a v i n g a root w h i c h has a 2-3 stress pattern, but in whichbecause of some affixation the second and third syllables are a CV syllable followed by a V syllable, w i l l have a 1-3 stress pattern.

40 Examples otopiko 'he chopped' otoplkoti 'he is chopping' This verb has a 2-3 stress pattern and its root, otopi- has the same stress pattern, nikoa 'he ate it' nikoatimo 'he w i l l eat it' This verb has a 1-3 stress pattern though its root, niko- has a 2-3 stress pattern. Contrast niko'ovi - stress pattern remains the same for like vowels but prosodic feature of glottal junction operates, 6,7.4.1.
4. 3.3.2 First and s e c o n d stress In order to make statements about the stress s y stem it is
necessary to distinguish the occurrence of stress when it falls on the first stressed syllable and its occurrence when it falls on the second stressed syllable. The same phonetic exponents of length, loudness and pitch are found irrespective of wh i c h syl­ lable is marked by stress, however, since the selection of the first or second stressed syllable has grammatical implications, it is necessary to distinguish these two occurrences. This may be simply achieved by calling the occurrence of stress on the first stressed syllable, first stress, and its occurrence on the second stressed syllable, second stress» The use of such terms has the advantage of avoiding cumbersome phrases such a s , 'when the stress that usually falls on the second stressed syllable....', since 'when second stress---- ' is much simpler to u s e c
However it should be emphasized that this analysis does not set up two full stresses or even two sub-classes of full stress, but rather one prosodic feature of stress w h i c h has various phonetic

said to occur on the second syllable and second stress on the third syllable.

4. 3. 3. 3 Type A and type B stress The various phonetic exponents described in S 4 „ 3 02 combine
with one another in certain s p e cific ways in particular words. The different ways in which they combine is taken as the basis for the setting up of two types of full stress, type A and type B. Type A full stress is m a r k e d by the occurrence of phonetic exponents 1,2a, and 3a, while type B stress is m a rked by the occurrence of exponents 1, 2b, and 3 b 0
When full stress falls on the last syllable of a wor d it is always of type B„ Similarly w h e n full stress falls on the penul­ timate syllable of a w o r d wh o s e final syllable is a V, it is always of type B a Type B stress is found only w h e n full stress marks one of the last three syllables of a w o r d 0
It should be noted that type A stress is found much more frequently than type B, averaging over 70 per c e n t of the occur­ rences of full stress in m a t erial examined,,

Symbolization Type A stress is symbolized by an acute accent

over the vowel of the stressed syllable and Type

B by a grave accent0

Examples

otopiko 'he chopped' itukoa 'when he did it'

hSyeno 'man'

mopoi 'stone, h i l l 1

403. 3. 4 The relation of type A and B stress to the stress patterns and the length of words
Type A full stress is found whenever there are no factors to prevent it falling in accordance with the stress pattern of the particular word. However, stress does not usually fall on the

last syllable of any word,, The only instances of this found are verbs functioning in a clause emphasizing the subject preceded by the suffix -ti, S. 4.3.4.3. and 4.3<>5.3o Except then for these instances (which are described in the following sections), if the stress pattern of the w ord is such that stress wo u l d fall on the last syllable of that word, it falls on the preceding syllable, and is of type B usually. However, in the following circumstances such stress is not of type B.
If the second stress falls on the syllable preceding the normal second stressed syllable and that syllable is also marked by type B stress when first stress falls on it, then the second stress is of type A„ For instance, a short w o r d of two syllables, having a 2-3 stress pattern is marked by first stress on the first syllable since stress does not normally fall on the last syllable of the w o r d 0 This first stress is of type B 0 However, since the wor d is only of two syllables second stress also falls on the first syllable, as it cannot mark the non-existent third syllable not normally the second syllable since this is the final syllable of the w o r d c Such second stress is of type A„
In this way the contrast between the occurrence of stress on the first or second syllable of the w o r d is maintained even when for specific reasons the first and second stressed syllable are on the same syllable. If the norm a l contrast in the pl ace­ ment of stress is inoperative, the distinction between the type A and type B stress fulfills the same function and the opposition is maintained.
Examples pihopo (pihop:o) 'he w e n t h o m e 1 Type A stress on the usual syllable pihopb being a verb with a 2-3 stress pattern since it contains a root, p i h o - , with a 2-3 stress pattern. pihopomaka (pihopSm: aka) 'when he also w e n t home' Type A stress on the normal syllable.

piho (p:ho) 'he went'. Type B stress on the syllable preceding the usual syllable. pihopo (piho:po) 'when he went home'. Type B stress on the syllable preceding the usual syllable. piho (pih:o) 'when he went'. Type A stress marking a syllable two syllables preceding the usual syllable but since this syllable is marked with type B stress w h e n first stress falls on it, type A stress occurs here.

4.3.4 Full stress on class G verbs 4. 3. 4.1 General
Since class G and class A verbs are markedly different in their stress patterns, section 4.3.4 deals with class G verbs and 4.3.5 with class A verbs.
Quite apart from the grammatical factors which determine whether first or second stress occur, there are two other factors which determine which syllable of a particular class G verb will be stressed and whether the stress w i l l be of type A or B. These factors are the stress class to which the G verb belongs and the number of syllables in that word. In addition certain morpheme restrictions are found.

4.3.4.2 Stress classes of class G verbs stress
All G verbs are assigned to one of t h r e e ^ classes on the

basis of their stress patterns. Since the first stress always

falls on the first or second syllable and the second stress on

the second or third syllable, there are three possible stress

patterns and so three stress classes are set up, as follows, class
StressA l, first stress falls on the first syllable, second stress

class

on the second syllable,

Stress^2, first stress falls on the first syllable, second stress

on the third syllable,

Stress class 3, first stress falls on the seco n d syllable, second stress on the third syllable.
In sample material analyzed, two-thirds of the G verbs were of class 3, one-quarter of class 2 and the remainder of class 1.
Certain specific factors determine the stress class of G verbs. If the verb includes a vowel cluster wh i c h involves the first and second, or the s e c o n d and third syllables, the stress pattern is as described in section 4. 3. 3.1. In all other instances the stress class is determined as follows, All verbs with a VG root b e l o n g to the same stress class as that G root. All verbs containing a noun stem, S 14.6, b e long to the same stress class as that n o u n stem. All verbs wit h a V A root have a stress class as follows. The stress p a t t e r n set up for VA roots includes two first s t r essed syllable, one for the definite mood form, S 15.2, and the o t h e r for the indefinite mood form of the A verbs in which the A roots occur, S 4.3.5.2. The first stressed syllable of the indefinite moo d form is the first stressed syllable of the verb stem in which the VA root occurs„ The second stressed syllable of such verbs is always the third syllable

Examples

otopiko otopiko 'he chopped' VG root otopi- Stress class 3

ahyikovo ahyikovo 'he bathed' VG root ahyi-

"

"

1

arunoexo arunoexoti 'she's a girl' Noun stem arunoe stress class 2

komomikoa komomikoati 'he mad e h i m tired'

VA root momiwith first

stress in the indefinite mood on the first

syllable.

4,3.4.3 Type of stress and length of G verbs G verbs having four or more syllables are marked by stress
of type A and are stressed according to the stress pattern of the stress class to which they belong. In material examined a majority of verbs fall into this category.

G verbs having less than four syllables are also marked by stress of type A and are stressed according to the stress class to which they belong except in the following circumstances.
1. G verbs of stress class 3 which only consist of two syllables are found with first stress of type B on the first syllable. Example: p i h o 'he went* has VG root of stress class 3, c.f. pihopo 'he w e n t home'. nike 'you ate' is of stress class 3 since it has a VG root of stress class 3, c.f„ nikemaka 'you also ate'
2. G verbs of all stress classes which consist of two syllables only are found with second stress on either, a. the second syllable, w hen the verb is (part of) a clause emphasizing the subject, S 16.2„2 and also when the suffix -ti, S 14„7o3 occurs on the word preceding the verb. Such stress is of type B, or, b. the first syl l ab l e in all other circumstances. Such stress is of type A 0 Example: hyoko pihe 'Don't g o j ', is of stress class 3 since it has a VG root of stress class 3, c f e hyoko piheponoe 'Don't go home (pi)J' kuti piho 'Who went?'; since this is emphasizing the subject, second^tress falls differently from the previous example, cf0 kuti pihopeneB 'Who went h o m e ? 1 akoti piha 'No one went' c f e enepo pihapane 'When he went h o me.'
30 G verbs of stress classes 2 and 3 which consist of three syllables arefound with second stress on either, a. the third syl l a b l e wh e n the verb is (part of) a clause emphasizing the subject, S 16.2.2. and is of type B, or, b. the second syllable in all other circumstances and is of type B .

46 Example: pihopo 'when he went home' contrasted with, kuti pihopo 'Who w ent home?' cf. pi h o p o m a k a 'when he also went home'.
4. G verbs of all stress classes w h i c h include the suffix -ti as their fourth syllable are found w i t h second stress on either,
a. the third syllable whe n the second and third syllables are a vowel cluster. Such stress is of type B. or,
b. the second syllable in all other circumstances. Such stress is of type A.
Example: pihopotimo 'he w i l l go home' (contrast, pihotimo 'he will go') nikoati 'he is eating it' Both verbs are of stress class 3 since they have VG roots of that class and both are marked by second stress and have -ti as the fourth s y l l a b l e 0 The difference in their stress is as stated ab o v e e
5. G verbs of all stress classes w h i c h include the suffix -ti as their third and last syllable are found w i t h second stress on the second syllable. Such stress is of type B„ Example: pihoti 'he is going' stress class 3, isoti 'he is hoeing' stress class 1.
6» G verbs of stress classes 2 and 3 w h i c h include the suffix -hi S 14.5.3.3, as third syllable and the suffix -ti as fifth syllable are found with second stress on the second syllable. Such stress is of type A. Examples: kipoheoti 'she's washing' cf. kipohea 'when she washed it' This verb is of stress class 3 since it contains a VG root of that stress class and is marked by second stress on the second syllable. Also, siraheoti 'she's raking' cf. siraheopoti 'she's raking again' this verb has the same stress class 3 with second stress on the second syllable.

4.3.5 Full stress on class A verbs

4.3.5.1 General

The sub-feature of full stress marks class A verbs somewhat

differently from class G verbs. The two factors which, apart

from the grammatical factors determining whether first or second

stress occurs, determine which syllable of a particular class A

verb will be stressed, are the same. But the

stress classes

are set up differently and the details regarding the length of

the stems also vary. The morpheme restrictions are also d i f­

ferent for the two types of verb.

4.3„5.2 Stress classes of class A verbs

All class A verbs are assigned to one of

four stress classes

on the basis of their stress patterns. In the case of A verbs

the second stressed syllable is normally marks the third syllable

so that it is only the plac e m e n t of first stress which varies.

This, however, does not always fall on the same syllable b u t may

vary depending whether the adjective is in definite or indefinite

mood.

There are four classes set up on this basis, as follows,

Stress class 1, first stress, definite mood on the first syllable,

indefinite mood on the first syllable,

Stress class 2, first stress, definite mood on the first syllable,

indefinite mood on the second syllable0

Stress class 3, first stress, definite mood on the second syllable,

indefinite mood on the second syllable.

Stress class 4, first stress, definite mood on the second syllable,

indefinite mood on the first syllable,,

T r - r vT-riv-v 1

m —i -4—/-~v. v -J —i H

»-» - i 1 T r r ?

V i —< *1 -P

4—V-> <—» 'A » t< - \ v * V > r i t . ty~\ v«/*>

-f- f i 4— -v— o o

---------------

48

stress class as that A root. A l l A verbs containing a VG root

belong to either stress class 1 or 3 according to the stress

class of the VG root. Class A verbs with VG roots of stress

class 1 or 2 belong to stress class 1, while those wit h VG roots

of stress class 3 belong to stress class 3 C All A verbs con­

taining a noun stem b e l o n g to either stress class 2 or 3

according to the stress class of the noun stem, and the structure

of the initial syllable of the noun stem. All class A verbs

with a noun stem with an initial V are members of stress class

3. Otherwise, A verbs w i t h noun stems of stress class la

belong to stress class 2 , the remainder to stress class 3 C

Examples: All with first stress,

Definite mood Indefinite mood

v5ke

ovoke

1 liquid', VA root vo- Stress class 1

hyou'i

ahyou'i 'hard', VA root hyou- Stress class 1

kohiyana okohiyana 'care for', VA root kohiyana Stress class 2

kSyeno

okoyeno 'married', Noun stem yeno of stress class 1

miyeke

amiyeke 'sticky', VG root miye- of stress class 3

hyahya'ine ahyahya'i 'black', VA root hyahya- of stress class 3

koyuho

okoyuho 'speak', Noun stem yuho of stress class 2

hyuleke ahyuleke 'lazy', VA root hyule- of stress class 4

s^unapone a ^ Luna

'strong', VA root suna of stress class 4

40 3.5.3
n

Type of stress and length of A verbs a imvKe ar-o TmvVoH hvr ci-f-rp.ss of tvoe A and are

Example: momi 'when he was t i r e d ' , has a V A root of class 2, cf. momipone 'when he was tired again'. kuti momi 'Who's tired?', cf. kuit m o m i p o 'Who's tired again?'

2. A verbs of all stress classes w h i c h consist of three syl­

lables are found wit h second stress on either,

a. the third syllable, when the verb is (part of) a clause

emphasizing the subject, S 16.2.2. Such stress is of type B. or,

bo the second syllable in all other c i r cumstances 0 stress is of type B.

Such

Example: h y o k o kemomo 'Don't l o o k i ', has a V A root of class 3,
cf. hyoko kemomopo 'Don't look a g a i n I ' kuti komomo 'Who looked?'

cf0 kuti komomopo 'Who looked again?'

3. A verbs of all stress classes wh i c h include the suffix -ti as their third syllable are found w i t h second stress on the first syllable. Example: inati 'heavy', has a V A root of stress class 2, cf. ina'inonuti 'It's heavy for me' momiti 'tired', has a V A root of class 2 momoponoti 'he went and is tired'

4. A verbs of all stress classes w h i c h include the suffix -ti as their fourth syllable are found with second stress on the second syllable. Example: hyahya'iti 'black', has a V A root of stress class 3, cf. hyahya'xpoti 'black again'. hyou'iti 'hard', has a V A root of class 1 .

4.3.6 Full stress on nouns 4.3.6.1 General
As is the case w i t h verbs, so there are two factors which determine wh i c h syllable of a noun is marked by first stress and

50 which by second stress, and w h e t h e r stress is of type A or B. These factors are the stress class of the noun and the number of syllables in the noun. However the basis for the e s tablish­ ment of the stress classes of the noun is n o t the same as that used for the verbs.
4.3.6 .2 Stress classes of nouns All noun steins are assigned to one of two stress classes on
the basis of the stress patterns of the words in wh i c h they function as stem. Since for all nouns the second stressed syl­ lable is the third syllable, the placement of the first stress is the basis for this subdivision, which is made as follows, Stress class 1, first stress falls on the first syllable of the
noun, Stress class 2, first stress falls on the second syllable. Two-thirds of the noun stems in sample material were found to
1? belong to class 2. Factors determining the stress class of noun stems are as follows. A l l noun stems containing a noun or particle root belong to the same stress class as that noun root, S 12 0 2.8, or particle root, 13.4C
Noun stems consisting of a verb and the suffix -keno, S 12.3.3, are assigned to a stress class on the basis that their first stressed syllable is either the syllable w h i c h is two syllables before -keno, or, the syllable w h i c h is stressed in the corresponding verb if this occurs before that syllable.
In all other cases noun stems containing a verb stem are assigned to a stress class on the basis that their first stressed syllable is the syllable which is marked by first stress in the corresponding verb form without the derivational affix, irrespec­ tive of the stress class of that verb w h e n this happens to be different. Thus, for example, ovoku 'house' is a noun stem

51 belonging to stress class 1. This s t e m contains a verb form ovo and the derivational suffix -ku, S 1 2 0 3. 3 0 ovo is a verb stem with a stress class 3 wh i c h is de t e r m i n e d by the stress class of its VG root ovo which is of stress class 3. But the noun, ovoku, does not have a 2-3 stress pat t e r n since the corresponding verb form wit h o u t the derivational affix -ku, ovo, is stressed on the first syllable in spite of its root haring a 2-3 stress pattern. Ovopoku 'place where he stayed again' is another noun and has a stem which belongs to stress class 2 since the corresponding verb form without the suffix -ku, ovopo, is stres s e d on the second syl­ lable when marked by first stress. Both ovoku, noun stem of stress class 1 , and ovopoku, noun ste m of stress class 2 , contain the same verb root, ovo, but belo n g to diff e r e n t noun stress classes because of the difference in the p l a c e m e n t of stress in the verb forms that correspond to the respe.ctive n o u n s »

Examples

First stress Second stress Stress class

ikoku 'hiswell' ikokuti 'well' 1

VG stem

anane 'his enemy' ananeti 'enemy' 2 Noun root of class 2

kapa 'cape' kapanati 'someone's cape' 1 Noun root of class 1„

4.3.6 .3 Type of stress and length of nouns Nouns are marked by stress of type A which falls according to
the pattern of the stress class to w h i c h the noun s tem belongs except in the following circumstances,,
1. Nouns with stems of stress class 2 w h i c h consist of two syl­ lables are found with first stress on the first syllable. Such stress is of type B. Exampi: kame 'squash' , has a noun s t e m of stress class 2, cf„ kamehiko 'squash (pi) '„ ka'i 'monkey', has a nou n stem of stress class 2 , cf„ ka'xhiko.

2, Nouns with stems of stress class 1 or 2, which consist of three syllables, including the morpheme -ti as the third syl­ lable, are found with second stress on the second syllaHe. Such stress is of type B. Example: hyeveti 'a f o o t 1 has a noun stem of stress class 2, cf. hyevetlhiko 'feet1, muyoti 'a body', has a noun stem of stress class 2 , cf. muyotihiko 'bodies'. 3. Nouns w i t h stems of stress class 1 which contains a noun root of stress class la, S 12.2.9, which include the suffix -na, S 120402, are found to be marked w i t h first stress on their second syllable. Noun roots of stress-class 1 are divided into two sub-classes on this b a s i s 0 Example: kaxe 'a day', has noun root of stress class la, cf. kaxena 'his day' and kaxehiko 'days'. indlna 'my blood', cf„ itimaka 'blood too'
4.3.7 Full stress on particles 4.3„7<,1 General
Phonological words which are congruent to grammatical worcls of the word-class, particle, differ from other words in that they have only one stressed syllable. Stress classes are set up for such words on the basis of the placement of this one full stress. The factors determining which syllable of the particle is stressed and what type of stress marks the particular particle are, there­ fore, the stress class of the particle stem and the number of s y l ­ lables in the particle.
4.3.7.2 Stress classes of particle stems Two stress classes are set up as follows,
Stress class 1, full stress marks the first syllable, Stress class 2, full stress marks the second syllable,
ma-inritv of particle stems belong to stress class 2 .

The stress class of a particular particle is determined by the stress class of the root of that particle. S 13. 4. Since particles only contain particle roots, the particle root stress class determines the stress class of the individual particle. Examples ko'oyene 'now' has a particle root of stress class 1 , cf. ko'o y e n e m a k a upanini 'although' has a p a r t i c l e root of stress class 2 C
4,3.7.3 Type of stress and length of particles Particles are marked by stress of type A which falls according
to the pattern of the stress class to which the s t e m belongs, except in the following circumstances.
Particles with stems of stress class 2 which consist of two syllables only, are found to be m a r k e d with full stress on the first syllable. Such stress is of type B c Example: meku 'a long time ago', has a particle stem of class 2, since it has a particle root of that class, cf, mekune 'some time ago'„ soko 'to...' has a particle s t e m of class 2 as its particle root is on stress class 2 , cf. sokoyoke.
4,3.8 The sub-feature of secondary stress When a phonological phrase consists of more than one word, it
is usually marked by the occurrence of secondary stress in addition to the full stress which always falls on the nucleus of the phrase. When it occurs, secondary stress falls on the first syllable of the phrase.
The phonetic exponent of secondary stress is the utterance of the first syllable of a w o r d w i t h somewhat greater loudness and articulatory force than the other syllables of that word. Secondary stress is clearly distinguishable from full stress in that the phone t i c exponents of length and pitch v ariation which play such an important

part in full stress do n o t occur with secondary stress. Furthermore

secondary stress always marks the first syllable of the phrase ir­

respective of the stress class of the first word in that phrase.

Symbolization 1 in word initial position symbolizes secondary stress.

Examples:

'yara yoti

'this nightf

'enepo neko ovoku

'that house'

'ha'i tikoti 'ako eN^a

'fruit' 'I don't know'

'se'esa t a p ! 'i 'itea inusoti00«

'egg' (lit. off­ spring of a hen
'but at first'

4,4 The complex phonological phrase Like the simple phonological phrase, the complex phonological
phrase consists of from one to three words. However, the phrase nucleus is always a complex w o r d in contrast to the simple w o r d of the simple phonological phrase. The majority of complex phrases consist of just this one word.
The complex phrase is established on the basis of the fact that full stress marks at least two syllables of the phrase, in contrast to the one full stress that marks the simple p h r a s e 0 When the complex phonological phrase is compared with the elements set up in the grammatical analysis for the same stretch of speech, it is found that full stress always falls on the auxiliary element and the head piece element of the complex verb, S 1 4 08 09 0 For this reason the statement of full stress on the complex w o r d is made in terms of the head piece and auxiliary of the complex w o r d c
Every complex word is marked by full stress on the auxiliary in the same way as full stress marks the verb in the simple phrase. The syllable that is stressed in any one instance is determined by the stress class of the auxiliary and the n u mber of syllables in the auxiliary together w ith the grammatical factor determining whether stress is first or second stress. The auxiliary kiso belongs to stress class 4 of A verbs, i.e. it is m a rked by first stress on the second syllable of the definite mood and the first syllable of the

indefinite mood. Use belongs to stress class l c In other respects the auxiliary is stressed similarly to A verbs as described in S 4.3.5.3.
Full stress marks the head piece of the complex w o r d as follows:
1. In the case of complex verbs of classes 1, 2 , 6 and 8 , full
stress falls on the final syllable of the hea d piece, 2. In the case of complex verbs of class 3, full stress falls ac­ cording to the stress class of the verb root or noun s tem wh i c h it contains in the normal way as d escribed for class G and A verbs in sections 4.3.4 and 4„3.5, 3. In the case of complex verbs of class 4, full stress falls on the initial syllable of the head piece, 4. In the case of complex verbs of classes 5 and 7, full stress falls on the first syllable of each red u p l i c a t e d verb core.
It will be seen that except for the second type m entioned above full stress falls on the head piece of complex verbs very differently from the way it falls on simple w o r d s 0 There is no distinction be-
complex tween first and second stress, and e x cept on class 2 Averbs full stress is always of type A. Unusually hig h pitch accompanies stress on types 1 and 3 above,,
The complex phonological phrase may also include secondary stress. When this occurs it falls on the first syllable of the phrase,, Examples: pore'o 1 kisonu 'he made me a gift', complex verb class 1 , type 1 above pono-koeye 'she kept on staring', complex verb class 2 , type 1 above iko'iparaso'kji^oa 'he gave' (emphatic) complex verb class 3, type 2, titiu'koeye 'very t o u g h 1, complex verb class 4, type 3 above, namu'namu'ki^oa 'he took repeatedly, com p l e x verb class 5, type 4 above namunamu'kisoa 'he took very firmly', complex verb class 6 , type i, u'upori'u'upori 'koe 'always very thin indeed', complex verb class 7,
type 4 above, lapihi'ki^one 'it's a poor pencil', complex verb class 8 , type 1 above.

4.5 The phonological phra s e in rapid speech Simple phonological phrases which in normal speech are marked by
full stress of type B on the penultimate syllable, in rapid speech when followed by another w o r d are sometimes found marked by type A stress on the final syllable. It w o u l d seem that stress falls in such cases on the normal stressed syllable, p r o bably because the 'normal' syllable is no longer final, the w o r d boundary be i n g in­ operative in such rapid speech.
It should be emphasized that this is not always the case. Only a few examples have been found and these involve simple phonological phrases with a single word, though there w o u l d s e e m to be no theoreti­ cal reasons why phonological phrase wit h more than one w o r d should not also be marked in this fashion.
Examp les: simotl Miranda 'he arrived at Miranda' In n o r m a l speech simoti is always found, cf. s i m o timaka 'he also arrived'
4.6 The emphatic phonological phrase Simple and complex phonological phrases are sometimes found with
full stress in which the p h o netic exponents of length and pitch are greatly emphasized. Such stressed syllables h a v e a much higher pitch than the normal full stress pitch, and they are much longer,, This feature may occur at any p o i n t in the clause and is not related in any way to the phonological features stated for any other level of analysis.
It is found that the occurrence of this type of phonological phrase correlates closely w i t h emphasis in the situational context. Examples kalirhaso 'Just a very little' a£n:apu yakoe 'Very many thanks' han:aiti hyoe 'It's a b i g fishj '

57 4.7 Congruences between the phonological phrase and grammatical
elements The majority of phonological phrases in the material examined correspond to the grammatical word. In all cases where the p honologi­ cal phrase consists of a single word, that w o r d corresponds to a grammatical word. Complex phonological phrases consisting of one word only are always congruent to the complex verb S 1 4 08„ However when the phonological phrase consists of two or more words, there may or may not be a close parallel with some grammatical unit. In a majority of instances there is some such correspondence. The following occur commonly. 1. Phonological phrase paral l e l to a nominal expression consisting of a demonstrative and noun, S 10.2.3, such as, enepo neko h o yeno 'those m e n 1. 2. Another parallel is w i t h a nominal expression consisting of two nouns, such as, se'esa tapi'i 'egg' (lit„ offspring of hen) „ 3. Another parallel is w i t h adverbial expression, S 1 0 04, con­ sisting of a particle and noun, such as, y a Mir a n d a 'to Miranda'. 4. A very common paralel is w ith a negative expansion of the verb expression, such as ako e N s a 'I don't k n o w '0 This is (also commonly) found wit h complex phrases, such as, ako pore'o'akoe 'he didn't make a gift'o 5. Another paallel is w i t h a verb followed by a subordinateverb such as, Nkahya'a vaneNsea 'I w a n t to buy it'. Not infrequently the phonological phrase is found to be con­ gruent to an initial conjunction and following verb such as, ina piho 'then he went' „ Such sequences have no parallel grammatical status since the relationship between the conjunction and verb is exocentric. Similarly phisses paralleling a conjunction and noun have no particular

58

Chapter five

The phonological word

5.1 General The phonological w o r d functions as (part of) the phonological
phrase. On the basis of their function in phonological phrases, two types of word are set up, simple and complex. Simple words are found in simple phrases and as the satellite element of complex phrases, while complex words are found only as the nucleus of complex phrases.
In structure every word consists of one or more syllables. Simple words most commonly consist of from two to five syllables, but words of six to eight syllables are not infrequent and examples of words of up to eleven syllables have been found in unelicited material. Complex words generally consist of more syllables than simple words. Most complex words hav e from six to ten syllables but longer forms are f o u n d »

5.2 Phonetic exponents of the phon o l o g i c a l wor d

The phonological word corresponds to a stretch of speech with

the following characteristics:

1 . the potentiality of being marked with at least one full stress,

2 . the potentiality of silence before

and after it,

3. the occurrence of one of the three

word prosodies.

5.3 Prosodic features of the w o r d 5.301 General
Every phonological w o r d is marked by one of three prosodic

2. Vibration of the vocal chords during the articulation of the first stop or fricative, together with, 3. Narrowing of the opening b e t w e e n the alveolar ridge and tongue with grooving of the tongue p r o d u c i n g increased friction w h e n H is the first fricative.
The phonetic exponents of the y-prosody are as follows: 1. In the case of words other than certain two-syllable words, a fronting and raising of the first vowel, except that when that vowel is I, the second vowel is fronted and raised and if that vowel is I, the third vowel is fronted and raised and so on through the word until the first vowel w h i c h is not I. In words having a vowel cluster for the first and second syllable, if the first vowel is I or E, the feature of fronting and raising extends to b oth vowels. This same feature extends for all syllables of words in w h i c h all the vowels are E. All examples found have bee n nouns, and almost all have had two syllables. With some speakers the feature of fronting and raising also extends thrasgh the first two syllables whe n these are both U, but this pattern is found much less frequently, or, 2. In the case of two syllable words which
a) have as first vowel U, 0 or A, and, b) have type B stress on the first syllable, this fronting and raising is only partial for the first syllable and results in a vowel cluster consisting of the fronted and raised vowel followed by the unfronted and non-raised vowel. In such circumstances type A stress on the second vowel is found. It is significant that in some syllables wit h E as nucleus where this feature of fronting and raising operates, the vowel quality differs from that of syllables w h i c h have I as nucleus in words marked by the z-prosody. This distinction is found in syllables w i t h a con­ sonant margin of T or N, S 6„2. For example, the first vowel of nimiikuso 'you fish' (cf. numi i k u ^ o 'he fishes') is more open than

the first vowel of niko 'he eats' The first syllable of the first syllable of niko contains a I vowel marked by z-prosody. Similarly the first vowel of tiyo 'you are ashamed' (cf. teyo 'he is ashamed') is more open than the first vowel of tipe 'deer'
The phonetic exponents of the z-prosody are the absence of all the phonetic features listed above for the other two word prosodies.
In the case of the complex word the prosodic features mark the auxilliary and not the head piece, S 14.8-9.

NYZ

Symbolization: raised

before the word indicate the occurrence

of the respective word prosodies.

Examples:

phonetic phonological symbolization

ayoN

'my brother'

(a:yo)

ayo

'her brother'

(a:yo)

N ayo
Z ayo

noNkone 'my need'

(norj: gone) ^nokone

nekone 'your need'

(nekone)

^nokone

nokone 'his need'

(nokone)

Znokone

Npiho pihe piho

'I went' 'you went' 'he went'

( m b i :ho) ( p i :he) (pi:ho)

piho Y
piho Z v,
piho

5o3o3 Congruences between the prosodies and grammatical elements Phonological word marked by either the n- or y- prosodies
are found to correspond to grammatical words of the wor d classes verb or noun. Words marked by the z- prosody correspond to words of any word class.
All words marked by the n-prosody are found to correspond to grammatical words which are marked by the grammatical category of first person, S 17. All words marked by the y -prosody are found to correspond to grammatical words which are marked by the grammatical category of second person, S 17.

5 0 3.4 Alternative analysis of the nasal and y-features A quite different analysis might be made of the phonetic
features involving nasalization and yodization that have been assigned to the n- and y- prosody here.
In treating the features of n asalized vowels and sequences of nasal followed by voiced consonant, a phonemic analysis would be faced with two main choices, either, 1. The nasalized vowels and n a s a l i z e d consonantal features might be handled as in each case a single unit. This interpretation would avoid postulating consonant clusters and closed syllables which do not occur anywhere else in Terena. Furthermore the sequence of nasal and consonant is similar in length and rhythm to a single consonant rather than to a long consonantc However this would lead to twelve additional phonemes: 2. Alternatively, these features might be interpreted as two units, i.e. either vowel or consonant plus a segmental or supra-segmental phoneme of nasalization. Analysis as consonant or vowel and seg­ mental nasal phoneme would, of course, lead to the postulation of consonant clusters and closed syllable.
For a fuller discussion of this see 'Some problems of segmen­ tation in the phonological analysis of Tereno'.^
5.4 Junction prosody of the complex word. All phonolgical words that correspond to complex verbs, except
those that correspond to class 4 complex verbs, S 14.8 are marked by a junction prosody between the head piece and auxilliary. The phonetic exponents of this j-prosody are as followss 1. In the case of complex verbs of classes 1,3, 5 , 6 ,7 and 8 , com­ plete closure of the glottis at the end of the final vowel of the head piece. 2. In the case of complex verbs of classes 5 and 7, complete clo­ sure of the glottis between e ach redu- licated core of the head piece:

62 3. In the case of complex verbs of classes 4 and 7, complete

closure of the glottis between the first and second syllables of

the core(s) of the head piece when the first syllable of such core(s) is a V syllable:

4. In the case of complex verbs of class 2, considerable lengthening of the final vowel of the head piece.

Symbolization a raised ^ indicates j—prosody

Examples

-

Z -i

vayu'koe 'it's bent' vayuJkoe complex verb of class 1

u'upori'u'upori'koye 'she's always very thin' complex verb class 7 t.-uJuj p o n J•uj J-jupon-*.kiioy>•e

505 Congruences between the phonological w o r d and grammatical elements The phonological word corresponds closely to the grammatical
word. Complex phonological words correspond to complex verbs0 Simple phonological words correspond to grammatical words of all word classes. The degree of congruence between phonological and grammatical categories reaches its maximum at the word level.

Chapter six The syllable 6.1 General
The syllable functions as part of the word. The syllable differs from the other elements in the phonological hierarchy so far described in one respect. All the other higher level element (word, phrase, clause) may function as the next higher element in the hierarchy and so right up through the different levels so that each may function in isolation as a free form. Thus a form referrable to the phonological word may also be referrable to the phrase, clause and sentence. However, there are only two examples of a phonological word consisting of a single syllable, so that apart from these two, no form referrable to the syllable can also be referred to the other phonological units.
In structure the syllable consists of two elements, phonematic units and prosodic features. Within the syllable two places are distinguished, initial and final.
6.2 Phonematic units of the syllable 6.2.1 General
Two types of phonematic unit are distinguished, namely, C and Vo Every syllable has a nucleus w h i c h is always a V unit and is always found in final place. Some syllables also include a C unit which precedes the V unit and is found in initial place. The C unit is termed the syllable margin in contrast to the syllable nucleus.
There are, thus, two types of syllable in Terena, V - nucleus alone, and, CV- nucleus p r e ceded by margin.
The majority of syllables are referrable to the second structure. Either type of syllable may occur at word initial, medial or final place. However, there is a restriction in the distribution of V syllables inasmuch as two V syllables are found contiguous only in initial place in the word. Apart from this, following a V

syllable there is always a CV syllable or silence,, In other instances where Terena morphology might lead to such a sequence certain junction features are found, S 6.7.
6 0 2.2 Initial place in the syllable The majority of syllables include an initial C unit functioning
as the syllable margin,, There are 12 C units w h i c h together form a closed s y s t e m 0
The members of this 12-term syst e m are: P, T, K, ?, M, N, H, S, L, R, V and Y. These symbols should not be confused w i t h the symbols of the transcription, p, t, k, ', m, n, h, s, 1 , r, v, and y D
The phonetic exponents of these 12 phon o l o g i c a l units are: P - bilabial unaspirated stop articulation, T - alveolar unaspirated stop articulation, K - velar unaspirated stop articulation, ? - closure and opening of the glottis, M - bilabial nasal articulation, N - alveolar nasal articulation, S - alveolar sibilant articulation, L - alveolar lateral articulation, R - alveolar flap articulation, H - glottal fricative articulation, V - labio-dental frictionless continuant articulation, Y - palatal frictionless continuant articulation. Symbolization: The capital letters are used in the phonological
transcription, as above. Examples: hoyeno 'man' HV YV NV, sane 'people' SV NV, Npiho 'I went' PV HV
6.2.3 Final place in the syllable Every syllable includes a final place in which the syllable
nucleus, a V unit, functions.

'i'k The members of this five-term system are I, E , A, 0, and U. These symbols should not be confused with the symbols of the transcription, i, e, a, o, and u.
The phonetic exponents of these five phonological units are vowels with the following qualities: I - closeness and frontness, E - half-closeness and frontness, A - openness and centrality, 0 - half-closeness and backness, U - closeness and backness. Symbolization: The capital letters are used in the phonological
symbolization as above. Examples: hoyeno 'man' HO YE NO, sane 'people' SA NE, mpiho 'I went' PI HO.
6.3 Prosodic features of the syllable 6.3.1 General
Every syllable, irrespective of its phonematic structuring, has one prosodic feature stated for the syllable. There are three such syllable prosodies, palatalization, backness, and non-palatalization-backness. These are termed the p-prosody, u-prosody and 3 -prosody respectively. These prosodies form a mutually ex­ clusive closed system of syllable phonological units.
6.3.2 Phonetic exponents of syllable prosodies The phonetic exponents of the p-prosody are as follows:
1. the palatalization of the initial C unit of the syllable, together with, 2. fronting of the initial articulation of the V unit functioning [ as nucleus of the syllable.
The phonetic exponents of the u-prosody, are as follows, the ] backing of all front vowels to a back position.

66

The phonetic exponents of the 3 -prosody are the absence of the

phonetic features described for the other syllable prosodies.

The p- and u- prosodies may be said to contrast in that the

p-prosody focusses on syllable initial position and the u-prosody

on syllable final position.

Symbolization: A raised P u ^ indicate thesyllable prosodies,

1 these are written before thesyllable andwhe n w o r d initial imme-

| diately after theword prosody symbol,,

| Examples: l
[ sane 'people'

Q ZpSA NE, mpiho 'I went' N3pl 3 H0,

| P^ihe 'you went' Y<3pt UH0 (pi:he)

ovoNku 'my house' N 9,_ 9 TT(_ 9 U VO KU

6C4 Distribution of phonematic units and p r o sodic features within the syllable
604 01 C and V units All possible C and V sequences are found within the syllable,
except for the sequences YI and VU which are never found within the morpheme0 YI never occurs and VU is only found w h e n the prefix voccurs, S 11.6„30
Some sequences are however, much less frequent than others and particularly those involving L, R, and S„ Sequences involving these consonants are relatively uncommon» The following combinations are not very common though more often than those involving L, R and S: ME, MI, NU, TE, V E , VI, YA, YE and Y 0 o

604 02 Phonematic units and prosodic features No syllable is marked by more than one syllable prosody. The syllable NI only occurs when marked by the p-prosody. No
other syllables are restricted in terms of occuring only when marked by certain syllable prosodies.

67 The p- and u- prosodies are restricted in their distribution with phonematic units in the following respects. The p-prosody is found wit h syllables w h o s e first p h o nematic unit is S, H , or N only. It wo u l d s e e m that the distinction b e ­ tween syllables marked by p-prosody and those marked by 9-prosody is gradually being lost. Almost all N initial syllables are marked by 3 -prosody in the speech of some Terenas though among the older speakers these syllables are still marked by p-prosody. There are very few minimal pairs of words contrasting because of these two prosodies on N initial syllables. In another genera­ tion or so it seems likely this contrast will no longer exist. Much the same is true for H initial syllables. Many speakers only make a contrast between p-prosody and the other two syllable prosodies when occurring with H syllables, when the n-prosody marks the word. Some among the younger generation are uncertain as to the occurrence of the p h o netic features which are referred to the p-prosody in H syllables and there is fluctuation b etween p- and 9 - prosodies in some of the more uncommon words. However, in some Terena villages the distinction is maintained clearly. With S initial syllables the position is reversed in that a large majority of S initial syllables are marked by p-prosody. Indeed the other syllable prosodies occur quite infrequently with S syllables. There is, for instance, only one affix of any type with a syllable of such a structure. There would thus seem to be going on a change which may well make it more economical to set up an additional phonematic unit,

with phonematic units in tne roiiowiny rebpci-1.0 . The p-prosody is found with syllables wh o s e first phonematic
unit is S, H, or N only. It w o u l d see m that the distinction b e ­ tween syllables marked by p-prosody and those marked by 9-prosody is gradually being lost. Almost all N initial syllables are marked by 3 -prosody in the speech of some Terenas though among the older speakers these syllables are still marked by p-prosody. There are very few minimal pairs of words contrasting because of these two prosodies on N initial syllables0 In another genera­ tion or so it seems likely this contrast w i l l n o longer exist,.
Much the same is true for H initial syllables. Many speakers only make a contrast between p-prosody and the other two syllable prosodies when occurring with H syllables, when the n-prosody marks the word. Some among the younger generation are uncertain as to the occurrence of the p h o netic features which are referred to the p-prosody in H syllables and there is fluctuation between p- and 9 - prosodies in some of the more uncommon words. However, in some Terena villages the distinction is maintained clearly.
With S initial syllables the position is reversed in that a large majority of S initial syllables are marked by p-prosody. Indeed the other syllable prosodies occur quite infrequently with S syllables. There is, for instance, only one affix of any type with a syllable of such a structure.
There would thus seem to be going on a change which may well make it more economical to set up an additional phonematic unit, a palatalized sibilant and to eliminate the p-prosody. It would be necessary to handle the initial articulation of the V unit of the syllable as a feature of the junction of C and V, S 6.5. and this would especially be necessary in the case of NI syllables since the palatalization which at present exists would need to be referred to some type of junction prosody if it could not be referred to a syllable prosody.

1. With syllables h a v i n g H as margin and I or E as nucleus,

2. With syllables w h i c h a. occur as first syllable in a w o r d

marked by y-prosody, and b. have H as their margin and A, 0, or

U as nucleus.

The u-prosody could be regarded as a junction feature rather

than as a syllable prosody. If the distinction between the p-

and 9-prosodies were to be eliminated it w o u l d probably be more

economical to treat the phonetic features at present referred to

the u-prosody as exponents of a junction prosody occurring when

an additional phonematic unit HY is preceded or followed b y a

front vowelo

Examples

^

zo P

ahya (a:ha or a:hya)

A HA

'his will'

aNsa (a:n3 a) N^ A P HA

'my will'

ahara (ah:ara) A H A RA 'a spade'

^

Q

aNsarana (anrzarana) A H A RA N A 'my spade'

6.5 Junction within the syllable

Within the syllable the only type of junction is C followed

by Vo Two such sequences are marked by special phonetic features,.

In the case of T followed by I there is someaspiration as

the stop is released and during the initialarticulation of the

vowel. When the morpheme -ti is final in the w o r d this feature

is emphasizedo

In the case of ? followed by

any V thereis oftensome

constriction of theglottis after the opening of theglottis.

Such vowels may be regarded as having a partially glottalized

onset. These features are regarded as the phonetic exponents of

a glottal junction prosody, cf. 6 .7.2 . 1

Examples

tikSti (t^ikot:h i) keno'oko (keno?:?o)

'a t r e e 1 'he came'

68 The u-prosody is also very restricted in distribution. It

occurs as follows:

1. With syllables h a v i n g H as margin and I or E as nucleus,

2. With syllables w h i c h a. occur as first syllable in a w o r d

marked by y-prosody, and b. have H as their margin and A, 0, or

U as nucleus.

The u-prosody could be regarded as a junction feature rather

than as a syllable prosody. If the distinction between the p-

and 9-prosodies were to be eliminated it would probably be more

economical to treat the phonetic features at present referred to

the u-prosody as exponents of a junction prosody occurring w he n

an additional phonematic unit HY is preceded or followed by a

front vowelo

Examples P
ahya (a:ha or a:hya) A H A 'his will'

aNsa (a:n3 a) N^ A PHA 'my will'

—

-*

Z9 ^ Q

ahara (ah:ara) A HA RA 'a spade'

aNsarana

q
(an:zarana) A H A RAN A 'my

spade'

6.5 Junction within the syllable

Within the syllable the only type of junction is C followed

by V. Two such sequences are marked by special phonetic features,,

In the case of T followed by I there is some aspiration as

the stop

is released and d u ring the initial articulation of the

■- --

in -t-Ha unrflthis feature

69 6.6 Distribution of syllables within the word
No syllable wit h ? as consonant margin is ever found w o r d initially. Apart from this limitation, there are no restrictions in the distribution of syllables in word initial, medial or final place as far as the phonematic structure of the syllable is con­ cerned, or its prosodic features.
There are, however, restrictions in the sequences of sylla­ bles within the word. Within the morpheme no example has been found of two syllables with a glottal stop as C unit following one another though this may occur across morpheme boundaries within the word.
Within the morpheme no syllable w i t h I or U as nucleus is found followed by a V syllable wh i c h has E, A, or 0 as its nucleus,, This phonological gap is significant as it marks the morpheme boundary and also because of the junction prosody which mark such sequences between morphemes, S 6c7<,3„2<, Sequences of like vowels do not occur within morphemes, only between morphemes.
Between morphemes no sequence involving syllables with R or L as margin as the second syllable have bee n found and only one where S is the syllable margin. This is in contrast to sequences within the morpheme.
No sequence involving a syllable of structure PSV and UHV has been found within the morpheme. This may well be a type of opposition between p- and u-prosodies, since the u-prosody has exponents that are stated for the preceding syllable in certain respects. The reverse sequence of these two syllables is found.
Another, more general restriction involving the prosodic features is that no w o r d has been found wit h a syllable having the u-prosody when that word is marked with n-prosody.

70

6.7 Junction between syllables and words

6.7.1 General

The phonological features relevant for the statement of syllable

junction are treated as Iprosodic because they have implications for

the whole word, not just for one place in any one syllables Further­

more these features mark the boundaries of grammatical elements and

in some instances mark the grammatical status of the elements, eg.

whether bound or free.

Four types of syllable junction are distinguished.

Type one - intra-morphemic, i.e. junction

within the morpheme,

" two - inter-morphemic when both of the syllables involved in

the junction are parts of forms which are not free,

"three - intermorphemic when one of the two syllables involved in

the junction is p a r t of a free form b u t the other is not,

" four - inter-word, i.e. junction between syllables of different

words or of the initial or final syllables of a word and

silence.

6.7.2 Type one syllable junction 6 o7. 2 o1 (C)V and CV
Within the morpheme one junction feature occurs between any type of syllable and a following CV when the margin of that second syllable is ?. Glottal junction prosody occurs with the following phonetic exponents: some degree of constriction of the glottis immediately before the closure of the glottis. Examples keno'oko (keno”? : ’oko) 'he came'

6 . 7.2 o2 (C)V and V There are no junction features

71 6.7.3 Type two syllable junction 6 .7.3.1 (C)V and CV
The features described in section 6.7.2C1 apply equally in type two syllable junction. The occurrence of the glottal junction prosody when two contiguous syllables contain a C margin which is ? is sometimes marked by constriction of the glottis continuing to some extent throughout the vowel between the ? consonants.
No additional junction features are found.

6 .7.3.2 (C)V and V The junction of (C)V and V involves a prosodic feature whenever

it is of the following types:

1. I or U followed by E, A or 0,

2. E, followed by A or 0,

30 0 followed by A or E. These junctions are marked by the junction prosody of vowel

neutralization, termed v-prosody, The phonetic exponents of v-prosody

are: 1. A considerable degree of lowering of any close vowel,

or, 2C A lesser degree of rai s i n g of any half-close v o w e l c

The effect of this v-prosody is to neutralize the distinction between

I and E and 0 and U when they are followed by a more open vowel0

Symbolization a raised -v_ indicates the v-junction prosody

Examples kipoheo (kipoh:eo)

Z3K1 5 P0 u Hl“ v“9 0

'she washed'

Consists of

a verb base kipohi- and the direct marker -o S

pihoneo^o (pihon:eoso) Z^PI ^ H O NE V 0 P S0 'he wen t indeed'

consists of a verb pihone and word suffix -oso, S

6,7.4 Type three syllable junction

6 .7.4.1 (C)V and C, and (C)V and V

All the statements made in sections 6.7.2 and 6.7.3 apply

equally to type three syllable junction and in addition certain

other features are found.

A junction involving the syllables VO and A is marked by the

occurrence of the 1 -prosody whose phonetic exponents are the lowering

of the half-close back vowel to open-central quality. This is of

especial interest in the light of the fact that the contrast between

U and 0 is neutralized before A, see 6 . 7 . 3 C2, and that sequences

VU only occur when V is a w o r d prefix.

A junction involving (C)V followed by V is m a r k e d by a junction

prosody whenever full stress marks either of the two syllables con­

cerned. The exponents of this prosodic feature are the closing and

opening of the glottis between the articulation of the two vowels,

together with a certain amount of glottal constriction in the articu­

lation of the vowels. For example, Ituko'oviti 'God' (lit. the one

who made us) consists of the morphemes ituko, verb stem, -ovi, verb

suffix, and -ti verb suffix,, Since this form is in second stress

and second stress marks the third syllable in this case, a glottal

junction prosody is found.

_ I_

Symbolization raised

indicates the glottal junction prosody

raised ^ indicates the 1 -junction prosody.

Examples

ZQ Q _ <_9 9

omo'ovi

0 MO

0 VI

'he carried us'

niNko'iko NpNI ° KO~' ~° I &K0 'I'm still eating'

ovaa Z^0 ^VO ^ A 'lives there.'

6.7.4.2 ( C ) W and V A junction involving any form which has a final V syllable and
another form which has an initial V syllable would lead to a sequence of three vowels without any intervening consonantal unit. Such sequences

73 are never found in Terena. When stress does not mark any of the syllables involved in the sequence, there is a vowel reduction as follows: If the first two vowels of the sequence are like vowels they reduce to one vowel, otherwise the third vowel does not occur. But when stress marks any of the three syllables involved in this junction a glottal junction prosody is found after the second vowel. The exponents of this glottal junction prosody are iden­ tical to those described in section 6.7.4.1. Examples nlkoako 'he's still eating it' consists of verb ni k o a followed by word suffix -lko„ nikaika (indefinite mood form of same word) consists of verb nikaa followed by word suffix -iko„ pore^oa'iko 'He is still giving it' consists of verb p o r e ^ o a and word suffix -iko, as stress falls on the third syllable, the glottal junction prosody occurs.

6.7.5 Word junction

6 .7.5.1 V and V In the majority of instances there is a glottal junction

prosody between words which involve the junction of final V with

following V of the next word. This prosodic feature is often

greatly reduced but is seldom completely absent. The phonetic

exponents of the prosody are identical with those detailed in

section 6 . 7 0 4.1. This glottal junction prosody does not occur at times in

very rapid speech.

Examples ako eNsa

(ako ? ensa)

'I don't know'

With glottal prosody between

the two words. Contrast,

eno ko'e (e:no ko?e:) 'There are many potatoes' No junction prosody

74

6 .7.5.2 Nasalized final V When a small group of words occur without suffixation, a

nasal junction prosody marks the final vowel of the word. This nasal junction prosody has the phonetic exponent of nasalization

of the final vowel of the word.

All these words have a final vowel cluster, with one excep­

tion, and in almost all cases the final V of the cluster is U.

All these words are found to correspond to grammatical words of

the word-class noun, apart from two forms which are interjections.

Many of these words are loan w o r d s .

When any of these words is suffixed by any type of

suffix

this nasal feature no longer occurs. Its presence is, therefore,

a marker of word final position. This nasal junction prosody

should be clearly distinguished from the word prosody of nasaliza­ tion whose phonetic exponents are somewhat different. Words may

be marked by both the n-prosody and the nasal junction prosody.

Symbolization raised n indicates the nasal junction prosody

Examples niu ZpN I ^ U _n_ 'mosquito'

contrast niuhiko ZpNI U UHI^KO 'm o s q u i t o e s '

meu Z9ME V n " 'world' contrast meukuke 'outside, in the world'

yemo'u Y ^E 9 M 0 3 ?U-n" 'Your word' contrast emo'uti 'a word'

Chapter seven

75 The phonological structure of assimilated and

partially assimilated loan words

7.1 General

In view of the fact that the Terena people have been living

in close contact with Brazilian culture and people for several

generations, it is not surprising that a considerable number of

Portuguese words have been assimilated into Terena: some of

these are used frequently by most if not all Terenas. This chap­

ter presents a brief study of such words which have been assimi­

lated whether partially or completely, since this throws light on

Terena phonological structuree

The words dealt' with in this chapter may be grouped into two

classes:

1. Words of foreign origin w h i c h are completely assimilated to

Terena structures. (These are not now strictly 'loan' words.)

2. Words which are partially assimilated to Terena structures but

which retain some Portuguese features.

These two classes should not be regarded as having mutually ex­

clusive membership,, The same words are, in fact, found in both

classes from time to time. Much of this variation may be accounted

for on the basis of different speakers. Generally individual

Terenas are consistent in their use of any one word though the

speech of some varies depending on whether the person addressed

does or does not know Portuguese. Such variation is not unexpected

in a setting where the amount and type of contact wit h Brazilian

culture varies so greatly.

The method followed in this chapter is to take three phonologi­

cal features, namely the syllable patterns, the C and V systems,

and stress features, and to show how assimilated words are structured

in relation to these three features. Following this partially

assimilated words are examined.

7.2 Syllable patterns In fully assimilated loan words, only the Terena patterns of
CV and V sylfebles are found. When Portuguese words are compared to the corresponding Terena words, it is found that CV and V syl­ lables in Portuguese words correspond to syllables of the same structure in the Terena words. CVC and CCV syllables differ as follows:

1. Where the Portuguese w o r d has syllable final 1 of r , the Terena wor d has an open syllable. e . g c tambor, t a m b u e Some examples are found where syllable final but not w o r d final 1 cor­ responds to r with the consonant cluster broken by a transition vowel, e 0 g. balde, mbaritio

2. Where the Portuguese w o r d has w o r d final s, the Terena w ord has an open syllable, e.g. milreis, mire„

3. Where the Portuguese w o r d has a consonant cluster, the Terena word has an additional syllable, breaking the cluster w ith a transition vowel which is of the same quality as the following vowel, e„g0 trigo, tiriku, and metro, meturu.

4. Where the Portuguese wo r d has a dipthong, the Terena w o r d

sometimes has a single V and sometimes a V cluster as follows:

Portuguese i or u followed by another vowel, correspond to Terena

vowel cluster, i when followed by u, elsewhere e followed by V,

u

"

" i,

"

o

"

" V:

Portuguese vowel followed by i or u, correspond to Terena single

vowel, ou to u, ei to e , ai to a. However, in w ord final place

Portuguese au corresponds to Terena au. Examples: d o u t o r , ndutu;

quiabu, keapu; caixao, ka'sau; pasajeiro, pasayeru; quadro, koaduru»

7.3 The consonantal and vocalic systems It is found that when the consonants and vowels of Portuguese
words and their Terena counterparts are compared, the following

correspondences regularly occur:

1. Portuguese word - prenasalized voiceless stop, T e rena w o r d -

a prenasalized voiced stop. This may be compared with the Terena

words in which the n-prosody operates; however, whereas the nasal

prosody operates throughout the word, the nasalization in these

Terena words is confined to slight n a s a l ization of the vowel

immediately preceding the prenasalized voiced stop, e.g. grampo,

karambu.

2. Portuguese w o r d - voiced stop in initial place, T e rena w o r d -

a prenasalized voiced stop as in 1. above. Occasionally Terena

words have a voiceless stop. Examples: bola, mbola: banco, pangu

(contrast the first person form of this word, Npangunae)

3. Portuguese wor d - voiced stop in non-in i t i a l place, Terena

word - voiceless stop, e.g. prego, pereku.

4. Portuguese wor d - palatalized lateral, Terena w o r d - the semi­

vowel y, e.g. basilha, m b a s i y a 0

5o Portuguese wor d - voiceless sibilant, Tere n a w o r d - either

а. voiceless sibilant which may or may n o t be palatalized, or,

b 0 h in word initial place is found in a group of words w h i c h may

well be loans from Spanish, dating from the days in the last

century; when the tribe lived in Paraguay. These words correspond

closely to their Spanish counterparts and their frequent use in

Terena also suggests long usage as T e r e n a words. This is of p ar­

ticular interest because of the infrequent occurrence of s in

Terena. It could be that the distinction between the palatalized

and alveolar sibilants is quite recent in Terena and that when

these words were borrowed from Spanish the h rather than the ^

was substituted for Spanish s. Examples:
handea: saku; sandia, ksaisax soldado hundaru.

cento, sendu:

saco,

б . Portuguese w o r d - voiced sibilf^ant, Tere n a w ord - voiceless

sibilant, e.g. mesa, mesa.

7. Portuguese w o r d - palatalized sibilant, Tere n a w o r d in initial

position - prenasalized palatalized sibilant, or semi-vowel y,

in non-initial position - voiceless palat a l i s e d sibilant or semi­

vowel y. Examples: pasayeru.

jantar, n^anta (^anda) or yanta: pasajeiro,

8 . Portuguese word - 1 in non-initial place, Terena word usually no corresponding consonant, see above in 7.2. When this is not

the case tte consonant cluster is divided by a transition vowel

Terena has r, e.g. balde, bariti.

9. Portuguese w ord - semi-vowel between vowels, T e rena wor d semi-vowel, e.g. meia, meya: aveia, aveya.

100 Portuguese word — i in word final position, Terena word — sometimes i and sometimes e. It is possible that the words with

e may be loans from Spanish, eg. mate, mate: leite, lete.

11. Portuguese words w ith e and £ , these two vowels are not dis­

tinguished in Terena words, the corresponding Terena word always having e.
12. Similarly Portuguese o and 0 are not distinguished in Terena

word?, except that in non-initial place Tere n a words have u cor­

responding to Portuguese words with o, e.g. bolo, bulu.

13. Portuguese word - nasalized vowels, Tere n a w o r d - p r e n a s ali­

zation of the following consonant and voicing of the consonant,

cf. 1 above, e.g. grampo, karambu. However, in w o r d final place

the Terena vowel is sometimes nasalized and sometimes not, e 0 g 0

butao, putau: ligao. lisau.

14. Portuguese words with consonants and vowels other than those

mentioned above are found to correspond to Terena words with con­

sonants and vowels which are very similar. There are some dif­

ferences, e.g. Portuguese dental sounds correspond to Terena

alveolar sounds.

7.4 Stress patterns In Portuguese stress falls on the final or p e nultimate syllable

while in Tereno full stress falls on one of the first three syllables of the word, (except for complex words). There is, therefore, in assimilated words a shift forward of stress as follows: 1. Portuguese words w i t h t w o or three syllables, correspond to Terena words with first stress on the first syllable, except when this syllable has a transition vowel and corresponds to a Portuguese consonant cluster, when it falls on the second syllable, e.g. banana, panana: trlgo, tiriku. 2. Portuguese words wit h four or more syllables correspond to Terena words with first stress on the second syllable, e.g. pasajeiro, pasayeru. 3. Second stress always falls on the third syllable. Thus a word like kafe has a Terena stress pattern 1-3 and is assigned to the noun stress class 1 0 It is found that such nouns are almost always suffixed by -na, 12.4.2, but when so suffixed stress remains on the first syllable, so they are assigned to sub-class la.
7.5 Partially assimilated w o r d s When partially assimilated words are examined the following
features are found: 1. All partially assimilated words have a Terena stress pattern,, 2. Some words are assimilated to Terena stress patterns and syllable p±terns while retaining a non-Terena consonant,, 3. A few words are assimilated to Terena stress patterns and to the Terena C and V system while retaining some non-Terena syllable pattern.
It does seem that the process of assimilation can be set out as, first the stress pattern, then the syllable pattern and vowel system, finally the consonantal system. It is found that where the syllable pattern is n o t assimilated to Terena patterns, the

80 unassimilated feature involves the sequence sk„
Where the consonants are not assimilated to Terena two features predominate: 1. Portuguese f is retained,, This is not unlike T e rena v. E.G. fuba, fuba 2. Portuguese voiced stops are retained instead of the normal assimilation to the voiceless stop or prenasalization and voiced stop. Examples: baldrame, badarame: fuba, fuba,: escola, xskola: jardineira, nj adinera:

VERSAO FRELIMINAR

An Outline of the Grammatical and Phonological Structure of Terena - Part 2 John Bendor-Samuel 1961
SUMMER INSTITUTE OF LINGUISTICS
0 Arquivo LingtlTstico e uma serie de trabalhos que se ericontra atualmente nos arquivos do SIL e da FUNAI (Fundagao Nacional do Tndio). Estamos colocando a maioria deles a disposi'gao da comunidade academica na lingua em que foram originalmente escritos, podendo ser, eventualmente, publicados na original ou em outra lingua. Damos permissao aqueles que se interessarem para usar este material em trabalhos de pesquisa, contanto que incluam a seguinte informagao:

The Arquivo LingUTstico is a series of workpapers archived in SIL and FUNAI

(Fundagao Nacional do Tndio) files. Most of the papers are being made avail­

able to the scientific community in the language in which they were origi­

nally written. They may eventually be published in that language or

in

another one. Permission is given for the material in the papers to be used

in research, provided the following information is given:

Bendor-Samuel, John. 1961. An Outline of the Grammatical and Phonological Structure of Terena - Part 2. Arquivo LingOistico NO 091. Brasilia, D.F. SIL.

Page 1
2
5 4 5 6 7
8 10 11 12
15
14
15 16 17
18

PART TWO

Chapter ^dght The clause

8.1 General

8.2 The verbal clause head piece

8.2.1 General

8.2.2 Verbal clause class 1

8.2.5 8.2.A

Verbal clause class 2 Verbal clause class 5

8.2.5 Verbal clause class 4

8.2.6 Verbal d e u c e class 5

8.2.7 Verbal clause class 6

8.2.8 Verbal clause class 7

8.2.9 Verbal clause class 8 8.2.10 Verbal clause class 9

8.5 The non-verbal clause head piece

8.5.1 Generul

8.5.2 The non-verbal clau3o class 1

8.5.5 8.5.4

The non-verbal clause clans 2 The non-verbal clause/class 5

8.5.5 The non-verbal clause class 4 8.4 The verbal clause outer expansion

8.5 The compnrative expansion 8.6 The appositional expansion

8.7 Glassificstlon of clauses on the basis of

8.8 Congruences between the grannaticnl clause

19 Chapter niine The sentence-type

9.1 General

21 9.2 Single clause sentence-types

22 9.5 Oo-ordinative nultiple clause Sentence9.5.1 General

9.5.2 Class 1 CMST

25 9 0 . 5

Class 2 CMST

24 9.5*4 ClasH 5 CIST

25 9.5.5 Class 4 CMST

9.4 Subordinative multiple clause sentence-'

9.4.1 General 26 9.4.2 Claes 1 SMST

27 9.4.5 Class 2 SMST

9.4.4 Claee 5 SMST

28 9.4.5 Class 4 SMST

29 9.4.6 50 9.4.7

Class 5 SMST Class 6 SMST

51 9.4.8 Class 7 SI-ST

52 9.4.9 Class 8 SJST

9.5 The sentcnce-type extensor

55 9.6 Classification on the basis of function

9.6.1 General

5^ 9.6.2 The structure of major sentence-types

9.7 The exclamatory piece

55 Chapter ten The expression

10.1 General

10.2 The noun expression

56 10.2 .2 The noun expression head piece

37

10.2 .5

The noun expression subordinate piece

10.2 .5 .1 General

38

10.2 .3 .2 The demonstrative piece

59 10.2 .5 ♦5 fts adjectival piece 40 10.2 .3 .4 The noun expression functioning as possessor

41 10.2 .3 .5 The adverbial expression

10.2 .3 .6 The clause construct

42

1 0 .2 . 4

Classification on the basis of function

.-.Classification, on .the .ia^is ,of the demonstrative rciece

45

Clansificatlon on tne basis of function as subject, object

and indirect object.

47 10.3 The verb expression 10.3 .1 General

48

10.3 .2

The verb expression head piece

4?

10.3 .5

The verb expression subordinate piece

10.5 .3 .1 General

10.3 .3 .2 The negative piece

50 10.5 .3 .3 The qualifier piece

51 10.3 .3 .4 The

noun piec«

53

1 0 .5 . 4

Classes of verb expression on the basis of function

5* 10.4 The adverbial expression

10.4 .1 General

10.4 .2

Structure of the adverbial expression

%

10.4 .5

Classes of adverbial expression

10.5 The interrogative expre sion

57 Chapter Eleven 11.1 General

11.2 The grammatical word

58 11.3 'ford classes 11.3.1 General

59 11.3.2 The verb

11.3.5 11.3.4

The noun The particle

11.4 Sub-classes of word classes

11.4.1 General

60 11.4.2 Sub-classes of the verb

11.4.2.1 General

11.4.2.2 Classification on the basis

Qualifier pieces

11.4.2.3 Cla-sificalon on the basis

11,4.2.4 Classification on the basis

61 11.4.2.5 Claosificalon of the basis

11.4.3 Sub-classes of the noun

11.4.5.1 General

II.4 .5 .2

Classification on the basis

62

H . 4 .5 .3

Classification on the basis

11.4 .3.4

clauses Classification on the basis

65 11.4.4 Sub-classes of the particle

64 11.5 The verb participle 65 11.6 rhe word expansion

11.6.1 General

11.6.2 ','ord euffixation

9 NaO NXi
4 non-verbal

<55 11.6.2. 1 General 66 11.6.2.2 The word inner expansion
61 11.6*2.3 The word outer expansion 70 11.6.3 '.'ord prefixation
7X 11.7 The clitic 72 11.8 The exclamation

P« 5

73 Chapter twelve The noun 12.1 General 12.2 The noun root 12.2.1 General 12.2.2 Classification on the basis of occurrence in noun stems
74 12.2.3 Classification on the basis of occurrence in nouns of classes C and 75 12.2.4 Classification on the basis of occurrence in nouns of classes
A , L and M
12.2.5 Classification on the basis of occurrence in nouns of classes Q and 12.2.6 Classification on the basis of occurrence in noun stems of classes
P and 0
12.2.7 Classification on the basis of occurrence in noun stems of classes N, T, S and Z
76 12.2.8 Classification on the basis of occurrence in class A3g cores 12.2.9 Classification on the basis of noun stem stress classes
77 12.5 The noun stoia 12.5.1 General
12.5.2 Classification on the basis of internal structure 78 12.3.3 The noun derlvatonal suffix 80 12.5.4 Classification on the basis of prefixation
12.5.5 Classification on the basis of suffixation 82 12.4 The noun expansion
12.4.1 General
12.4.2 The noun inner expansion 85 12.4.5 The noun outer expansion 84 12.4.4 Noun prefixation

Chapter thirteen She particle
1J.1 General 85 13*2 Classification on the basic of occurrence in noun stems
13*5 Clansificatlon on ths basis of stress classes

86 Chapter fourteen The verb

14.1 General

14.2 Simple and complex, clans G and A verbs 87 14.3 The verb root
14.5.1 General

14.3.2. Class G roots

14.3.2.
88 14.5.2.

General Classification on the basis of prefixation

14.3.2.

Classification on the basis of occurrence in A2 cores

89 14.5.2.

Classification on the basie of occurrence in verb banes

14.5.2.

Classification on the basis of

90

I. J or T

14.5*2.6 14.5.2.7 14.5.2.8

Classification on the basis of occurrence in stems of classes E and N Classification on the basis of occurrence in stems of classes R and 3 Classification on the basis of stre33

PART TWO
Chapter Eight The clause
Every clause functions as (par t of) a sentence-type* In structure every clause consists of one or more expressions* Many differently structured clauses are found inasmuch as different expressions in varying sequences occur in different clauses* In this chapter different classes of elause are Bet up on the bnsis of their differing structures* It would also be possible to classify clauses on the basis of their function in sentence-types and section 8*7 outlines such a classification*
The clause is an endDcentric construction consisting of a head piece, with or without a subordinate piece, and/or an appositional piece. The headpiece consists of a nucleus with or without an inner expansion. The subordinate piece consists of an outer expansion and/or a comparative expansion. Each of these five parts of the clause, nucleus, inner expansion, outer expansion, comparative expansion, and appositional expansion consists of a word expression.
The various types of clause are divided into two main groups, verbal clauses and non-verbal clauses. A large majority of clauses in a given text are found to contain a head piece which has as its nucleus a verb expression) these are called verbal clauses. However, some clauses do not include a verbal expression as nucleus of the headpiece I these aro termed non-verbal clauses. There is, thus, a subdivision of the clause on the basis of the structure of the head piece. Within each of these groups there is a further sub­ division on the basis of the structure of the inner expansion of the clause.
Sections 2.2 to 8.6 describe the structure of the clause. First the two main types of head piece are described with their various subdivisions, section 8.2 dealing with verbal clauses and section 8.5 with non-verbal clauses. Then the subordinate piece is described, the outer expansion in 8.4 and the comparative expansion in 8.5 Finally, the appositional expansion is described.

p *2 Section 8*7 gives a classification of clauses on functional grounds and section 8.8 details congruences between the olause and phonological elements.

8.2 The verbal clauBe head pieoe

8.2.1 General

Every clause head piece which includes a nucleus thst is a verb expression is a verbal clause head piece. All except one clause head piece also include an inner expansion and this varies considerably in structure. Different classes of verbal clause are, therefore set up on the basis of the differing inner expansions and in this way soos 9 classes of vsrbal clause are established. All the various inner expansions include at least one noun expression.
In the following sections describing the structure of the various classes of verbal clause, in each case a brief definition of the class is firfet given, t then full details of thd structure of the head piece including such features as the sequence of the different expressions in the head piece. Each section ends with examples of the particular class*

Symbolization C - clause VO - verbal clause VC1 - verbal clause class 1 NO - non-verbal clause HP - hend piece SP - subordinate piece

Example

uhya'koeti sane piko pevoti.

IE - NX

Ho-VX IE-NX

VG - HP

Nc —

nucleus

IE -

inner expansion

OE -

outer expansion

CE - comparative expansion

AE - appositional expansion

X - expression of any type

VX -

verb expression

NX - noun expression

•All people fear death."

pO 2.2.2* Verbal clause class 1

Every verbal clause which has an Inner expansion consisting of a nominal

expression functioning as subject (NXs), S 10*2*4*3, and which is not a member of

class 7, S 8*2.8, is a member of class 1*

In structure the head piece of the class 1 verbal clause consists of

two expressions: a verb expression functioning as nucleus and a nominal

expression as inner expansion*

The usual order is for the verb expressions to precede the noun expression*

'Then the verb expression is a VXa (i.e. contains a verb nucleus which includes

a suffix of order 2a, S 10*3*4 ) no demonstrative is found in the noun expression

(-NX) • When the VX is a VX-, then the NX is found to have a demonstrative in

initial position (dNX)*

The NX precedes the VX when the nucleus of the NX is a noun used generically,

i.e. to represent a class of items*

Any subordinate plecd occurs before or after the head piece*

Symbolization

NXs - noun expresrion functioning as subject

-!IX noun expression without demonstrative

dNX - noun expression with demonstrative

VXa - verb expression with suffix of order 2a

VX- - verb expression without suffix of order 2a

Examples

vekoane varututu ovokuke-ra inikone*

Nc-VXa IE-NX

SP - OE

---------------______ HP________________ SP__________

V01

'The buzzard passed by the house of his friend.'

kehi yatoko'ovi* VC1 - HP

'Gnats sting us*'

2.2.5 Verbal clause class 2

Every verbal clause which has an inner expansion consisting of two

noun expressions, one functioning as subject and the other as object (NXo),

and which is not a member of class 7» is a member of class 2*

In structure the head piece of the class 2 verbal clause consists of

three expressionst a verb expression as nucleus, and two noun expressions as

inner expansion.

One common order for these three expressions is i NXs followed by VX

followed by NXo. The NXs generally includes a demonstrative whereas the NXo

only includes a demonstrative when the VX is a VXa. Most commonly the VX is

a VX- and the NXo is then a -NXo. When the NXs is not a dTIXs it is found that

the noun nucleus of the NX is usually either a noun of class c, 11.4.3.2, or

an indefinite noun or a noun bein g used g e n e r i o a l l y . In BUCh caoe an a d j e c t i v e l

expansion within the noun expression may occur, e.g. uhya'koeti sane piko

pevoti. 'All people fear death' Another commonly occurring order for these three expressions is for the

VX to be followed by both NX. '-Jhen the VX is a VX- it is generally followed

by the NXo without any demonstrative and then by the UXs which may or may

not include a demonstrative. If the NXs directly follows the VX- it always

includes a demonstrative. When the verbal expression is a VXa it is generally

followed by the NXs without a demonstrative and then by the NXo with or

without a demonstrative. If the NXo follows the VXa directly it always includes a demonstrative.

Any subordinate piece or appositional piece follows or precedes the head piece.

Symbolization

NXo - noun expression functioning as object.

D - demonstrative

Examples

enono-re. elnl hoenasone kasena ikorokone. IE - dHXa_______ Ho -VX-______ IE - -NXo
VC 2 - HP

'The tiger fixed the day of his Vedding.'

2.2»J Verbal olause clasB 2

Every verbal clause which has an inner expansion consisting of two

noun expressions, one functioning as subject and the other as object (NXo),

and which is not a member of class 7» is a member of class 2*

In structure the head piece of the class 2 verbal clause consists of

three expressionst a verb expression as nucleus, and two noun expressions as

inner expansion.

One common order for these three expressions isi NXs followed by VX

followed by NXo. The NXs generally includes a demonstrative whereas the NXo

only includes a demonstrative when the VX is a VXa. Most commonly the VX is

a VX- and the NXo is then a -NXo. When the NXs is not a dNXs it is found that

the noun nucleus of the NX is usually either a noun of class c, 11.4.3*2, or

an indefinite noun or a noun being used generioally. In such case an adjectivel

expansion within the noun expression may occur, e.g. uhya'koeti sane piko

pevoti. 'All people fear death1

Another commonly occurring order for these three expressions is for the

VX to be followed by both NX. ’-Then the VX is a VX- it is generally followed

by the NXo without any demonstrative and then by the NXs which may or may

not include a demonstrative. If the NXs directly follows the VX- it always

includes a demonstrative. When the verbal expression is a VXa it is generally

followed by the NXs without a demonstrative and then by the NXo with or

without a demonstrative. If the NXo follows the VXa directly it always includes

a deaonstnative.

Any subordinate piece or appositional piece follows or precedes the

head piece.

Symbolization

NXo - noun expression functioning as object.

D - demonstrative

Examples

ensno-ra sinl hoenasone kasena lkorokone. IS - diTXs________No -VX-______ IE - -NXo
VG 2 - HP

'The tiger fixed the day of his ’tedding. •

po*i lease vanesone jpovoti ha'a-ra homoehou.

OE

No - VX- IS - -NXo IE - NXs

SP___________________ HP____________________

VC2

p. 5 'Another day the youth's father bought Bome cloth.'

8.2.4

Verbal clause class J

Every verbal clause which hasan inner expansion consisting of three nominal expressions, and which is not a member of class 7* is a member of class p.
In structure the head piece of the class J verbal clause consists of four expressions, t a verb expression as nucleus, and noun expressions functioning as subject, object and indirect object as inner expansion.
The most frequent order for these four expressions is; NXe followed by VX followed by NXo followed by NXi (the noun expressions functioning as indirect object). Usually the 1K b ia adNXa and the VX is a VX-, though occasionally examples of VXa / / are found#
Less frequently all the noun expressions follow the verb expression. In such instanoe the usual order is t VX- NXo NXi and NXs. The VXa NXs NXo IIX1 has also been found.
Except when the nucleus of the VX is a verb containing a stem of olass Sf S 11.4.2.{5 the VX is a VXino, i.e. it always includes the suffix -ino •indirect object* as part of the structure of the verb functioning as nucleus of the VX.
Any subordinate piece or appositional piecd occurs either before or after the head piece.
In unelicited material examined examples of class 3 verbal clauses are very infrequent. 5y:abolization NXi - noun expression functioning as indirect object Examples

omooino VXino
Nc

s u w Germano
NXo NXi IE
vc 3

Patricio. NXs

'Patricio carried mandioca back for German.'

Pilatos poresoa ahya neko anane Jesus

NXs

VXa NXo

NXi

IE

Nc

IE

VC 3 - HP

their desire.'

8.2.5. Verbal clause class 4

Every clause which has an inner expansion consisting of a single noung

expression functioning as object, and which is not a member of class 7» is a

member of class 4.

In structure the head piece of the class 4 verbal clause consists of two

expressions! a verb expression as nucleus and a noun expression as inner

expansion.

Almost always the verbal expression precedes the noun expression. A

VXa is followed by a dNXo usually, and a VX- by a -NXo.

Any subordinate piece or appositional piece precedes or follows the head

piece.

Examples

nlNka3oti Nkurena No - VX- IE - -NXo
VC4 - HP

'I'm feeding my pigs'

Nc - VXa IE - d’IXo

OE

HP

SP

VC 4

Examples

p. 8

yunu'yakoe. 'Be quietJ' VC6-IIP-N0-VX-
Npiho Htukeke ya kaaoke» HP-Nc-VX-________SP - QE______
VO 6

*1 want to Duque by horse.'

koakuti kase yonoNti'ikomo
SP-OS_______ HP - Wo - VX
vc 6

nitivoko. SP-OE

'Someday I'll walk to town.'

8.2.8 Verbal clause class 7

Every clause which has one of the following structures is a member ofclass 7 . a. A head piece consisting of a Noun expression followed by a verb expression. The noun expression may function as either subjeot or object. The VX is either a VXa or VX-. b. A head piece consisting of NXo followed by VX followed by NXs. The VX is usually a VXa. If it is a VX- the NXs is a dNXs. The NXo is usually a d'IXo. c. A head piece consisting of NXs followed by NXo followed by VX. In Buch clauses the VX is usually a VX-, and the NXb is usually a dNXs. d. A head piece consisting of a NXo followed by a IIXs followed by a VX. The NXo is usually a dNXo. a. A head piece consisting of NXo followed by VX followed by NXi. Such clauses may also include a NXs following the NXi. The VX is usually a VXino and the NXo a dNxo. When the VX includes a verb nucleus which has a stem of class R, the VX is usually a VX-. f. A head piece similar in structure to e. above except that the NXi precedes the Vx and the NXo follows it. All the other statements made in respect of e. a^nly to f. g. A head piece which is interrupted by some part of the outer expansion coming between the VX and one of the NX.
Clauses of these different structures have this in common that there is sone eaphasis on the NX which irflmediately precedes the VX. Thus in clauses

P* 9
of structures b., c. and e., the NXo is emphasized, whereas in d. the NXs is stressed, while in f. the NXi receives emphasis, and in g. the outer expansion. Hie degree of emphasis in these different clauses is noteasily determined and seems to vary but there would seem to be enough indicnt ions to suggest that the emphatic position in all verbal clauses except class 2, is the position

immediately preceding the VX. Although the sequences of expressions in Terena clauses allows for many variations many of which do not seem to correlate with any particular grammatical feature or situational factor, it does seem the NX preceding the VX is the most prominent NX of the clause. For this reason these clauses are grouped togethe as a class of verbal clause which could be labelled 'emphatic1.

Any subordinate piece occurs before or after the head piece apart from

the features mentioned in the case of type g.

Exanple s

akoti sakesa IE, NXs
VC 7,

ako nika. Nc, VX
HP

'The one that doesn't shell (beans) doesn't eat.'

enepora

movo 'iti Nsapara NXo
IE VC 7, HP

akotoni NXs

nikoati. VX Nc

'All sorts eat this dried corn.1

enepora seno kallvono akohi ltupa'lka enosaka. 'Her step-mother treated this

IB, NXo__________________ Nc, VX_________ IS, NXs

VC 7, IIP

£irl very badly.1

enepone nikltiniki sa 1okuke notuvaka ovo.

IE, NXs

........ AX........ Nc, VX

______ HP__________ _________ SP__________ HP

vc 7

’That beaver lives at the edge of the river.*

8.2.9 • Verbal clause class 8

Eve~y clause which ha3 a head piece which includes on emphatic particle,

11.4.4, as par t of the inner expansion, is a member of class 8.

In structure the head piece of the class 8 verbal clause consists of a

nucleus which is always a verb expression and an inner expansion which consists

of an emphatic partiile and upto three noun expressions, which may be

functioning as subject, objector indirect object.

The emphatic particle always occurs imuediately preceding the verb

expression, ’/hen the emphatic particle is a member of sub-class El, 11.4.4.,

any preceding noun expression is emphasised and if there is no preceding noun

expression, then the particle refers back to the preceding clausef 'then the

emphatic particle is of sub-class E2, attention is usually drawn to the noun

expression following the verb expression, or if there is none, to the following

clause. The noun expressions thus emphasised may or may not be members of the

inner expansion, since attention may be drawn to an adverb expression which is

part of the outer expansion in the same way.

Apart from the features describedabove, the structure of clauses of

class 8 is similar to that of clauses already described. Thus in a class 8

verbal clause which includes in its head piece two noun expressions one

functioning as subject and theother as object, (i.e. it is similar instructure

to a clause of class 2), theseexpressions will occur as follows.!Vhere

the

verb expression isa VX-, the NXo will usually follow and then the NXs, where the

verb expression isa VXa, the lIXs will usually follow and then the NXo. If

other orders occur then the NX immediately after the VX includes a demonstrative

in the manner described in 8.2.5*

In the case of a class 8 verbal clause with an emphatic outer expansion,

the enphatic particle and outer expansion precede the verb expression and any

noun expressions of the inner expansion follow the verb expression.

'/hen the emphatic par t i d e enomons occurs together with a VXino, 10.J.4,

instead of the indirect or benefactive object following the VX as is generally

p. 11 the case, the preceding clause may ba regarded as a type of benefactive

object, since the olauee refers back to the previous clause in such a way that

enomone may be translated, 'therefore' or 'on account of...(the preceding

clause).

Symbolization

PS - emphatic particle Examples

enoaone pulnoa exoveno. IB, PE Nc, VXino IE, NXa
VC 8, HP

'Therefore his brothers hated him.'

inoneihyal Corunba ene slmone *e.

NXa_______________ PE

VXo

___________IE________________He

VC8, HP

'The load from Corumba that's what arrived.'

ukeane

piho

poke'e

koahati

Haran,

ene oko. PE VXo IE NC
VC8, HP

'From there he went to the land Haran, that's where he stayed.'

itea enapora hoyeno hara piko ayo Maria.

OS

NXs

PE VXo

NXo

_______IE_______________nc_______ i e

SP____________________ HP____________________

VC8

'But that man the one he feared was Ifery's brother.'

8.2.10 Verbal clause class 9

Every clause which has a head piece which includes an interrogative expression as part of the inner expansion, is a member of class 9.
In structure the head piece of the class 9 verbal clause consists of an initial interrogative expression, followed by a verb expression which in turn may be followed by up to three noun expressions. The noun expressions following the verb expression may funotion as subject, object or indirect object. They are found in the sequences already described for verbal clauses 1 to 5» Thus if there is both a noun expression functioning as object and another aB indirect object, the NXo precedes the NXi.
If the verb expression contains a verb which is marked by second stress

then no noun expression functioning as subject is found.

Any subordinate piece follows the head piece of the class 9 verbal clause.

Symbolization

IX - interrogative expression

Examples

kuti IX IS

otoniko klyakase.

VX

He

OE

HP__________SP

VC 9

(Vfhat did he cut down yesterday?'

kuti otopiko klyakase.''?ho cut down yesterday?' (identical analysis )

namea ye'aye kase ke'arine. IE, IX__________He, VX VC9, HP

'For how many days were you ill?'

naroo Nooresea tiukati akotl apeinoati.

IX

VX

NXo__________ TOO_______

IE______ Nc___________________ IE_________

VC9, HP

'’Then shall I give money to the poor?'

8*3The non-verbal clause head piece

8.5*1 General

Every clause head piece which does not include a verb expression as nucleus, is a non-verbal clause head piece. On the basis of the different structures of the nucleus of the clause head piece, four classes of non-verbal clause are set up and these are described in sections 8 .3 .2 to 8.3.4/ This is in contrast to the classes of verbal clause which are set up on the basis of the structure of the inner expansion since all verbal clauses have a similar nucleus. However for both types of clause it is the internal structure of the head piece which is the basis of the classes which are established.
The non-verbal clause frequently includes a noun expression as nucleus. Such a noun expression may, however, be distinguished from the noun expression within the verbal clause in that though identical in structure, they differ in function.

8.J.2 The non-verbal clause class 1

Every clause having a head piece wit h a nucleus consisting of two noung

expressions, is a member of class 1, and may be termed a predicative clause.

Generally one of the two noun expressions includes a demonstrative and

usually this is the first noun expression.

These noun expressions may be of any structure as described in section

10.2, but they tend to be without extensive expansions. They may include more

than one head piece. Occasionally a subordinative piece is found with this class.

Symbolization

NCI - nonverbal clausa class 1

Examples

enopone ute unatl kipoheotl koane unati inruaasoti.
nx___________________________________ ICC________________________________
NCI, HP, Nc

'That woman is a good wesher and lroner-'

uNtl kulotna

NX

NX

NCI, HP, He

'I'm the middle one.'

utl'iko kalivono yaye.

NX

MX

OE

HP, Nc_______ SP

NCI

*\?e're still children here.'

8.3.3

The non-verbal clause class 2

Every clause having a head piece with a nucleus consisting of a single noun expression, or adverbial expression or particle, and which is not a nanber of class 4, is a member of class 2 and termed a response clause.
These clauses are found frequently following a verbal clause of class 9, a non-verbal clause of class 3 j or a clause of any class which is congruent to a phonological clause marked by tune 3#
There is never any type of expansion with clauses of this class. Synbolization iIC2 - non-verbal clause claes2 Examples

ovokutike hainara.

'In the house' (qfter question, 'where's so and eo«) 'Thut's right.'

8.3*4 The non-verbal clause class 5

p# 14

Every clause having a head pieoe with a nucleus consisting of an interro­

gative expression, 10.5, is a member of class 5 an(i termed a question olause.

The class 3 non-verbal head pieoe may include an inner expansion consisting

of a noun expression, 10.2.

The class 3 non-verbal clause may include a subordinate piece consisting

of an outer expansion but this is only found very infrequently.

Examples

na Puli klyakase.

IX NX

03

Nc IE

HP________SP

NC3

*'There was ^ l i yesterday?•

naku. ''.There?* N03, - HP, Nc, IX

8.3.5 The non-verbal clause class 4

Every clause having a head pieoe with a nucleus consisting of a noun

expression and which is congruent to a phonological clause which is marked by

a tune of class 5» 3»3«6» is a member of class 4 and termed avocative clause.

Almost always the noun expression consists of a single

nounhead piece and

this noun is frequently a noun of class N, 11.4*3.2.

Class 4 non-verbal clauses are never found with any type piece.

of subordinate

Exaaples

Auhile, yoko. NC4, HP, NX

'Auhile, oome here!'

Ngurl, namukapaane-ne kamo. NC4, HP, NX

'Boy, get the horseJ*

8*4 The verbal clause outer expansion

Every expression or single word in any olause which is not referrable to some part of the structure of the head piece is considered a member of the subordinate pieoe* The outer expansion consists of that part of the subordinate piece which is not the comparative expansion, 8*5*

All verbal clauses may include an outer expansion and non-verbal clauses of classes 1 and 5 are also found with an outer expansion occasionally.

The outer expansion consists of one or more adverbial expressions or particles*

Apart from the instances described in the preceding sections of this

chapter, any outer expansion precedes or follows the clause hend piece. 'Then

the outer expansion includes an adverbial expression of time, 10.4.3, any such expression usually precedes the head piece. Any other part of the outer

expansion follows the head piece* Symbolization

OE - outer expansion SP - subordinat e piece AX - adverbial expression

AXt - adverbial expression of time* Examples

po'i kase ape hoyeno slmonutl SP, 05, AXt_________HP___________
V01

1Another day there was a nan who came to me*1

soenae soenae ukopono vaka*

SP, OE, AXt

HP

VC1 *

'The price of meat increases year by year.'

Hpiho Ntukeke ya karaoke.

HP

AX

AX

'I went to Duque by horse.*

8*5 The comparative expansion

Verbal clauses of classes 1, 2, 4, 6 and 9 are sometimes found with a

comparative expansion, irrespective of whether or not they inolude an outer

expansion. This comparative expansion functions as part of the subordinate

piece of the clause.

The comparative expansion consists of one of the following structures!

1. ya or kutea followed by a noun expression.

2. ya or / kutea followed by an adverbial expression.

The comparative expansion always follows a noun or adverbial expression and when

the comparative expression follows a noun expression it consists of structure 1, whereas when it follows an adverbial expression it consists of structure 2 .

The comparative expansion may follow any noun or adverbial expression of

the head piede or of the outer expansion* In such claases including a comparative

expansion the first noun or adverbial expression is compared with the noun

or adverbial expression of the comparative expansion.

Symbolization

CS - comparative expansion

Examples

ako malika Miranda ya Moreira* 'j-Iiranda is further away than Moreira**

VX

NXs

ICC

No

IS

CE

HP

SP

VC1

novo'iti VX Nc HP

ovoNkuke kutenti AX OS SP VC6

ovokuke
AX Qg

Hele.

'It's dry in my house like in Hole's house.*

kuti ovo DOi'aku enevoNpe ya enevope Maria.

IX VX

NXs

IDC

NC

IE

CE

HP

SP

VC9

'’That's the difference between my cup and Mary's cup? i

8.6

The appositional expansion

Every clause may include an appositional exoansion. Ihis appositional expansion consists of an expression which stands in a paratactic relationship to some expression in the clause and which is the same class of expression as the expression to which it wtands in this relationship. Thus a noun expression only occurs as the appositional expansion of another noun expression.
Most commonly the appositional expansion follows immediately after the expression to which it is in this paratactic relation. Symbolization AE - appositional expansion Examples

NX

NX

NX

NX

HP, Nc

AE

AE

NX

NX

AS

AE

NCI

This was the dream, the dream of Joseph, that deceiver, that troubler, the

brother of Efeau*'

noeNsea repenoti Nc, VX IE, NXo
HP VC4

itukeinopi. AE, NX AS

*1 want to see the she made for you.*

8*7 Classification of clauses on the basis of function

The analysis of the clause presented in this chapter is based on the grouping of clauses on the basis of their internal structure. However it is possible to correlate this classification with the function of clauses in eentence-types. On the basis of their function sentence-types are divided into major and minor sentence-types, 9.6. It is found that only certain classes of clause occur in major sentence-types whereas all classes are found in minor sentence-types.
Ihe following function in major sentence-types consisting of a single clause, or as the head piece of subordinative multiple clause sentence-types

p. 18

and of co-ordinative multiple clause sentenoe-types whan these are major

sentenoe-types•

1. Any verbal clause of classes 1, 2, 5 and 9»

2# A verbal clause of classes 4, 5» and 6 only when the verb expression of

such clauses includes either a nominal piece with uti, 10.

or a verb

which is marked by first or second person, chapter 1 7 *

5» A non-verbal clause of classes 1 or 4.

8.8 Congruences between the grammatical clause and phonological elements

Different utterences which at the grammatical level are assigned to

grammatical clauses of all classes, verbal or non-verbal, are found to be

assigned to phonologioal sentences at the phonological level of analysis.

Similarly, grammatical clauses of all classes are found to correspond to

phonological clauses marked by every turo. While thereis no clear-cut correla­

tion between any grammatical clause and phonological clause having any one

particular tune, certain grammatical clauses tend to o;cur more frequently

congruent to phonological clauses marked by certain tunes and these may be listed as followi1

Verbal clause class 9 congruent to phonological clause with tune 3 or 1,

Non-verbal clause class 2 H

"

" " " 4,

"

"

* 31*

n

h

« it * 3 or 1,

*

«

n

«

N

H

HHH

Similarly some negative statements can be made in that certain grammatical

clauses very seldom are found congruent to phonological clauses marked with

certain tunes, for example;

Verbal clause classes 2 , 3 , ]5» 1-9 and phonological clauses with tune 4 or 5»

■"

"

1-5 , 7-9

"

"

Non-verbal « ■

*

«

■

H " 5,

a

it h 4

"

""

1

and 3

"«

*

"

8

5,

*

l , l , 2 ,,^ 3

w

H

"

""2,

"

H" 4

"

B

* " « i_4.

ilraltea by soma conditioning lactor, sucn Q3 xne occurrence ox b prEfie-^ng . The sentence-typa

In structure every sentence—tyna consists of one or more clause• Thus /ti 06n9r&i sentence-types differ in two respects. They differ in their function in that

some m U i n M & f m

ll^d8fe52t ^ e 8SHlllontenC8“

%mrB &9 tSSHd395lH99€-to iSa^i$fl£.th*h $s£tf?&F%y$i§£MgtM$to8i ^

m9tsggi3nggJ,tQ3^f_<^ g n 6 9jT^jr§Ssigrt^e0^g | f§sJlH3 ^ (i9t^ sh ^ r ^ Shfre g ^ l l s h e d

£fl?m%hfrfiSFiP&flP g
implyoShefoifcakgna*

f

8SF^HEfdul®i?y^3n8£ EfaSsa}0

Wh^SSR^iStiaiSH^SS t&iht$t58§ ft£S38

re&fei#m & fa j^b&difetiv®
MrtSpBS • c l ^ ^ ^ . ? % ^ ^ £ f c 4 £ v 5 ia45l4f»pffitcS?SU§3 h^^fnfiFfifi^5^Palr W tt3faftiese SR*d to function, some account is
given of whether sentence-types can occur independently or whether they are limited by some conditioning factor, such as the occurrence of a preceding sentence-type.
In structure every sentence-type consists of one or more clause. Thus sentence-types differ in two respects. They differ in their function in that
•s
some sentence-types only occur when following another sentence-type while others are found without such limitations. They differ in their structure in that some sentence-types consists of a single clause, others of two or more and furthermore some santence-types consist of particular types of clause.
On the basis of thair differing function sentence-types are divided into two dlasees, major and minor. On the basis of their differing structure sentence-types are divided into three main clas-es, single clause, subordinative multiple clause and co-ordinative multiple clause sentence-types. Two of these three main classes are further subdivided.
In the following description, sections 9.2 to 9*4 present the analysis of sentence-types based on their structure in terms of the clauses of which they consist. Section 9»6 presents a classification based on the functional division into major and minor sentence-types. It would be possible to make the division into major and minor sentence-types and then sub-divide on the basis

p. 20 of differing structures within the two main functional classes of sentence-types* However this would be vary repetitious sinoe very many of the structural features are common to sentence-types irrespective of their function. It appears very nuch more economical to make the first sub-division on the basis of structure*
The sentence-type is an endocentric construction consisting of a he?d piece with or without a subordinate piece. Sentence-types may consist of more than one head piece and more than one sub-ordinate piece* In order to describe the diversity of sentence-type structure, three main classes are set up*
All sentence-types which consist of a head piece only are single clausa sentence-types and constitute class 1* In contrast all other sentence-types are multiple clause sentence-types, and there are divided into two classes* Some multiple clause sentence-types consist of two head pieces and these constitute class 2, co-ordinative multiple clause sentence-types * Other multiple clause sentence-types consist of a head piece and subordinative piece and these constitute class 5 » subordinative multiple clause sentence-types*
Structures which are identical with a multiple clause sentence-type but which differ in that they are not functioning as a sentence-type but as part of either a co-ordinative or subordinative multiple clause sentence-type ars termed co-ordinative fS/ constructs, and subordinative constructs respectively* This provides a means for stating the structure of a sentence-type which consists of two or more head pieces and a subordinative piece. 'Then the subordinative piece is in a subordinate relationship to only one of the head pieces the sentence-type is regarded as a co-ordinative multiple clause sentencetype with a subordinative construct as one of the he ad pieces, l&ien the subordinative piece is in a subordinate relationship to all the head pieces, the sentence-type is regarded as a subordinative multiple clause sentence-type with a co-ordinative construct as ■ftie head piece*
Thus far the sentence-type has been presented as an endocentric construction having a head piece and, sometimes, a subordinative piece* However sentence-types ara found which include another eleuent here termed a sentence-type extensor,

which is not part of the head piece of subordinate piece and which may or may not be a clause* Section 9*5 gives details of the sentence-type extensor*
It should be noted that except where it is stated to the contrary in this chapter and apart from the features described in chapters 15 and 16, the verb which functions as the nucleus of the head piece of clauses of all three classes of sentence-type, is marked by first stress, definite mood and direct aspect* Symbolization ST - sentence-type SST - single clause sentence-type OMST - co-ordinative multiple clause sentenoe-type SMST - subordinative multiple clause sentence-type ST3 - sentence-type extensor SC - subordinative construct CC - oo-ordinative construct

9*2 Single clause sentence-types

Every sentence-type which consists of one clause only is a single clause

santa nee-type*

Exanples of Bingle clause sentenoe-types are found in which clauses of

every class, verbal and non-verbal, occur* However, verbal clauses of class 6 only occur as single clause sentence-types infrequently. On the other hand non-verbnl clauses of classes 1 — 3 usually occur as single clause sentence-types

The majority of single clause sentence-types consist of verbal clauses

of classes 1, 2, 4 and 9, and of non-verbal olauses of class 1* Verbal clauses of classes 3 » 5 * 7 Rnd 8 and non-verbal clauses of classes 2 and 3

occur less frequently.

Examples

enopo-ra kaaoa-ra

sini hoenasone SST, VC1
honoti emo'utl

kasena lkorokovope. 'This tiger fixed the day of

yotike*

his wedding*' 'he heard a loud cry in the night**

SST, VC4

utl1iko kalivono. 'We're still children.' SST, HOI

9.5

Co-ordinative multiple clause sentence-types

p. 22

9.3.1 General

Every multiple clause sentence-type which consists of two or more head pieces in a co-ordinative relationship is a co-ordinative multiple clause sentence-type, (CMST). These head pieces may be either single clauses or oo-ordinative or subordinative constructs.
Sometimes not all the phonic data of a sentence corresponding to a co-ordinative nultiple clause sentence-type may be referred to theclauses and constructs functioning as the head pieces, since in addition to these certain connecting elements are often found. These elements are termed connectives and are either verbs of class C, 11.4.2»3» or particles of olasses C and Cj, 11.4.4. Such particles and verbsare regarded a3 part of the structure of the Cl1ST and are not assigned to any one or more head piece.
Since CMST ofvarious structures are found, four classes of Ci-STare sat up and each is described in turn in the following sections. Symbolization c - connective element Pc - particle of class C Pcj - particle of class Oj Vc - verb of class 0

9.3.2 Class 1 CMST

Uvery co-ordinative multiple clause sentence-type which has two or more head pieces with the following structures either in juxtaposition or with one or more connective, is a member of class 1 .
The head pieces may bet 1. Any verbal clause, 2. A non-verbal clause of class 1, 5. Any subordinative construct. These head pieces may follow one another in any order.

p. 25

Structures which are identioal with class 1 CJ-ST except that they occur

as part of soma other multiple clause sentenoe-type, are termed co-ordinative constructs class 1 *

Symbolization

CKST1 - Blass 1 co-ordinative multiple clause sentence-type

CoO - oo-ordinative construct

Bxamoles

ya ra'a puhl'koene sukuyo, noesoa ukoa. 'At that moment the bird appeared

HP, VC1

HP, VC1

and the fox saw him*1

enapo-ra hoyeno ____________ HP,

e9oti numlikusea, kene uNti ako esa numiikusea* SCI__________________ c , Pcj HP, SCI________ _______
CMST1

•This man knows how to fish, but I don't know how to fish*'

ako aunatl, ako aeloke

SP, VC6

HP, VC1 HP, 5C3

okovo sana, CMST1

kene unati,
Pcj SP, VC6 c

ulAhlyijeWn(JeOtWii,y HP, VC6
HP, SCI
HP, S03

ouveoa ko'oVvVoAkMubtJlL SP, VC1

'If he is evil, the peoole are not happy, but if he is good, it is pleasant

for tha inhabitants to live.*

90*3 Olass 2 CIST

2very co-ordinative multiple clause sentence-type which has two or more

head pieces with the following structures, each of which includes a verb with

Indirect aspect, 15*4 and l4*6*3» as head piece of the verb expression functioning

aa nucleus of the clause which is itself head piece ofthe CMST of isthe head

piece of a subordinative construct which is a headpieceof the member of class 2 .

CIST, is a

The head pieces may be I

1. Any verbal clause of classes 1-7 (

2. A cubordinative construct of classes 1,4-7*

Thore may or nay not be connective preceding any or all of the head pieces*

Structures which are identical with class 2 CK3T except that they occur aa

p. 2A

pert of some multiple clause sentence-type, are termed co-ordinative constructs

class 2 *

Examples

mokesa koeku HP, VC1

noesea, irikeovo-ra SP, VC1
HP, SCI CMST2

kurike,

koane Pc c

veyea, VC6 HP

nikea. VO6 HP

'■Thenever his sister saw the peanuts fall, she took them and ate them.'

9.5*A Class 3 CMST

Every co-ordinative multiple clause sentence-type which has two or more

head pieces with the structures listed below, is a member of class 3» In

class 3 CMST each herd pieoe has a verb narked by second stress, 16*2*2, as

the head piece of the verb expression of the clause which functions either as a

head piece of the CMST or as the head piece of the subordinative construct

which functions as a head piece of the CMS T«

The heaj piece may be I

1* A verbal clausa of classes 1 - 7»

2* A subordinative construct of classes 1, 4-7*

There may or may not be a connective preceding any or all of the head pieces.

Structures which are identical with class 5 CMST except that thay occur as

part of some multiple clause sentence-type, are termed co-ordin&ive constructs class 3 ,

Examples

seopo-ra sini, epemo hyovovo, yusikea, plhea.

____ VC1

VC4

HP, VC6 SP, VC6

jjp

Sp^ sc^

H?___________________~~HP, SCI_______________ CMST 5

'The tiger arrived and asked the toad if he would go.*

9.3*5 Glass 4 CM3T

Every co-ordinative multiple clause sentenco-type which has two head

pieces with the following structures, is a member of class 4*

The head pieoes may be I

1* A verbal clause of classes l-7p

2. A subordinative construct of classes 1, 2, 5“7»

5» A co-ordinative construct of classes 1 - 5»

The second head piece has a verb in second aspect, 14*6*3 and 15*4, as the

nucleus of the head piece of the claua which functionseither as thesecond

head pieoe of this CMST, or as the head piece of the Subordinative or co-ordinative

construct which function as the second head piece*

There is always a connective between the fiwo head pieces and this is

always the particle sopo*

Structures which are identical with class 4 CMST except that they occur

aa part of some multiple clause sentence-type, are termed co-ordinative

constructs class A*

Examples

akopepo oNko'ituke, sopo k e *itukelyl* ______ HP, VC6___ o, Pc.1 HP, VO6
CMSTA

*1 didn't work, whyever did you!'

kohisovane ukoe, ina slnokoa, sopo

SP, VC1

HP, VC6

Pcj

____________ HP, SO?______________c

CKST A

itukeovo make inovo* HP. VOA

'When the fox came
n0ar> h0 t0Uchsd him. but (surprising!}

9.4 Subordinative multiple clause sentence-types

it was a shed skin!'

9.4,1 General Every multiple clause sentence-type which consists of a head piece and a
subordinate piece is a subordinative multiple clause sentence-type (SMST)* The head and subordinate pieces of a SMST may be either single clauses, or co-ordinative or subordinative constructs*
Since SMST of various structures are found, eight classes of SflST are set up and these are described in the following sections*

9.4.2 Class 1 SMST

p. 26

3irery subordinative multiple clause sentence-type whioh has a head pieoe and subordinate piece with the following structures, is a member of class 1 .

The head piece may bot 1 . toy verbal clause,

2. A co-ordinative construct of any clas.

The subordinie piece may be l

1. A verbal clause of classes 1-7 or 9,

2. A co-ordinative construct of classes 1 or 2,

5. A subordinative construct of class 1.

The verb which is the nucleus of the he: d piece of theclause whichfunctions

as subordinate piece or which functions as

the headpieceof a constructwhich

functions as subordinate piece, is in indirect aspect form, 14.6.J*

The entire head piece usually preoedes the subordinate piece. However,

not uncommonly the subordinate piece is found after the nucleus of the clause

functioning as head piece and before the inner expansion of such clauses*

This occurs when the head piece is a verbal clause, usually of classes 1, 4 or 6 t and when the subordinate piee is also a verbal clause, usually of classes 1 , h or 6. In almost all such instances the nucleus of the clause functioning as

subordinate piece follows immediately alter the nucleus of the clause functioning

as head piece.

Symbolization

SMST1 - subordinative multiple clause eentence-type class 1

Examples

Nknhya*a eNsea inekii, ako'oiyea.

VC6 HP, > 0 6 HP, VC6

HP

. SP, CoQ___________

HP, VC6_______ SP, SCI____________
SKST1

*1 want to know if you slept or nott*

p. 27

na koeti'lye yeto'okino, npeiyeako pe'inu, nako natl. HP, VO9___________________ SP, V04____________ HP, VQ9 SMST1
9.4.5 Clans 2 SKST

'Why did you tell the king that you had a brother?•

Every subordinative nultiple clause sentence-type which has a head piece and subordinate piede with the following structures, is a member of olase 2 .

The head piece may bet

1. Any ver bal clause,

2. Any co-ordinative construct,

Any subordinative construct*

The subordinate piece may be I

1. A verbal clause of classes 1-6 or 9» 2. A co-ordinativ8 construct of class 1,

J. A subordinative construct of clans 1*

The ver b which is the nucleus of the head piece of the clause which functions

as subordinate piece or which functions as the head piece of a construct

that functions as subordinate piece, is in indirect aspectform.

The head piece usually follows the subordinate piece. Examples of the

reverse order are uncommon*

Structures identical with class 2 SMST except that they occur as part of a multiple clause sentence-type, are termed subordinative constructs class 2 *

Examples

imokeako sini, ipuhikone ka'l. 'While the tiger was still asleep, the

SP, VC1

HP, VC1

...koene, noesea, a u m *ike a .

monkey went out ** '...he said, when he 3aw he had deceived him.'

HP, VC6 SP, VC6

HP, VC6

SP. SCI_________

SK3T1

9.4.4

Class 3 SMST

Everysubordinative multiple clause sentence-type which has and subordinate piece with thefollowing structures, is a member

a head piece of class J*

The head piece may be*

1. A ve bsl clause of classes 1-8,

2* Aco-ordinative construct of classes 1 or 2,

3« Asubordinative construct of classes1, 2, 4-7*

The subordinat e piece nay be I

1* A verbal clause of classes 1-7 or 9,

2. Aco-ordinative construct of classes 1 or 2,

3. Asubordinative construct of class 1*

The verb which is the nucleus of the head piece of the clause which pieoe of

a construct which functions as subordinate piece, is marked by second stress,

chapter 16*

tost frequently the subordinate piece precedes the head piece but

examples of the reverse order are soaetiraes found*

Structures which are identical with class 5 SMST except that they occur

as part of a multiple clause sentence-type, are termed subordinative constructs

class 5*

Examples

simovone itovope ha*i tikoti, ina lpuhiko-ra yunae. '’Ihen the time of

SP, VC1

HP, VC1

----------------------------- ---------------

SMST3

ripe fruit arrived,

ao'oko-ra peyo uti, keno *okohiko kirnou»

SP, VCl

HP, VC1

then the lizard went out. *When our dogs barked, the wild pigs

SMST3

, came.1

9.4.5 Class 4 SMST

Every subordinative multiple clause sentenca-typa which has a head piece and subordinate piece with the following structures, is a member of class 4.
The head piece may be l 1* Any verbal clause, 2. Any co-ordinative construct, 3» A subordinative construct of classes l-5»
The subordinate piece may be l 1. A verbal clause of classes 1-7,

p. 29

2* A co-ordinative construct of classas 1 or 2,

5* A subordinative oonstruot of classes 1, ^-7»

The subordinate piece is always introduced by the particle vo'oku. The verb

which is the nucleus of the head piece of the clause which functions as sub­

ordinate piece, or which functions aa the head pieoe of a construot which functions a8 subordinate piece, is frequently narked by indirect aspect*

Usually the head piece precedes the subordinate piece, but occasionally

examples of the reverse order aro found*

Structures which are identical with olass A S15T except that they occur

as part of a multiple clause sentence-type, are termed subordinative constructs

class A*

Examples

eno une, vo'oku eno'iyea kevea uko. 'There's a lit of water because it's

HP, Y01__________SP, SCI_______________

SMSTA

rained a lot*'

hyoko pike, vo'oku aneye aeraaina* HP, VC6___________SP, VC1__________ SMST A

'Don't be afraid because your mother is here*'

9.A .6

Class 5 SMST

Every subordinative multiple clause sentence-type which has a head piece and subordinate piece with the following structures, is a member of class
Tho head piece may bet 1* A verbal clause of class 1-7, 2t Any co-ordinative construct, 5* Asubordinative construct of classes l-J*
The subordinate piece may be l It Averbal clause of classes 1-7 » 2t Aco-ordinative construct of clasn 1, Jt Asubordinative construct of classes 1, A, or 6 *

The subordinate pieoe is introduced by either kutea or ya (or some form of

these words) and always follows the head piece* The verb wS.ch is the nucleus of

the head pieoe of the clause which functions as subordinate piece, or which

functions as the head piece of a construct which functions as the head piece,

is marked by indirect aspect*

Structures which are identical with class 5 SMST except that they occur

as part of a multiple clause sentence-type, are termed subordinative constructs

class

Examples

yuNtoso kouhyapu 'lkeovoso ya yitosii* _______ HP, SGI_____________ SP, VC6
SMS 15

write more clearly than you write

avo yesa numlikusea kuteati eNsea*

HP, SCI

SP, VC6

SKST 5

'You don't yet know how to fish like I know*1

9.4.7 Class 6 Sl-ST

Every subordinative multiple clause sentence-type which has a head piece

and subordinate piece with the following structures, is a member of class

The head piece may be I

1. Averbal olause of classes 1-7»

2. Any subordinative construct,

A co-ordinative construct of classes l-J.

The subordinate piece may be*

1. Averbal clause of classes l-7»

2. Aco-ordinative construct of classes 1 or 5»

5* Asubordinative construct of class

1.

The subordinate piece is introduced by iraokone and always follows the head piece

The verb which is the nucleus of the head piece of the clause which functions as

subordinate piece, or which functions as the head piece of a construct which

functions as subordinate piece, is marked by second stress.

Structures which are identical with class 6 SMST except that they occur

as part of a multiple clause sentence-type, are termed subordinative constructs class 6 .

Examples

niko lnokone lmatasovo.

HP, Y06

S?. VC6

SK3T6

'He ato until he w;s full.1

yapaalka kamo, lookone lnlsepana. HP, VC4____________ SP, VC6________ sj'.sitf

'Look for the horse till you find it.

9.4.8 Class 7 SKST

E v e ry eubordinative nultiple clause sentence-type which has a head piece

and subordinate piece with the followin' structures, is a meaberof class 7•

The head piece may bet

1. A verbal clause of classes 1-7»

2. A co-ordinative construct class 1,

5. A subordinative construct ofclasses 1, 4-6.

The verb subordinate piece is introduced by maka or nara'inamo. The verb

which is the nucleus of the head piece of the clause which functions as subordinate

siecsj or wnich functions as the head piece of a construct which functions as subordinate piece, is narked by the indefinite cood, chanter 1 5 , except ’'hen

hyoko is part of the negative expansion of the verb, in which case the verb is in definite mood form and parked by second strops, 1 0 .5 .5 .2 .

The subordinate piece always follows the he d pises*

Structures which are identical with class 7 SUSP except that they o cur

us part of a multiple claus e sentence-type, are termed subriinative constructs

class 7* Sxaanles

pjha soko yeno, maka naesana slpil.

VC6

HP, VC6

SP, VC6

_____ Ip____________ SP, SCI___________

SMS 7J

*Go to your mother so that she sees you have arrived.*

neesjpa narallnano Irlkepu*

HP, VCg

SP, VC6________

'Be careful lest you fall over.'

nee3ina, maka hyokone irlkevo.

HP, VC6

SP, VC6_____________

3K3T7

'Be careful so that you don't fall.'

9.4.9 Glass 8 SMST

p. 52

Every subordinative nultiple clause sentence-type which has a head piece and subordinate piece with the following structures, is a memberof class 8 .

The head piece may be I

1. A verbal clause of olasses 1-7,

2. Any co-ordinative construct,

5* Any subordinative consfcuct.

The subordinate piece nay be I

1* A verbal clause of classes 1-7*

2. A co-ordinative construct of class 1,

A subordinative construct of class 1.

The subordinate piece 1b introduced by eha'aso and usually precedes the head

piece. Structures which are identical with class 8 SMST except that they occur

as part of a multiple clause sentence-type, are termed subrdinative constructs class 8 .

Examples

eha'aso komitlso'o, nacukoa ukoe. SP, VC6____________ HP, VC1 SMST8

*V7hen ho shut his eye, the fox seized him.'

eha'aso veyoa, hanajti ekoyeovoti. HP, VC<5 SP, VC6
SP, V06____________HP, SOI_________ SMST 8

'When he took it, she laughed very much.'

9*5 The sentence-type extensor Sentence-types of any structure are found with an extensor. This extensor
stands in a paratactic relationship t o the sentence-type as a wble. It cannot be regarded as functioning as part of any head piece or subordinate piece of the sentence-type.
The extensor consists of non-verbal clause of class 4 or an exclamatory piece, 9 .7 . When the extensor is a non-verbal clause of class 4, it usually occurs at the beginning of the sentence-type. Mien, however, it is an exclamatory

p. 55 pleca it always occurs at the and of the sentence-typo and in such instances

It is significant that the extensor often corresponds at the phonological

level with the tune extensor, 5«5*7*

Symbolization STB - Sentence-type extensor

ExP - exclamatory piece*

Example s

amo'u slni yakeneaye, o.

________HO 1____________ ExP

SST

STS

!There was the sound of the tiger coming!*

tata'a, yeseouka, nike elfeo.

no4

V06________vcA

STE________ HP_________Iff_____

CKST1

'Father, get up and eat my presentl'

9,6 Classification on the basis of function

9.6.1 General In this analysis the eentence-type has been presented in terms of its
internal structuring since no higher unit of grammatical structure has been thoroughly analysid. However, sentenoe-types can be divided into two main groups on the basis of their function in the discourse. All Bentence-types which may occur either in initial place in a discourse, or after another eentenoe-type are termed major sentence-types. All sentence-types which are only found after another sentence-type are termed minor sentence-types• The use of these terns does not imply any type of prior or pre-eminent statue to one class of sentence-types but merely refers to its wider/ funtion.
’■/hen the internal structure of major and minor sentence-types are examined, it is found that whereas sentence-types of any structure function as a minor sentence-type, only cdrtain sentence-types function as major sentence-types. The next section, therefore, gives details of the internal structure of major sentence-types.
A filler study might be able to establish different classes of minor sentence-types since some minor sentence-types only occur after certain other fientence-types. For instance, a minor sentence-type consisting of a single

p. 54
clause of structure N02 only follows either a sentence-type of structure V09 or N05, or a sentence-type which is congruent in whole or in part to a phonologioal clause marked by tune 5* A detailed study of this type is not attempted here* However, it seem9 unlikely that many such classes can be set up sinoe it is found that sentence-types of most structures follow sentenoetypes of almost any other structure* A great deal of the selection of sequences of sentence-types would seem to be determined notby structural factors but by extra-linguistic factors.

9.6.2 The structure of major sentence-types

Major sentence-types with the following internal structure have been found.

1. Single clause sentence-types with clauses of the following classest

Verbal clausa classes 1, 2, 5» and 9

*

B

* 4, 5» Qnc* only when the verb expression includes

either a noun pieoe with uti, 10.5 .5 .4 , or a verb which is marked by first or

second person, chapter 17*

Non-verbal clause of classes 1 or 4.

2. Co-ordinative multiple clause sentence-types of any class with at least one

head piece consisting of a clause of one of the structures listed abve in 1 *,

or with the head piece of a construct functioning as head piece of the sentence-

type consisting of such a clause.

5« Subordinative multiple clause sentence-type of any class with the head

piece consisting of a clause of one of the structures listed above or with the

head piece of a construot functioning as head piece of the sentence-type con­

sisting of such a clause.

9.7 Th0 exclamatory piece

The exclamatory piece functions as r. sentence-type extensor, 9*5» lo structure it consists of either of the followingl 1> The verbs ako'o or haina, 2. An exclamation, 11.8*

Symbolization

ExP - exclamatory piece

Ex - exclamation

Examples

lkorokoanemea neko VC1 SST

sini, eho. ExPp Ex

'The tiger made him fall, ehi *

hara VC6

vekoa, 3ST

o.

•This is the way he went.'

Exp,, Ex

nihone VC6

Miranda, ako'o. 3X Exp, 7
SST

'He went to Miranda,

Chapter ten The expression

10.2 General

The next lower level of analysis after the clause is the expression level. Scpressions function mainly in clauses, though some expressions also function as part of another type of expression.
Some four classes of expression are set up according to their function in different clauses and according to their different mutual relationships as elements of the clause. Each of these four, the noun, verb, adverbial and interrogative expressions, is described in turn in the following sections. Symbolization X - expression AX - adverbial expression IX - interrogative expression NX - noun expression VX - verb expression

10,2 The noun expression
The noun expression may be defined structurally and functionally. Every expression which functions as (part of) an inner expansion of verbal clauses or as (part of) the nucleus of non-verbal clauses, or as (part of) a comparative

or appositional expansion, or adverbial or interrogative expressions, is a noun expression* Every expression whioh has as its head pieoe a noun and which is not an adverbial expression is a noun expression*
In structure the noun expression is an endocentric construction consisting of one or more head pieces with or without a subordinate piece* When mord than one head piece occurs, no subordinate piece or pieces are in a subordinate relationship to more than one of the head pieces* When the subordinate pieoe is subordinate to a structure that might be analysed as two head pieces, the structure is regarded as a complex head piece, see next section.
Section 10.2.2 describes the structure of the head piece, and 10.2.5 the structure of the subordinate pieoe. In 10.2.4. three types of noun expression are set up on the basis of their function in the clause. 10.2 .5 presents a chart of noun expression structure.

10.2.2 The noun expression head piece

The head piece of a noun expressionis either a simple or complex head

piece. The simple head piece consists o onaof the follcrfingl

1. A single noun, chapter 12,

2. A participle, 11.5*

J. A clause construct, 10.2*5*6,

4* A demonstrative niece, 10,2*5*2*

The complex head piece consists of two or more of any of the above except 4*

These are either in juxtaposition or either a particle of class C or oneof

the verbs itukovo or ako'o, are found between the elements of the head piece*

Symbolization HPs - simple head piece IIPc complex head piece

CO - clause construct

DP — demonstrative piece

N - noun Pep - participle

Examples

1anapone hanajti ovoku

SP

HP. N

'that large house*

noeNsoa raja.

*1 saw It**

NX, IIPs, DP

piho ha*a yoko eno-ne Donato*

_______ N

Pc N

N

__________ HPc____________ 3P

fiX

p. 57 ’Donato’s fathor and mother went**

10*2*9 The noun expression subordinate piece

10.2.5*1 General

The subordinate piece of the noun expression consists of an inner expansion

and/or an outer expansion. The lnnar expansion consists of a demonstrative

pieoe and/or an adjectival piece. The outer expansion consists of a noun

expression functioning as possessor and/or a clause construct and/or an adverbial

expression. The members of the inner expansion always precede the head piece

and the members of the inner expansion follow the head piece*

Thera are, thus, five elements which function as the subordinate piece of a

noun expression* The only restriction in the distribution of these elements

would seem to be that a noun expression seldom occurs wiLh both a possessor

noun expresnion and a clause construct. Noun expressions are more commonly

found v?ith an inner expansion than an outer expansion and it is not often that

a noun expression with more than three expansions is found*

The following sections describe each of these elements in turn.

Symbolization

AdjP - adjectival piece

IE - inner expansion

NXp - naan expression functioning as possessor

OE - outer expansion

Exanples

enepo-ge hanaiti DP______ AdjP SP, IS

ovoku-ne Hele

H

NXp

HP

SP, OB

'that large house of Hele's.*

10.2*5*2 The demonstrative piece

p. 58

The demonstrative piece functions as part of the inner expansion of the

subordinate piece of the noun expression.

occurring, 1A. 1b

b found In

initial place in tha noun expression. One type of demonstative piece functions

as head piece of the NX.

In structure the demonstrative pieoe nay be any of tha following»

1. A demonstrative clitic, 11.7# 2. The particle neko, 11.4.4,

5. A clitic or particle preceded by enepo,

4. The demonstrative particles ra'a and ne'e, 11.4.4.

There are two factors which largely determine of which structure a particular demonstrative piece will consist; firstly the function the demonstra­

tive piece has in the noun expression, and secondly, tha function that particular

noun expression has in the clause of which it is a part. These restrictions on

the structure of a demonstrative piecd are stated as follows< 1. When the demonstrative piece occurs as part of the inner expansion of the subordinate piece of a noun expression,

a) when the noun expression is functioning initially in any clause or as

(part of) a clause inner expansion which occurs before the verb expression, tha DP is always of type 5#

b) when the noun expression is (part of) a clause inner expansion after the

verb expression, the DP is usually of type 1 or 2. If it is of type 5 there is more emphasis on the demonstrative piece.

c) when the noun expression is (part of) a clause outer expansion, the DP is almost always of types 1 or 2 , d) when the noun expression is part of an adverbial expression, the DP IS of any structure,

e) when the noun expression is part of an appositional expansion, the DP is of structures 1 or 5 . Only the clitic -ne and the particle neko, with or without a preceding enepo have been found.

P. 59 2 * ’’/hen tha demonstrative piece occurs as the head piece of a noun expression, a) when the noun expression precedes the verb expression, the DP is of structure

5, b) when the noun expression follows the ve b expression, and includes an

adverbial expression which follows immediately after the head piece of the

noun expression, tha DP is of structures 1, 2 or 5, c) in all other circustances the DP is of stfcuoture 4*

Symbolization Dc - demonstrative clitic

Pd - particle of sub-class

d (demonstrative)* Examples

neesaa enepo neko ya etukuke»

DP__________OE, AX

HP

sP

NX

'Did you see those on the train?' (structure 5)

noesoa neko slnl

DP

N

S P ,I S HP

NX

'he saw the tiger*

(structure 2 )

enepo-ra hoyeno SP .IS.D P IIP.N
NX

*the man'

(structure 5 )

kemoa ra*a'Did you hear that?' NX,HP,DP

(structure 4)

koyuhoa-ne kalivono. S P ,IS ,D P HPtN NX

'He spoke to the child.'

10.2.5*5 Th« adjectival piece

The adjectival piece functions as part of tha Inner expansion of the subordinate piece of the noun expression. When occurring it always precedes tha head piece and follow any demonstrative piece*
In structure the adjectival piece may be any of the folloingt 1. A participle, with or without a negative expansion, 10.5 ,5 ,2 , 2. A verb of class A, sub-class m or q, 11.4.2.2,

40

5# A noun of sub-class q, 11.4.5*4,

4* A noun preoeded by akoti or avoti*

Symbolization AdjP - adjectival piece Nq - noun of class Q

Vra - verb of class a

Yq - verb of class Q

Examples

ovaa ya akoti ovaatl meu*

SP,IE,AdjP

HP* N

NX

'He lived in the desert

yaainanaa-ne DP

upenoku'koeti uto.

AdjP, Pep

N

SP, IB_________ HP

NX

'Hand me the deep plate.

10.2.5.4 The noun expression functioning as possessor

The possessor noun expression functions as (part of) the outer expansion

of the subordinate piece of the noun expression, ^hen ocourring it always

follows imaedintely after the head piece of the NX*

In structure the possessor noun expression consists of a noun expression*

This noun expression may be of widely varying structures though it tends not

to include an outer expansion. It frequently includes a demonstrative piee*

Symbolization

NXp— noun expression functioning as possessor

Exanplas

pi 'atl sakuna rnqako

'two sacks of farinha'

AdjP

N NXp,NX,HP,N

SP.IB HP SP, OB

NX

ivatako ya epavokopeke ovoku urukovoku h oyeno«

Y

HP, N SKP, CC

VX

HP, N

SP, NXp,

Nc

Pp

NX

HP

SP, OB, AX

'He sat down in the shade of the house where the man entered*'

Nkaoo

emo'u
N HP

ltina na*lnu.

N

NXtj

HP,

S P , OE

SP, OS, NXp

Nc, VX________IS, NXo

SST, VC4, HP

p. 41 'I heard the voice of your brother'a blood.'

10*2.5*5 The adverbial expression

lhe adverbial expression functions as part of the outer expansion of the

subordinate piece of the noun expression, tyhen occurring, it follows the

head piece and any possessor expansion*

In structure the adverbial expression may be of any type ae described in

10*4*

Examples

pi'ati
AdjP SP, IE

hoyeno N HP NX

ovakuke
AX SP, OS

ivokovone

....'Two men in the houa died..*'

neesoa enepo neko ya etukuke*

HP, DP

SP. OS, AX

NX

'Did you see those in the train?'

pohuti
AdjP SP, IS

kame oukeke mesa

N

AX

HP______ SP, OB

NX

ikorokovone.

'A squash on the fable fell*'

10.2.5*6 The clause construct

The clause construct functions as either the head piece of the noun expression or as (part of) the outer expansion of the subordinate piece of tha noun expression. When occurring it usually follows any other part of the outer expansion.
In structure various types of clause construct are found as follows. AJ1 clauge constructs have the structure of a ve bal clause of classes 1-6 , or any co-ordinative construct or subordinative construct containing as head and subordinate piece a verbal clause of classes 1-6 , except for the following I

, Clause construct 1

p. 42

Tha hand pieoe of the class 1 clause construct is,

1* A noun derived from a verb stem, or

2. A participle#

Clause construct 2

The head piece of the class 2 clause construct is a verb with indirect aspect,

15.4. Clause construct 5

The head piece of the class 5 clause construct is a verb marked with second stress,

16.2.J* The head piece of a clause construct/ always stands in initial place in

the construct* Apart from this, the structure ofa clause

constructis

identical with that described in sections 8*2*2 - 8*2*7*

Examples

simoa oye'ekotl ya Miranda. HP, Pep Spt OS, AX
NX, HP, CC1 (VC6)

'The one who isa cook in Miranda came*1

kane-ne ketikll ha'l
VX NXo jjc IE

ya enovopetlke kiso'esoti....'But yoursquaezing the

AX OE

fruit into the cup means...'

__ SP,DP

HP___________________________________ SP___ HP, CC2 (V04)

NX

eno lo'o o h oneune* Nc, N IE,NXs

____ CC1, (VC1) HP

HP,N

SP, OE

NX

'There are a lot of crabs, things the water carried*'

10,2.4 Clarsification on the basis of function

10,2.4,1 General In view of the wide diversity of function of the noun expression, and
in order to state the structureof the clause and the relations of the elements vithin the clause, it is usefulto set up two sets of classes of noun expression. Each set of classes is established solely on the grounds of the function of the

p. Aj noun expres-ion as an element of other grammatical units*
The following sets of classes of noun expression are set up* The first sat consists of the demonstrative NX, dNX, and the non-demonstrative, -NX* The second set oonsists of NX functioning as subject, object and indirect object. Noun expressions functioning in verbal clauses belong to one class from both sets of classes except when part of the subordinative piece*

10.2.4.2 Classification on the basis of the demonstrative piece*

Since the presence or absence of a demonstrative piece within the noun

expression makes a difference in the function of that in the verbal clause,

the NX is divided into two classes, the demonstrative NX (dNX) and the non-

damonstrative NX (-NX)* Bvery noun expression that includes a demonstrative

niece is member of the clans dNX. Every NX that does not Include a DP, is

a member of class -ICC*

Examples

koepekoa-ra sini*
Dc N dNX

'The tiger killed him*'

koepeko hoyeno-ra sini* -NX dHX

'The tiger killed the man*'

10.2.4*5 Classification on the basis of function as subject, object and indirect object*
The noun expression functioning as subject (NXs), the noun expression functioning as object (NXo), and the noun expression functioning as indirect object (NXi) are set up in order to sfete the structure of verbal clauses, and they function solely in such clauses. Tne noun expression in non-verbal clauses or functioning as an element of some other grammatical unit is not designated NXa, UXo or NXi.
The NXs and the NXo are formally established on the basis of three interlocking grammatical features. These aret 1. The presence or absence of a demonstrative piece within the NX, 2. The presence or absence of a suffix of order 2a in the verb functioning

p. Mi

es nucleus of the he-i -niece of the verbal cleu?e,

The order of the NX relative to any other KX in the inner expansion of the

head pieoe of the verbal clause*

Tne way in which theae features operate o&n best ba seen by considering the

substitution potentials of the head piece of b class 2 verbal clause, which

consists of a verb expression and two noun expressions. The structures A, B, C

and D are interchangeable.

A VXa

-IIXi JiX2 e.g. ohyonokoa koesoe tani'i. All these structures mean*

B VXad:IX2 NX^

ohyonokoa-ne tapi'i kossos. 'The snake bit the ohicken.'

C VX- —NX2 IIX2 D VX-dNX^ 11X2

ohyonoko tapi'i koesoe ohyonoko ne koesos tapi'i

These four structures may be contrasted to a fifth,

S VXa -IDC2 ‘TX]_

ohyonokoa tapi'i koesoe 'Tne hen pecked the snake*1

In these structures, VXa (10.5*4) is a verb expression vnose nucleus includes

a suffix of order 2a. VX- is a VX whose nucleus does not Include such a

suffix. dNA (10.2.4.2.) is a NX which includes a DP as (port of) its inner

expansion. -MX is a noun expression which does not include a DP.

In each of these structures whether the final NX includes demonstrative

niece or not is not relevant to the function of the NX as subject, object or

indirect object.

These substitutions serve ns formal grounds for the establishment of

two types of NX since NXj_ and !JX2 occur in different places in the structure

and soastinss include a demonstrative niece in & nredictable way. However,

instead of giving those two noun expression, the meaningless labels of 1 and 2,

it seems more reason-ble to call the first, the noun expression functioning

as subject and the second, the noun expression functioning as object.

On the basis of these substitutions it is possible to make eertain grammatical

statements. Within the head piece of a class 2 verbal clause, consisting of

VX Nx and NX,

1. Following a VXa, a -NX is a NXs and a diK is a NXo.

2.

"

a VX-, a -NX is a NXo and a d’JX is a NXa*

p. 45
This may be stated a little differently! Within the head pieoe of a class 2 verbal clause, 1* thefirst -NX after a VXa is a NXs, 2. Thefirst -NX after a VX- is a NXo, 5. Thefirst dNX after a VXa is a NXo, 4. Thefirst dNX after a VX- is a NXs.
Such statements are not meant to imply that the selection of a VXa or VX- determines whether the NX includes a demonstrative expression, Bince the reverse is just as true, i.e. the presence of a DP in the noun expression dete mines whether or not the verb expression includes a suffix of order 2 a. In fact neither of these features can be said to determine the other. Nor can it be said that tvo out of the three features determine the third. For instance, that the selection of a VXa or VX- in conjunction with the order of the NX determines the presence or absence of a DP in the NX.
It would seem better to recognise four interlocking factors; the three listed above (the presence or absence of a demonstrative piece, of a suffix of order 2a, and the order of the NX) together with the function of the noun expressions, whether subject or object. A combination of three out of the four features could be said to determine the fourth. For example, it seema true that the three features, whether the NX is a dNX or a -NX, whether the NX is functioning as subject or object, and whether the VX is a VXa or a VX-, determine the order of the noun expressions following the verb expression. Similarly the three other features may be said to determine whetheror not the VX is a VXa or a VX-.
These four features are not grammatically determined by any other factor, except that some verbs tend to include a suffix of order 2a cf. 14.6.4.2.
Thus far the distinction between NXb and NXo has been made in terms of substitutions possible in a head piece of a class 2 ve bal clause having a structure VX NX NX. Such head pieces also occur with the structure NX VX NX. It is found that stracture A ( VXa NXi NX2 ) is also interchangable with the follovdng structures!

E dNX VX- -NX

enepo-ne koesoe ohyonoko tapi'i

F dNX VXa dNX

enepo-ne koesoe ohyonokoa-ne tapi'i

0 dNX VXa -NX

enepo-ne tapi'i ohyonokoa koesoe

H dNX VX- dNX

enepone tapi'i ohyonoko-ne koesoe

In these structures the meaning is the same as in structures A - D, exoept that

in structures Q and H the initial NX is emphasized and such structures are

teeated as members of class 7 o f the verbal clause, 8.2.8. These substitutions

illustrate that the distinction between NXs andNXo is maintained.

In an analagous way it is possible to distinguish NXs andNXo ia structures consisting of a VX and a single NX, such as the head pieces of class 1 and k

clause. As a general rule the pattern already established is maintained*

That is, when a VXa is followed by a -NX, this functions as subject and when

followed by a dNX, this functions as object, and conversely for the VX-*

Howsver, often there is no possibility of ambiguity and this distinction does

not always operate when no possibility of ambiguity arises. For example in a

head piece such as noeNsoa hoyeno (I saw the man', the NX can only be functioning

as object since the verb which is the nucleus of the VX is in first person form,

see chapter 17.

In structures with one NX, expansion potentials establish the distinction between NXs and NXo. Structure M may be expanded by the addition of NX2 as follows 1

M VXa NX^ N VXa NXj IIX2 0 VXa dNX2 NX^

noesoa hoyeno noesoa hoyeno seno noesoa-ne seno hoyeno

'The man saw him (her).' 'The man saw the woman.{ 'The man saw the vraman*'

’/hen such expansions are possible NX^ is termed NX functioning as subject, and

IIX2 a NXo. . However, structure M might expand differently when NX2 is added, for
example 1

M VXa NX ^ Q VXa M 2 NX 1

noesoa hoyeno noeooa seno hoyeno

'He saw the man*' 'The woman saw the man*'

R VXa dNX 1 N X 2

nodsoa-ne hoyeno seno 'The woman saw the nan.'

p. 47

’•/hen such expansions are possible NX^ 1b termed NX functioning as object and

NXg ft NX functioning as subject.

It will bs seen that the distinction already described for VX NX NX and

NX VX NX structures operates immediately the VX NX structure is expanded.

This would seem to provide a formal basis for establishing the distinction

between NXs and NXo whan only one NX is present in the head piece.

A third type of noun expression is established for the statement of the

inner expansion of head pieoe of verbal clause, the noun expression functioning

as indirect object (NXi)« In this analysis the NXi is regarded as a type of

second object, and it is not set up for any clause which does not have a NXo.

It is possible that in a structure VX NX, the NX has an indirect rather than

a direct object meaning. But this is here treated as a semantic rather than

a structural distinction. It could, however, beregarded as a structural

feature inasmuch as the suffix -ino is found in the verb of the VX when the

NX has an indirect rather than a direct meaning, unless the verb has a root of

class S, 14.5.2.7. In such a treatment two additional verbal clauses would

need to be set up with head pieces consisting of VX NXi and NXs VX NXi.

The NXi may be distinguished formally from NXo and NXs. In apy head piece

which includes three noun expressions, the NX which follows the NXo is the NXi,

(occasion&lly the VX is found between the NXo and NXi but usually the two

are contiguous in the head piece). The NXo and NXs are established on grounds

similar to those already described. In any head piece that includes

two

noun expressions, any NX which is not functioning as NXo or NXs is a

NXI*

10.5 The verb expression

IO.5 .5 I General

The verb expression may be defined structurally and functionally. Every expression which functions as the nucleus of a verbal clause is a verb expression. EJrery expression which has as head piece a verb is a verb expression.

In structure the verb expression is an endocentric construction consisting of a head piece with or without & subordinate pieoe. Section 10*5*2 describes the structure of the head piece and 1 0 *J *5 that of the subordinate piece* 10*5*4 gives details of four types of verb expression which are set up on the basis of their function in the clause* 10*5*5 presents a chart of verb expression structure.

10*5*2 The verb expression head pieo®

The head piece of a verb expression is either a simple or complex head

pieoe. The simple head piece is a single verb whereas the complex head piece

consists of two or more verbs in a co-ordinate relationship. In both types bf

head piece the verb may be simple or complex, 14.2*

Symbolization

HPs - simple head piece

HPc - complex head piece

V - verb

Examples

pihone 'he's gone'

VX, HPs

enepo-ne hoyeno kutipo kuvovo

V

V

NXs

VX, HPc

IB

Nc

SST, VC2, HP

Ituko*ovitl*
NXo IE

'That man believes and trusts God.

Ukahya 'a VX HP, VC6

vansNsea nakaku* VX, HPs NXo SP, VC4, HP SMST1

'I want to buy

Puli kavane aunu koane vane ao nakaku ya Kirandake.

NXfl VX,HFs NXo c

VX, HPs NXo

MX______

IS

Nc

IE Pc

HP, VC2, HP

Pc

Nc

IE_________AX

Hp , VC4, HP____ SP, OS

______________________________________ HP, VC4__________ CKST1

'FUll sold mandioca and boUL'ht rice in tsiranda

IO.5 .5 The verb expression subordinate pieoe

P. 49

IO.5 .5 .I General The subordinate piece of the verb expression consists of any or all of
the following elemental the negative piece, the qualifier piece, and the nominal piece. Bach is described in turn in the following sections.

10.5.5*2 The negative pieoe The negative piece of the verb expression consists of one of the two verbs
ako or avo or of the particle hyoko. If the head piece of the verb expression ia a simple verb, the negative piece precedes the verb and any qualifier piece, IO.5.5 .5 . If tha head piece of the verb expression is a complex verb, it ia most common for the negative piece to precede the whole complex verb. Occasionally it is found between the head piece of the complex verb and the auxilliary, 14.8, and occasional examples are also found with the negative
pieoe both before the head piece of the complex verb and between the head piece and auxilliary. When the complex verb is preceded by a qualifier piece, the negative piece precedes the qualifier and is not found between the head piece and auxilliary of the complex verb.
In any negative piece the verbs ako and avo are never found in first or second person form. When a netative expansion occurs, the verb is always in indefinite mood form when following ako or avo, but in definite mood form with fu ll stress falling on the second stressed syllable when following hyoko. Symbolization IfegP - negative piece Examples avo piha 'he hasn't gone yot* SP, HegP HP, V
vx
hyoko pihe 'don't go!' SP, IfegP HP, V
VX

ako kali pore'o'akoe

NeEP QP

V

SP____________HP

VX

ako pore*o'ako'akoe

NegP V NegP V

SP

HP SP

HP

VX

p. 50 'ha didn't make a little present'
'He didn't make a present'

IO.5 .5 .5

The qualifier piece

The qualifier piece consists of a verb of sub-class Q, 11.4.2.2 which

occurs immediately before the verb functioning as head piece of the verb

expression.

The reasons for regarding the qualifier piece as part of the verb expression

rather than some other element of the verbal clause are as follows. In the

first place wBi6h a negative piece occurs, the qualifier piece is found between

the negative piece and verb functioning as head piece of the vefb expression.

Furthermore there is some doubt whether two out of the three members of the

sub-class Q are in fact free forms except when affixed. ’Than they occur as

qualifier piece they are never af ixed. This grammatical dependence on the

verb which follows them is matched by a phonological dependence since they only

bear full stress occasionally. The combination of qualifier piece and verb

functions as a phonological phrase with the first word huvlng secondary stress*

Syabolization QP - qualifier piece

Examples

kali yuslko(?koetl SP. QP Ha, V
VX

'he's a little better*

ako pohu Nparesapi

NegP QP

V

SP________ HP

VX

'I didn't give you one'

10.J.5*4 The noun piece

p. 51

The noun piece consists of one of the following nouns which oocurs immediately following the head piece* okovo, uti* The verb functioning as head piece is always in third person fora when a noun piece occurs*
Since okovo and uti are nouns, an alternative analysis would treat the sequenoe of verb followed by okovo or uti as VX followed by NX* This analysis is not adopted here for the following reasons.
The main reason for regarding okovo as part of the verb expsssion rather than as a separate noun expression is that the combination VX followed by okovo functions in the clause in Exactly the same way as a VX and not as VX followed by NX. Indeed the whole range of possibilities open to a VX in any ve bal clause is open to the combination of verb and okovo* For instance, in the head piece of a class 1 verbal clause the with structures VX- NXo NXs or VXa NXs NXo, the VX— or VXa nay be followed by okovo without any alteration in the order or relationships of the various parts of the head piece* If okovo were treated as a NX, new structures VX- NX NXo NXs andVXa NX NXs NXo would be set up, or alternatively okovo might be regarded as functioning as NXs* This would lead to two NXs which would be unique in clause structure. Furthermore it is clear that okovo when following immediately after the VX does not function as any other NX following the VX. For instance in a class 2 verbal clause, a NX directly after a VXa functions as subject, and a NXs only follows a VX- when a demonstrative piece is included in the structure of the NXs. This distinction does not apply to okovo which follows VX- or VXa without any demonstrative piece. In fact to treat the sequence verb followed by okovo as VX NX would necessitate a whole series of statements involving the structure of most classes of verbal clause*
Then, too, if okovo is a noun expression it is a very special one consisting of a head piece only since there would be no type of subordinate piece*

p. 52

There are somewhat similar reasons for treating uti an part of tha verb

expression rather than as a separate NX. However, there are some important

differences since clauses including uti do not have a further IIXs. Thus any

NX following uti is always a NXo or NXi and thismeans that there is no need

for the contrast between VX— and VXa linked with tha presence of the demonstra­

tive piece, which operates to distinguish noun expressions functioning as

subject and object.

However uti always follows immediately after the VX which is not true of

other NXs. Normally the structure VXa NXs NXo is interchangeable with the

structure VXa dNXo NXs or VX— NXo NXsbut this is not the case when

uti functions as subject. The NXo always follows uti irrespective what type

of VX occurs; nor is there any demonstrative piece between the verb and util

Nor does uti ever occur before the verb whereas the NXs doas sometime occur

in this position. There is another way in which uti is not comparable to tha

noun expression. Whenever the verb which is the head pieoe has an initial vowel, uti does not occur at all, but a prefix v- occurs, 11.6.5 .

It seems, then, that uti parallels okovo mos closely than it parallels

the usual NXs, and it is, therefore, treated as part of the verb expression.

Symbolization NP - the noun pieca

Bcannles

lnotoyo oNkovo koyuhopeti.

V

NP, N

NXo

HP

SP

Nc, VX

IS

SST, VC2, HP

*1 forgot the book'

aeloke yokovo.

'Be hapnyj •

HP, V SP, NP, N

SST, VC6, HP, Nc, VX

nosaoa uti hoyeno HP, V SP.NP N NXo He, VX________ IS
?c 4 , HP

'we saw the man. *

10*5*4 Glasses of verb expression on the basis of function
It is found that there is a close correlation between the function of the verb expressions in different clauses and their internal structure* In order to state the structure of the clause and the mutual relations of the elements which function within the clause, it is necessary to distinguish four classes of verb expression. These differences of function parallel differences in structure*
The functional differences necessitate four classes of VX, as follows* 1. VX which function in the clause with a dNXs or a NXo following them, cf* 10.2.4* 2. VX which function in the clause with a NXs or a dNXo following them, 5. VX which function in the clause with a NXo and/or a NXi following then, 4. VX which are only followed by a NXo when the order C suffix (-ino^ occurs a9 pnrt of the verb which is the head piece of the VX* These four classes are referred to as VX- and VXa VXino and VXk respectively.
The structural differences are the presence or absence of a suffix of the verb outer expansion of orders 2a and 2bas part of the verb functioning as head piece of the VX and the presence orabsence of a suffix of the verb inner expansion of order C as part of the verb functioning as head piece of the VX*
Every verb expression with a verb as head piece without either a suffix of order 0 or order 2a, belongs to the first class, VX-* Every verb expression which has a verb with a order 2a suffix and no order 0 suffix, belongs to the second class, VXa* Every Verb expression which has a verb with an order C suffix and no order 2a suffix, belongs to the third class, VXino* Every verb expression which has a verb with both an order C suffix and one order 2a suffix belongs to the first class, VX-* Every verb expression which has a verb with both an orderC suffix, andorder 2a and order 5 suffix belongs to the second class, VXa* Every verb expression which has a veb with an order 2b suffix belongs to the fourth class, VXk, unless the verb is of subclass S, 11.4.2*5, when it belongs
to the second class, VXa,

p. 54

Examples

iketusinanaa-ra une.

'Heat this water for mel'

VX, V with -ino (order 6) -nu (order 2a) -a (order 5) 80 functions as VXa

iaukoko 'they hit each other' VX, V with -koko (order 2b) so functions as VXk

10.4 The adverbial expression

10.4.1 General

The adverbial expression is set up primarily on the ba3is of its function in the outer expansion of the clause and the hounexpression. As will be seen from the next section, the majority of adverbial expressionsconsist of a noun exoreesion and in many respects the adverbial expression may be regarded as a noun expression functioning in a particular way. An alternative analysis could bo set up with a noun expression functinging adverbially paralleling the noun expressions which function as subject and object. ThiB is not done sine the structures which are covered by the adverbial expression are not all noun expressions (eg. particles) and since these function similarly it seems useful to group them together. There is a further contrast, too, in that the noun expressions function as pnrt of the inner expansion of the head piece of the clause whereas theadverbial expression functions as part of the outer expansion of the subordinate piece of the clause.

10.4.2 Structure of the adverbial expression

In structure the adverbial expression (AX) may be any of the following* 1. A NX suffixed by -ke, 12.4.5 e.g. ovokuke 'in the house' 2. A NX preceded by one of the particles of class P, 11.4.4. This NX may also be suffixed by -ke. E.G. ya ovoku 'to the house'.
A NX preceded by both the particle ya and one of the other particles of class P in that order, e.g. ya soko Puli 'to FUli'. 4. A NX whose head piece is a noun of sub-class A (adverbial), 11.4.J.J e.£. pihone pitivoko 'he went to the city'

p. 55

5» A NX whose head piece is a noun of subclass L (locational), 11*4.50*

and which includes a noun functioning as possessor, 10.2.5«^. This noun

exT>resr<ion never includes any other subordinate piece, whether inner or outer

expansion apart from this possessor noun expression. The NX functioning ae

possessor nay include a variety of elements including both an inner and outer

expansion. The NX with a noun of sub-class L as head piece may be preceded

by one of the particles of sub-class P and/or suffixed by -l?e. E.g. ya

se'o mesa 'at the table'

6. A particle of sub-class A (adverbial), 11.A.4 e.g. yaye 'here*.

7. Two noun expressions, both consisting of a single identical noun functioning

as head piece. This noun is always of subclass A. This sequence functions as

one unit and cnnnot be divided by other words coming in between the two nouns.

E.g. kase kase omo supu

'day after day he carries mandioca*

The noun expressions functioning in the AX are similar in structure to

other NX but they tend to have a less extended subordinate piece and only

a simple head piece. VJhen a subordinate piece occurs it usually consists of

an inner expansion and less frequently includes an outer expansion. Theoretically

there is no reason why the NX should not include all the elenents describd

in 10.2.5 and there are example e of each of thesa five elements occurring

as part of a NX of some AX. However, there are seldom more than one or two

of these elements in one and the same NX, though none could be said to be

mutually exclusive with any other.

Synbolization

AX - adverbial expression

ITl - noun of subeclass L

Pa - particle of sub-class A etc.

Examples

itunukotike kase Npihotimo

HP, N_________ SP .N Xp HP, V

AX, NX and -ke SP, 05
vc 6

VX HP, Nc

meu *At midday I will go to the pasture' Na AX
SP, OS

lvetaka yaya HP, V Pa Nc,VX CE, AX HP______SP
VC 6

'SithereJ'

p. 56

10.A.5 Claases of adverbial expression

On tha basis of their occurrence in tha outer expansion of the clausa, adverbial expressions are divided into two sub—classes, AXt (time) and AXg (general). All AXt are found to include either a noun or particle of sub­ class At, 11.A.5*5# an;i 11*4.4, while AXg include a noun or particle of class Ag.

10.5

The interrogative expression

The interrogative expression may be defined structurally and functionally.

Bvery expression which functions as (part of) the inner expansion of the class

9 verbal clause or as the nucleus of the class J non-verbal clause and is not

a noun expression is an interrogative expression. Every expression which

includes an interrogative particle is an interrogative expression.

The interrogative expression is an endocentric construction consisting of

an interrogative particle with or without a following noun expression. The

2IX which functions as part of the interrogative expression is very limited in

structure. There is usually only a simple head piece. 'Then more than one

head piece occurs there is no connective. The subordinate piece consists of

either an adjectival piece or a possessor noun expression, no other types of

subordinate piece have been found.

Symbolization

Pi - particle of sub-class I (interrogative) Examples

na Puli
Pi IX

’where's Puli?'

na yi'anoeye
Pi IX

'how many are you?' (lit. what is your number?)

kuti

hanaltl AdjP SP

ovoku N HP

kotohenea

ihunovoti

Pi___________ NX

V

N

IX

VX

NXa

________ IE_______________ Nc_________IB

VC?, H?

'Milch big housa did tha wind dastroy?1

Chapter Eleven The word, word olasses, word suffixes clitics and interjections

11.1 General

This chapter takes up the grammatical word and shows how it is fomally established as a linguistic unit, 11.2. Different classes of word are set up and within thesd classes sub-olasses are established, ll.J-A. One particular verb form, the participle is described in 11.5* Different type of suffix are distinguished and one class of affix described in 11.6. Clitics and interjections are dealt with in 11.7-8*

11.2 The grammatical word

The grammatical word is established on both functional and structural grounds. Every form which may function as a minimal free form is a word, As regards its structure, the tests of rlative fixity of internal structure, absence of interruption by other forms and substitution potentials serve to nark out the word*
The internal parts of Terena words nay be grouped into five categories prefix, root, extensor, class suffix and word suffix* Words may include one or more morphemes from any or all of these categories* The order of morphemes within the word is fixed in that morphemes of these different categories always occur in the order listed abovd* When words include more than one norpheme of the same category in a few instances there is some degree of fluctuation in the sequence of these morphemes but for the most there is still a fixed order*
To a large extent there is absence of interruption of the internal structure of words by other forms, The only exceptions to this are complex vnrKn nn/1 n

verba and secondly, verbs and nouns which include an extenaor since some extensors oan be considered identloal In form with corresponlng free forma with the same meaning. However it remains true that flflr tha large majority of words there is no possibility of interruption by other forms*
In a single word there is normally only one element for which a large number of substitutions may be made* In Terana vrords this is found to be the case since only one element may be replaced by a large number of substitutions whereas other elements In the word may ba replaced by members of a limited series of morphemes only*
These various criteria combine to give the word its status as a linguistic unit in this analysis*
11*5 ’‘ford classes
11*5*1 General
Words function in expressions, clauses and sentence types* Not all words may occur in every class of expression or every clause or sentencer-type* Words may, therefore, by grouped according to the ways in which they funtion
as elements of higher units in the grammatical hierarchy. Similarly, words consist of smaller elements but all words do not consist
of the same type of smaller elements* Words may, therfore, be grouped according to their internal structure. In this analysis words aregrouped into classes of words on the basis of their function as elements of higher units, but it
is found that this grouping correlates closely with the different types of internal structure which are found* Indeed this analysis aims to achieve the maxima congruence between divisions bases on function and those based on structure. However where one takes priority over the other, in the establishing of word classes function comes before structure. In subsequent chapters once functional criteria have established word classes and sub-classes, structual distinctions are treated. Thus, for example, while function establishes the verb as a word class, structure distinguishes verbs of types A and G, sea 14*2*

11.5*2 The verb

p. 59

Every word which nay function aethe headpiece of averb expression, 10.5.2 is a verb. All verbs are found to havecertainstructuralsimilarities which could serve as an alternative definition and which marks them outas a class in contrast to other words. Thus, all verbs include a marker, whether the direct or indirect marker,; all verbs h r:ve a definite and an indefinite mood form*’ and all verbs may be suffixed by a member of the verb suffix guoup of suffixes, see chapter 14*

11.5*5 Th® noun
Every word which msy function as the head piece of anoun expression, 10.2.2 which is not a verb participle or a demonstrative particle, is a noun. All nouns have certain structural similarities inasmuch as they contain a noun stem which may be suffixed by members of the noun and non-verbal groups of suffixes, see chapter 12*

11.5*4 The particle

Every word which may not function as the head piece of a verb expression
or noun expression, is a particle, and in addition every word which functions
in the demonstrative piece is a particle* All particles have certain
structural similarities which mark them out as a class in contrast to other
2
words, for instance, they are not found in first and second person form, see chapter 17, and the contrast between first and secondstress does not operate with particles, 15*4*

11.4 Sub-classes of word classes 11.4,1 General

In general functional criteria are used to establish the different sub­ classes of the various word classes*

11*4*2 Sub-classes of the verb
11*4.2*1 General
Four sets of sub-classes of tho verb are esta lished and all verbs ar; referred to one class from each set of classes.
11.4.2.2 Clasnification on the basis of function in tho Adjective and Qualifier pieces
Sub-class Q includes all verbs which function in the qualifier piece, 5
10.5 .5*5 Qnd o&y be exhaustively listed as follows 1 eno 'many, much'; kali 'little'; pohu 'one'
Sub-class M includes all verbs which function in the adjective piece, 10.2 .5 *5 , (without being in participle form) and may be exhaustively listed as
4 follows 1 pi'a 'two'; mono'a 'three'; yupihova 'very'; koati 'truly'
Sub-class IT includes all verbs ifhich are not members of sub-classes Q and M.
All the members of sub-classes Q and M have roots of class A, 14.5. Since there are so few members of these two classes, separate root classes have not been set up*
11.4.2.5 Classification on the basis of function as connectives
Sub-class C consists of all verbs which function as a connective within tha noun expression, 10.2 .2 , and the veb expression, 10.5 .2 , and may be
5 exhaustively listed as follows* itukovo 'or'; ako'o 'or'; haina 'nor'
Sub-class D consists of all verbs which do not function as a connective, i.e. all verbs which are not members of sub-class C. Since there are so few members of eub-class C, separate root classes are not set up.
11.4.2.4 Classification on the basis of function with the IDCo Sub-class I (intransitive) consists of all verbs which only function

p. 61 in a verbal clause which includes a NXo when thoy contain the suffix of order 0 (-ino), 14.7.2. Such verbs are found with a suffix of order 2a only when a suffix of order 0 is present.
Sub-class T (transitive) consists of all verbs which either occur in a clause v;hich includes an NXo, or include a suffix of orders 1 or 2, l4»7»5»
Sub-class J (general) consists of all verbs which ara not members of sub—classes I and T. The majority of simple verbs and all complex verbs belong to sub-class J.
All cembers of sub-classes I, T, and J have steas of classes I, T and J respectively, see 14.6.4.
11.4.2.5 Classification of the basis of function with the NXi
Sub-class R consists of all verbs which only function in a verbal clause which includes a IJXi when they contain the suffix of order C. l4»7«2..
Sub—class S consists of all verbs which are not members of sub—class R. and may be exhaustively listed, since it is only a snail class 1 poreso 'give'j iko'iparaso 'make a present'.
All the members of olasses R and S which contain a G verb root, have roots of classes GR and GS respectively, 14.J.2.7. All other simple verbs and all complex verbs belong to class R.
11.4.5 Sub-classes of the noun
11.4.5.1 General Two sets of sub-classes of the noun are established and each noun belong
to one class from each set of classes.
11.4.5.2 Cliasificalion on the basis of occurrence in the adverbial expression
Three sub-classes of nouns ara set up on the basis of the occurrence of nouns in the adverbial expression, 10.4.
Sub-class A (adverbial) consists of all nouns which may occur in an AX of structure 4 without being preceded by a pnrticle of class P or being suffixed

p. 62
by -ke. This clans is further sub-divided into At and Ag. Nouns of sub-class At occur in AX of class AXt, 10.4.5, whereas nouns of sub-class As occur in AXg. Hub-class A m y be exhaustively li3t ed as follows t Sub-class At I- kase 'day1; yoti 'night'; iharoti ’morning1 soinae 'year1j kiyakase 'afternoon; kohye 'month* Sub-class Agt- pitivoko 'town'; meu 'clearing; worli'; kavane 'field'; poke'e 'land'; imokovokuti 'church'; Names of places, e.g. Hiranda, Tone (Taunai) Egito (Ggypt) etc.
Sub-class L consists of all nouns which occur as the first noun in an AX of structure i*©» without any subordinate piece except a following NX functioning as possessor. This class may be exhaustively lifctadi akana 'back'; kuku 'Biddle'; kuveo 'v/ithin'; ikene 'behind'; noneku 'in front; oevoke 'within water'; ope 'underneath'; ouke 'on top'; pasamone 'at side'; poiso'o 'other side'; serere 'beside'; sapaku 'among'; sokoyo 'to'; supunu 'at the back'.
Sub-class M consists of all nouns which are not members of sub-classes A and L. The majority of nouns belong to this class.
Jfenbera of clasres L and A and K have noun stems which contain noun roots of classes L and A and M respectively, 12.2.4.
ll.A.J.J Classification on the basis of occurrence in class 4 non-verbal clauses
Sub-class C consists of all nouns which occur as head piece of a noun expression which functions as a non-verbal clause of class 4. All nouns of sub-class C contain a stem which has a noun root of class C, 12.2.5*
Sib-class D consists of all nouns which are not members of class C. Houns of sub-class D contain a stem which has any internal structure except that it does not contain a noun root of class C*
11.4.5*4 Classification on the basis of occurrence in the adjectival piece
Sub-class Q consists of all nouns which occur in the adjectival piece of the noun expression, 10.2.5*5* Class Q is a very small class and consists of

p. 65
only two taombarsj hoyeno •male1 and seno •female1• Sub-class R consists of all nouns which ara not members of sub-class Q.
Sub-class Q nouns have stems which contain a root of class Q, 12.2.5, whereas the members of class R have stem3 of any structure except that thaydo not have a root of class Q.
11.4.A Sub-classes of the particle
Eight sub-classes of tho particle are established on the basis of the function of particles as elements of various grammatical units.
Sub-class A (adverbial) consists of all particles which occur in structure 6 of th6 AX, i.e. with or without the Buffix -ke* Sub-class A is further sub-divided into At and Ag* Sub-class At occur in AXt, 10.4.5, whereas sub­ class Ag occur in AX£* Sub-class A nay be listed exhaustively as follows!
1. * At 1 oeku 'long ago'; novo 'past time'; ko'oyene 'now' Agl yakene, yako, yakono, yakoso, yatikene and yaye 'various locationals*
Sub-class 0 (connective) consists of all particles which occur as connective elements between the head pieces of noun and verb expressions, clauses and ssntence-types* This sub-class m y be listed exhaustively as follows* koane
* 'also', siraoya 'nor', yoko 'and'.
Sub-class Cj (conjunctive) consists of particles which occur as conjunctive elements between clauses and sentence-types, and may be listed exhaustively as follows t ehane 'when'j eha'aso 'as soon as'j epo'oso 'furthermore') ina 'then'; itea 'but'; kene 'contrastive'j naka 'that, so that', nnra'inamo 'lest', ukeane 'from there', vo'oku 'because', upanini''although'; sopo 'however'; whyever (surprise)*
Sub-class D (demonstrative) consists of all particles which occur in denonstrative piece, (structures 2 and 4) and may be listed exhaustively* neko 'that', ne'e 'that', ra'a 'this' neko contrasts with ne'e in being further away in time or space*

Sub-class E (emphatic) consists of all particles which occur in the inner expansion of a verbal clause of class * and may be listed exhaustively. Sub-class E is sub-divided into two classes, El and E2, of. 8.2.9. Sub-class El consists of ene and enomone 'referent to precedingitem', while sub-class E2 consists of ha 'referent forward'.
Sub-class I (interrogative) consists of all particle which occur in AX of s
6
structure 2 and may be listed exhaustively! ihyai 'from' , vo'oku 'on
7 account of' , sanena 'with', sapa 'among', soko 'to', ya 'at, in, on, to*
Sub-class 0 (general) consists of all particles which are not members of one of the other sub-classes. Such particles occur as (part of) the outer expansion of the subordinate piece of the clause, e.g. mani 'desiderative inako 'exclamation of surprise*.
Since the particle stea and root are identical, separate root classes of the particle are not set up. For this readon no correlaton is made between ths sub-classes of the particle Q®t up in this section andthe description of tha particle given in chapter 15 «
11.5 The verb participle
Though not a separate word class or sub-class, one form of the verb requires special treatment. All verbs of every class may be suffixed by the suffix -ti 'non-specific', 14.7»5» SU ch forms are termed particinles, for convenient reference.
The participle functions as a verb or aa a noun. As a verb the participle fora occurs frequently as head piece of a verb expression of a verbal clause. As a noun the participle form occurs frequently as head piecd of a noun expression in any of the clauses or expressions in which a noun expression may bo found, (in section 10.2 .2 it is listed as a head piece of the noun expression in addition to the noun since it is not completely identical with the word class noun.) ’ihen functioning like a noun the participle is found with non-verbal suffixes like any other naan, in contrast to verb forms which are never found with this class of suffixes. It is in fact indistinguishable from

p. 65 any other derived noun as far as its function is concerned*
For this reason, rather than treating such forms aa participles and stating that the participle can occur as head piece of a NX, an alternative analysis would set up a derivational suffix -ti, for such forms as, araukoti kosunakoovitimo 'swimming will make us strong' enet>o-ne araukoti ivokovone 'the swimmer died'* However such a suffix would be homophonous with a veb suffix -ti 'non-specific* as in, araukoti 'he's swi:.aning' or uhya'koeti kase araukoti 'he swims all day'.
There are, thus, two main analyses, either to treat these different -ti forms as homophonous but differing in function and therefore two different word-classes, or to regard this as oneform of the verb which can function in a verb-like or a noun-like manner* The latter has been adopted in this analysis•

11.6 The word expansion 11.6.1 General

All classes of word are found with suffixes* However not all words occur with all suffixes and for this reason suffixes are grouped into three main classes, word suffixes, verb suffixes, noun suffixes, and non-vebb suffixes* '•ford suffixes are found with all three classes of word, verb suffixes are restricted to verbs, noun suffixes to nouns, and non-verb suffixes are found with nouns and particles*
All classes of word are found with suffixes of the word suffix series, though particles are found suffixed less frequently than other classes of word.
Certain nouns and verbs may also be prefixed by the word prefix. The follovdng sections give details*

tU tt 11.6.2

Word euffixation

11.6.2.1 General

There a^e two typos of word suffixalion, termed the Inner and outer expansion and word suffixes are divided into two classes according to their occurrence in these different expansions of the word. All word suffixes follow verb and non-verb suffixes. ’Than they occur suffixes of tha inner expansion precede suffixes of the outer expansion. Of the two groups, suffixes of the outer exnansion are found very much more frequently than those of the inner expansion. Particles have not been found with suffixes of the inner expansion, only nouns and verbs.

11.6.2.2 The word inner expansion

Nouns and verbs may be suffixed by one or more suffix of the word inner

exnansion. These suffixes are arranged in 4 orders. An order may be defined

as a class of mutually exclusive affixes. These orders are lettered 7A, VB,

’TO, and 'TO, lettering from the stem outwards. Suffix of order 'TB only occurs

whan one of the suffixes of order HA is present. Suffixes of order 'TO and ’D

only occur when the Buffix -ino of order WA is present in the word.

No word occurs with more than three suffixes of the inner expansion and

usually only one or two suffixes are found as part of any one word.

Table of orders

WA

?B

’TO

WD

(Tha meanings of these suffixes are

-ino

-vo

-a

-ke

given in l4.7»2-5»)

-po

-koko

-oono

-kono

-nu

-pi

-Vvi

The suffixes of the v/ord inner expansion ore similar to some members of orders

A, B, C, 1, 2 and 5 of the verb expansion series, 14.7.2-J. However they

differ in certain respects, namely,

P. 67

1. Not all verb suffixes of these orders have a corresponging form in tha

word suffix series#

2. SuffixeB of the word inner expansion occur after all other verb suffixeB.

5. Occasional examples are found of words with verb suffixes and corresponding

word suffixes e.g. yoko'itukopinopovo (yoko'ituke -po -ino -po -vo)

4. 7ord suffixes occur with nouns as well as verbs.

5* Sequences of suffixes of the verb expression is quite fixed, and to treat the

noabers of the v/ord inner expansion together with the verb suffixes as one

Beries of suffixes would obscure the normal sequence of verb suffixes* A word such as katikokoinonune 'they 80cm alike to us', illustrates the confusion

which would arise if these suffixes are all treated as one series, kuti verb

-koko verb suffix of order 2, -ino VA suffix, -nu 70 suffix, -ne suffix

of word outer expansion. As verb suffixes -koko and -nu belong to the same

order and are mutually exclusive and furthermore, -ino always precedes -koko

and -nu, cf. 14.7*2-5*

For all these reasons it seems better to set up two series of affixes even

though there is considerable overlapping in the membership of these two

series of suffixes*

Sxanpler

eneno-ra itukepono 'this work he came to do' ituke N, -pnno VJA Sx.

ako so 'esainoa 'there were no children by her*

7 ee'esa -ino 7A Sx, -a 7C

Sx.

ono'uinoake 'his word to him on account of this

eao'u N -ino 7A Sx, -a 7C Sx, -ke 7D Sx

11.6.2.5 ThQ word outer expansion

’■fords of any class o.cur suffixed by from one to three suffixes of the word outer expansion. These suffixes are arranged in orders, numbered outwards from the 8ten of the word. These suffixes when they occur always follow any other suffixes whether word suffixes, verb suffixes or non-verb suffixes.

12

5

-na -iko -kono

-iyeo

Table of orders

A

5

6

7

8

-pepo -oso -su -noe hlko

9 10

11 12

-novo -mea -maka -mo

15 -meku -hi

14 -ko
-ya

-ni

///

-nini

-ayo

-pera

-pini Orders 6 and 8 are occasionally found occurring in the reverse order. Other

sequences for these affixes have been obtaine d in elicited mateial but this

arrangement reflects the examples found in unelicited material* 'ford suffix order 1 consists of one member, -na 'already, contrastive'

na ye'aneye se 'esa 'how many children does he have?' (i.e* may still have more)

contrast na ye'aye se'esa 'how many children does he have?' (no more expected)

pihone 'he's just goni "ord suffix order 2 consists of 6 members 1

iko 'still, yet'; araukotiiko 'he's still swi. ning'j mopo'aiko 'still three')

-iyeo 'used to but not now', ovoIGcuiyeohiko 'my old houses'; ihikasovoneiyeo

'ha used to study' (but doesn't now)

ll 'condition contrary to fact* eneponi yesaa *if you had known* (but you didn't)

ntmimea ke'eye 'whatever w ould have happened to you?' -nini 'uncompleted, in vain'; Mpihonini *1 went in vain', kalihanini

itovone 'it's almost ripe*

-pera 'information one should know' (this suffix only occurs rarely)

naperanea 'wherever is it (something lo?t)?'

-pini 'information forgotten' (this suffix occurs infrequently) napini pihea

'when did he go?'j yuma, keepinl 'did you say, 'yuma'?' 'brd suffix order 5 consists of one member, -ikopo 'then, as a result',

na kosti'ikcmo akoino yakutipoa 'why, then, didn't you believe him?'

(this euffix occurs infrequently')* 'ford suffix order h consists of one member 1 -pepo 'truly, really J

V-tukupepo 'its really a dog'f kise'epepo 'you said indeed'

p. 70
’•fords occur with up to t h r ‘a word suffixes irrespective of the number of suffixes of other classes which they include, e.g. unaNkopinopeatim^kamo •i will keep it again for you', consists of a verb with 6 verb suffixes and 2 word suffixes, -op- -ino - 0 -pi -a -ti (verb suffixes see chapter 14) and -maka 7 Sx order 11, -mo \1 Sx order 12. so'opeponotiikomakano 'he will still 30 and visit also', consists of a verb with 2 varb suffixes, -pono and -ti, and thrae word suffixes, -iko 7 Sx order 2, -maka 7 Sx order 11, -mo 7 Sx order 12.
Suffixes of tha word outer expansion occur affixed to thefirst member of the verb expression when that expression includes a negative piece, 10.5 .2 . '/hen tha verb expression does not include a negative piece word suffixes often occur on the word preceding theverb expression if thatword is not part of a noun expression functioning a3 subject or object or indirect object. Apart from these instances the word suffix occurs on the verb expression head piece.
Similarly in the case of a noun expression the suffix of the word outer expansion occurs on tha head piece of the noun expression or any word of the noun expression that precedes the head piece and that is not part of the deaonstrative piece, see 10.2 .
It would seem that these suffixes of the word outer expansion can be considered functionally as belonging to the expression rather than to the word. However, since it is more convenient to state their occurrence in terms of the word, and since phonologically they are dependant on the word, they have been presented here as word suffixes. The non-verbal suffixes, 12.4, also function as part of the expression not just as part of the word, though they, too, ora stated here In terras of the words (nouns and particles) with which they occur.
Examples ......
II.6.5 ’'ford prefixation
All nouns and verbs which have an initial vowel may occur prefixed by the word pre'ix v- 'first person plural', cf. chapter 17» In the case of

p. 71
verbs of class A which only have an initial vowel in the indefinite mood fora, this prefixation by v- is found only for the indefinite mood forms, 1 5 *2 . Examples vesoa 'we know it1; komomo uti 'we looked*) ako vokomomo 'we didn't look* Examples akonepepooso piha 'Indeed he didn't go' noisoa seno hanaltinaka kalivonona 'he saw the woman and her big child'
11.7 The clitic
One group of morphemes is treated aa a group of clitics rather than as a word affix. This group ia a very small class of demonstrative morphemes, consisting of -ne 'that', and -ra j'( 'this'. These morphemes are treated as clitics since they are phonolojrically dependent on the preceding word but grammatically dependent on the following word.
These morphemes are not words, either phonolojrically or grammatically. They are not free forms but are paralleled by the free forms, ne'e and ra'a. They are never marked by any kind of stress*
That these morphemes cannot be regarded ae part of the word that follows thea In spite of their grammatical function (they function as the demonstrative piece of the noun expression) is clear in particular from the stress system. Stress does not change from one syllable to another in the case of words following them as it does when prefixes occur. For instance a word with second stress on the third syllable will still have stress on tho third wylluble when extended by a prefix, so that the stress of tho prefixed form falls on the syllable preceding the syllable marked by stress in the unprefixed form. In the case of wordr preceded by ne and ra, there is no such change in the placement of stress under any circumstances*
Ilor can these morphemes be regarded as suffixes of the form preceding the noun expression since if so under certain circumstances they would be marked by stress (when functioning as the third syllable of a word with second stress on the third syllable), but this is never the case*

p. 72 In these circumstances it b u b s best to regard them as clitics which occur after all tha suffixes of the word upon which th<?y are phonologically dependent.

11.8 The exclamation

There is another snail group of morphemes which do not have the character­

istics that mark the phonological or grammatioal word. This is a small grap

of exclamatory morphsmes, o and ehe •

Only one phonological word consists of a single V unit in Terona and no

other word has the combination of nasalization and glottalization that marks

ehe?. These morphemes are never marked by the normal stresn features of the

word since they only occur in the final place of the phonological clause and

are always marked by one or other of the tune extensors.

These morphemes dd not have a structure or function comparable to the

grammatical word. They are nevef found affixed in any way. In this they

contrast with the pasue form ka'aye *er...' which is treated as a particle

since it is found suffixed by word suffixes, e.g. ka'ayemo. These morphemes

do not function as an element in any other grammatical unit except the exclamatory piece, 9 .7 , which is treated as an extensor to the sentence-type, 9 »5 *

Perhaps both phonologically and grammatically these morphemes could best

be regarded as a type of sentence clitic*

Symboliation Sxc - exclanation

Example a

emo'u sini yakeneeye o

'the sound of the tiger coming! Oh)'

kaunakoa neko suikenahiko ehe? 'when they had prepared their bows, ehi'

Chapter twelve

The noun

12*1 General

P* 75

The noun functions as part of the noun expression and adverbial expression, 10.2 and 10.4. In structure the noun consists of one or more morphemes. The noun cay be affixed by one or more of the affixes of the word expansion, 11 .6 . Nouns consist of a noun stem with or without one or mou suffix of the noun and non-verbal series of suffixes, 12.4. Noun stems contain a root element with or without a suffix. The following sections give ditails of noun roots, stems and of the various series of suffixes which are found within the noun*

12.2 The noun root

12.2.1 General

Every morpheme which may function as the root element in noun stems of classes 1-4 is a noun root, 12.p.2 .
Roots are divided into eight sets of sub-classes. Each set of sub-classes constitutes a cro3 e-classification of noun roots and is not a further subclassification of a previous division. Every noun root, therefore, belongs to one class from each of these sets.

12.2.2 Classification on the basis of occurrence in noun stems

Class M l only occur in noun stems of class 1, 12.$.2

n

NR2

i

nun

it

n

a

2

it

M

H

H

it

H

nit

^

1

"

1* " "

M

"" 1 and 5 ,

H

11

H

H

If

It

Nil

1

M

4«

Ex-'iiaples hoyeno ’man1 HRl tete- ’bumpy' IJR^

kili

’a species of bird* HR2

ope

'bone' NR4

ha’a 'father' HRJ?

p . 74

Naan roots of classes 2 and 5 are bound roots, while othar roots aro

froe forras* A snail number of roots belong to those classes. The majority of

roots belong to class 1 thaagh class 4 is also quite large*

Noun roots of class 5 occur with various members of the noun derivational

suffix series in stems of class 4, 12*5*2* However not all class 5 roots occur

with every derivaional suffix* Various sub-classes of noun root are therefore

set up*

Sub-class NR4e occurs with -eno, and may be listed exhaustively! hoveno-

'old woman*, yekote- 'old man', esovi 'older sibling of same sex*

ayo 'brother of a woman', euko ekuseno 'uncle'; amori amoseno 'grandchild'

Sub-class NR5I occurs with -kene and may be listed exhaustively! ha'a 'father'

eno 'mother*; ayo 'brother of woman'; inikone 'friend'; iyenosapa *relation*»

Sub-class

occurs with -ku and may be listedexhaustively!

hyeve 'foot*, kuveo 'inside*, mesa 'table/ none

'face', ope 'bone',

poiso'o 'other side', se'o 'beside'*

Sub-class NR5S occurs with -saka and may be listed exhaustively! ha'a 'father*

eno 'mother*, mokesa *sistor of man*

Sub-class NP^Sp occurs with-sapa and may be listed exhaustively l inikone

'friend', mokesa 'sister of a man', peyo 'domesticated a n i m a l s e ' a s a

'child', iyeno- 'relation'*

Sub-classes I, S and Sp overlap partially; all of sub-class S belong to

classes I or Sp, all of sub-class I belong to sub-classes S or Sp, but not all

of Sp belong to the other sub-classes* There is, thus overlapping between

tha Bub-classas of noun root class 5 but not between the root classes 1 - 5 *

12.2.5 Classification on the basis of occurrence in nouns of classes C and D

Nouns of class C, 11.4*5*5 contain stems which have as root element a noun root of class C, whereas nouns of class D contain stems of any internal structure except that the root element is never a noun root of class C* Noun roots are, therefore, divided into two classes, as follows! Class NRO occur in stems of nouns of class C,

^ Class HRD occur in staas of nouns of class D*

p. 75

Sub-clasB C oan ba exhaustively listed i

tano 'girl' (address form)

hoyeno 'man*

hemeno •fellow' (address form)

Beno •woman*

tata'a *father* (address form)

All flouns which are the names of persons and places are members of thisclass*

12*2*4 Classification on the basis of occurrence in nouns of classes A, L and M

Class NRA occur in stems which function as nouns of class A, 11.4*5*2

*

huh

n

h

n n ii n ^

*

URM h m w

h

h

hh nn

Examples kase 'day*, has root of c'lss NRA, hoyeno 'man', root of class NRM akene 'back', root of clas s NHL.

12.2.5 Classification on the basis of occurrence in nouns of classesQ and R

Class HRQ occur in stems H NRR

which function as nouns of class Q, 11.4.5 .4

n

II

MHHHpt

Examples

seno *fonale' has root NRQ, ipe 'bed* has root of class NRR.

12.2.6 Classification on the basis of occurrence in noun stems of classes P and 0

Noun roots are divided into three classes on the basis of their occurrence in nouns stems of classes Pi, P2and 0, 12.5 .4.

Claes NRP1 occurs in stems of class Pi,

h 2IRP211

mh n n

p2

« IIRO "

n 11

11 «

q#

Examples

hoyeno •man* has a root of class NRO, setl 'tale* has a root of class IIRPl

kau *slave* has a root of class NRP2.

12.2*7

Classification on the basis of occurrence in noun stems of classes N, T, E and Z

p. 76

Noun roots aro divided into four classes on the basis of their occurrence

in stems of classes N, T, E and Z. 12.J.5*

Class NRNoccurs instems of class N,

h

IJR T

^

it

ti

tt

i t «j i

n

NRE

ii

n

»

it

n

n

n it n

hg
uz

Examples nevoe 'cotton' has root of class URN, hyeve 'foot' has a root of class NRT, iha 'name* has root of class NR3, ayo 'brother of woman* has root of class NRZ

12.2.8 Classification on the basis of occurrence in class A5g cores

Noun roots are assigned to one of two classes on the basis of their occurrence in class A5g cores, 14.4*5 Class NRG occur in class A5g cor^s,
" NRH do not occur in class _A5g cores* Class NRG is a very small class# piti'i 'dirt' root of class NRG, yeno 'wife', root of class NRH

12.2.9 Classification on the Jiasis of noun stem stress classes

Noun roots atfe assigned to one of two stress classes on the basis of the

stress class of the stems in which they occur, 4*5.6*

Class NR31 occurs in stems of stress class L

w NRS2 *

h nwb

it 2

Noun root class NRS1 is divided into two sub-classes on the basis of the

occurrencc of first stress on nouns which have stems containing roots of class !W51 r_ni which include the Buffix -na, 12*4.2* Sub-class NRSla occurs in nouns marked by first stress on the second

syllable in such circumstances

Sib-class NRG lb 2

"B

"

H first stress on the first syllable

in such fcircuQstances. It is found that most nouns of foreign origin belong to class NRS1 rather than clans 1IR32 and to sub-class NRSlb.

Examples lapi laplna lapinati NRSlb 'pencil* ipe ipena ipenatiNHSla 'bad' se'esa NRS2 'child*

p. 77

12.5 Tha noun stem 12.5*1 General

Any morpheme, or gnoup of morphemes, which function ag a noun without further affixation, is a noun stem.
Noun stems may function as a noun without further affixation or may include suffixes of the noun inner and outer expansions, 12*4.
In structure noun stems consist of a root element with or without some suffix. Noun stems are divided into classes on the basis of their internal structuri Soae noun stems include n noun derivational suffix. Noun stems are also divided Into classes on the basis of their distribution with the affixes of the noun inner expansion.

12.5*2 Classification on the Jjasis internal structure

Noun stems contain a root element which may or may not be followed by

oufflxes, as follows l

Sten class 1 consists of single noun root, e.g. seno ’woman',

11 B

2 H ” a reduplicated noun root, e.g. vakavaka 'type of buttergly'

""

5 H " a noun root followed by an extensor suffix, e.g.

opopu'i ’skull’, (ope

NR 'bone', -pu'i extensor 'round')

Stem class 4 consist s of a noun root followed by a noun derivational suffix of

class N, 12.5.5 e.g. hyeveku 'foot place* (hyeve NR 'foot*,

-ku NdSx of class IJ) Sten class 5 consists of a verb root witha noun derivational suffix of class

V, 12.5.5, e.g. otoniu'something cut do’?n* (otopi- VR *cut

down*, -u NdSx of class V)

p. 78 Stem class 6 consists of a particle followed by a noun derivational suffix of
class P, 12.5*5, e.g. sokoyo 'with* (soko particle -yo UdSx of class P)
12.5.5 The noun derivational suffix
There are three classes of noun derivational suffix, each class occurring with different root elements within the noun stem. Noun derivational suffix class N occurs with noun roots and consists of six members 1 -sno occurs with n6un roots of class 53, 12.2.2, e.g. hovenoeno 'old woman* -ikene 'deceased*, occurs with roots of class 4l, e.g. haikene *his deceased
father * -ku 'location*, occurs with roots of class 5K» e *S* nesaku *place at table* -aaka 'adopted or step relative', occurs with roots of class k S, e.g.
ha'asaka 'step-father* -sapa 'plural*, occurs with roots of class 5 Sp, e.g. se'esasapa 'children* -sea -sii 'thing given to someone* -3ii occurs with forms marked by second parson, 17, -sea occurs elsewhere. These affixes are always followed by -ke and sometimes onoof the a series, -a, -nu, -pi and -Vvi occurs between these two morphemes. B«g. lHpovose&ke 'my clothes which have been given me.' yakenesiivike *y >ur song given us*. There is a close parallel between this construction and the series of verb suffixes, verb classifier, marker, outer expansion orders 2 and 5 , cf. 14.6-7* However these two series of affixes
are kept separate since the verb series contain many more suffixes which do not occur in this series of noun suffixes. Rirthermore the verb construction with classifier and marker is a free form, whereas this noun construction cannot function as a free form without the suffix -ke. To treat these suffixes tis one series would lead to a very confused statement and one which would obscure the normal structure of noun and verb alike* Ihe overlapping membership of the various series of affixes is an interesting feature of Terena, c.f.
11.6 .2.2 .
’bun derivational suffix class P occurs with particles and consists of one

member» -yo 'nominalizer', e.g. nekoyo 'at that place or time'. Noun derivational suffix class V occurs with verb roots and consist? of nine members t -e -u 'nominalizer', -u occurs after e and 1, -e occurs elsewhere. This suffix occurs with verbs of stem cluse E, after the verb base and replacing the verb classifier and marker. E.g. eto'ji 'the person told', otopiti 'the thing cut down'. -ine 'sing of...' occurs with all verbs, replacing the verb marker.E.g. nlklne 'sing of eating') oye'ekine 'sing of cooking'• -ke 'nominallzer', occurs with verbs of all classes after the suffixes of order 2 of the outer expansion. E.g. vepemopike 'our question to you', suna'inoke 'on account of something strong'. Ihis suffix can either be regarded as homophonous with the suffix -ke, order 5 of the verb outer expansion, or as the satao suffix, the one suffix having two functions. -keno 'habitual doer...', occurs with verbs of all classes, afterthe veib marker. It always occurs with forms including -ti 'non-specific' suffix order4 of the verb outer expansion, 14.7»5» The sequence ko or ke followed by -keno reduces to -keno. (e.g* ituke -kenoti itukenoti, contrast, poreso -kentoti poresokenoti) E.g. ko'itukenotl 'one who always works, isukenotl 'one who always
fights1. -ko 'nominalizer', occurs with verbs having a stem class K, 14.6.4*5, after the verb stem. E.g. elokeko *joy' -ku 'place where, or time when' occurs with verbs of all classes, after order 5 of the verb outer expansion, vfoen tha direct narker is presentthe noun means, 'the tine when...'. E.g. iaokovoku 'church (lit. the place where they sing)' imokeovoku 'the time when they sing'. -ne 'nominalizer', occurs with verbs of stem class N, 14.6.4.5, following the verb base and replacing the verb classifier and marker. E.g. etetune 'cut things', ikasu'ine 'sorrow'. -pe 'time of', occurs vflth verbs of all classes, after suffixes of order 5 of the verb outer expansion. E.g. kaha'ine 'the time of ripe fruit', isukope •the time of fighting'

-pe ' i n s t r u m e n t o c c u r s with verbs of all classes, after suffix of order 5

of the verb outer expansion* E»g» enovope *cup (lit* instrument for drinking

lsukope 'weapon*. This form is hamoohanoaa

preceding HdSx -pe

'time when'.

12.5*4 Class ification on the basis of prefixation

M l noun stems are divided into two classes,P and 0,

on the basis of

whether they occur with a prefix or not, 12.4.4.

Class 0 stems never occur with a prefix,

*

P stems occur with a prefix and are sub-dividdd as follows i

Sub-class Pi stems occur with a prefix when suffixed by a member of orders A or

B of the noun inner expansion.

Sub-class P2 stems occur with or without a prefix only when Buffixed by order B

of the inner expansion but otherwise occur prefixed.

Class P is a Email class, some 15 members have so far been found and of these

only three belong to sub-class P2.

Stems of class P have noun roots of class P as described In 12.2.6.

Stems of class 0 which have a noun root as their root element have a root of

olass 0. Class 0 stems are found with the full range of internal structure as described in 12.5 *2 *

possibilities of

12.5*5 Classification on the basis of suffixation

Noun stems are assigned to one of four classes on the basis of their distribution with the noun suffixes of orders A and B as follows t Stem class N consists of all noun stems which are found with the suffix -na order A, Stem class T consists of all noun stems which are found with the suffix -ti order B, Stem class E consists of all noun stems which are found with the suffix -a
order A, Stem class Z consists of all noun stems which are never found with any suffix of the noun inner expansion*

p. 81

The majority of nouns belong to stem class T* Only three examples have

baen found of stem class E. It is found that these stem classes correlate

with the internal structure of noun stems as follows i

all stems including a noun root of olass N, 12.2.7 belong to stem class N,

""

"

m ■ * H * j belong to stem olass T,

"H

"

t i H H H M g belong to stem class E,

tt

H

it

a

it

it n

**Z"

Hit

it

All other stems belong to stem class T. Noun stems containing roots of

foreign origin, whether partially or wholejry assimilated belong to stem class N*

Stems of class N are divided into three sub-clanses on the basis of their

occurrence with the variant forms of the suffix -na, 12.4.2*

Sub-class Na occurs with -na,

"

Nb

""

-sa,

"

Nc

"■

-a.

A very large majority of class N stems belong tosub-class Na, So far only

7 examples of sub-class Nb stems and 19 examples of Bub-class Nc stems have

been found.

Stems of class Nc of some phonological structures have the following allomorphic forms when suffixed by -a,
1. Stems with o as nucleus of the penultimate syllable have a form identical a
to the usual form except that all the vowels are e.g. soporo, sagara ’corn',
1. Stems with o as nucleus of the final syllable have a form identical to
the usual form of the stem except that the last vowel is e, e.g. suruno, Eurunea 'vessel*,

5« Two stems v?ith a vowel cluster involving the last two syllables of the otem have forms as follows* nevoe -neva, 'cotton*J kurihoe -kurihe 'smoke*• One stem of class Na has been found with an alternate form when suffixed by ■na. In this case final o is replaced by a, uto, utana 'plate'.

12.4 Tho noun expansion

p. 82

12.4.1 General

The noun expansion is divided into tha inner and outer expansion. Tha noun inner expansion consists of suffixation by suffixes of the noun series, whereas tha noun outer expansion consists of suffixation by suffixes of the non-verbal series of suffixes. Noun prefixation is also treated in this section since it is for the most part a feature linked v/ith tha noun inner expansion.

12.4.2 The noun inner expansion

Noun stems may be extended by the addition of one or two members of tha

noun suffix series. Suffixes of the noun inner expansion are arranged in two

orders which are lettered A and B, lettering outwards from the stem in the

sequence in which they are found when more than one suffix occurs.

Noun stems of class T are never found with more than one suffix of the

inner expansion. Noun stems of classes N and E usually occur wih only one

suffix but occasionally occur with two. The infrequency of occurrence with

two suffixes probably reflects situational rather than structural factors.

Order A comprises two members t

-na 'possession marker' -na -sa -a -na occurs with noun stems of class

Na, -sa occurs with noun stems of class Nb, —a occurs wih noun stems of

class Nc. E.g. kasena 'his day' Npoke'esa 'my country'

-a

'non—possession marker' ihae 'name' (contrast the 'your name')

Order B comprises one member (

-ti 'non-specific marker' hyeveti 'a foot'

Suffixes of orders A and B are added to the prefixed stems of class Pi

noun stems and to tha unprefixed stems of class 0 noun stems. Suffix of order

B is added to the prefixed or unprefixed form of class P2 stems.

12.4,5 Tho noun outer expansion

p. 85

All noun stems may be extended by the addition of one or two members of

the non-verbal series of suffixes. Suffixes of the noun outer expansion are

arranged in two orders numbered outwards from the stem in the sequence in which

they occur*

Order 1 comprises one membert

-ke 'at, in, on', occurs with nouns of all classes and also particles*

-ke is suffixed to the head piece of the noun expression, except that when the

head piece is preceded by an adjectival piece, -ke is usually found suffixed

to the word functioning as adjectival piece* As with members of the word outer

expansion, this suffix may be regarede as a suffix of the whole expression,

however -ke is al9o found suffixed to particles which do not function within

any expression, cf. 11.6.2*5. Example ovokntike 'at thehouse' hanaitike

ovokutl 'at the large house'. The sequence of word ending with ke and

followed by -ke non-verbal suffix usually reduces to a single ke, e.g.

vanuke -ke vnnuke 'in the sky'*

Order 2 comprises three members!

-inavo 'diminuative affectionative' occurs with nouns of all classes

-yeovo

and also with particles*

Examples ovollkuinayo or ovoNkuyeovo 'my dear little house'

nesanainavo 'his little table' mokesayeovo 'his dear sister'

-Vne 'porticularizer, that very' V is vowel of same quality as preceding

vowel. This suffix occurs with nouns of all classes and also with particles.

Examples yayekeene 'right over there' (yaye -ke -Vne)

esoviine -ne kalivono 'the very brother of the child'

12.4.4 Noun prefixation

p. 84

A snail class of nouns are found with a prefix, 12.J.4 namely nouns of class P. The prefix which occurs with class P noun stems is determined as follows I 1. Stems with u as nucleus of the initial syllable are prefixed by / i-, 2. Stems with a vowel cluster involving the first two syllables are prefixed by e-, J. In the case of the stem sene the prefix is o4. All other stems ore prefixed by a vowel of the same quality as the vowel of the first syllable of the stem.
In the majority of cases noun prefixes only occur when there is also a suffix of order A. However with stems of class P2, a prefix occurs together with the suffix order B or without any suffix. Examples seti 'stofcy', Noun stem of class N and PI; esetina ^his story', e-P, seti N stem, -na NSxAt esetinati 'somebody's story', e-Px, seti N stem, -na NSxA, -ti IISxB. kau 'slave' (always occurs either prefixed or suffixed) N stem of classes T and P2 akau 'his slave' a-Px, kau N stemt kauti 'a slave', kau-N stem, -ti NSxBj akauti 'somebody's slave', a-px, kau N stem, -ti ITSxB.

Chapter thirteen The particle

lj.l General

The particle functions as an element of various grammatical units, tha noun expression, the adverbial expression, the interrogative expression, tha demonstrative pieoe, the clause, and tha sentence-tyne.

p. 65

In structure tha particle consists of a Darticle stem which any be affixed

by a member of the non-verbal suffixes 12,4*5 and by the members of the word

suffixes of the word outer expansion, 11*6.2*5* Bachparticle consiste of

a

particle root and no other elements* Separaterootclasses are not, for the most

part set up, since there are no structural reasons for such classes and the

functional distinctions between particles have been handled at the word level

in the establishment of sub-classes of ^articles, 11,4.4. However, particle

roots are divided on the basis of occurrence in noun stems and on the basis of

stress•

15.2 Classification on the basis of occurrence in noun stems

A few particle roots occur as the root element in noun stems of class 7t 12.J.2. On this basis particle roots are divided into two classes as follows* Class N particle root consists of all particles which occur in noun stems of class 7 together with -yo 'nominalizer•, and may be listed exhaustively* soko *to', neko 'that1* Class 0 consists of all particles which are not members of class N, e.g. yaye •here*, ko'oyene 'now'*

lJ.J Classification on the basis of stress classes.

Pafticle rootB are divided into two classes on the basis of the occurrence of stress on the particle stems, 4.5 .7 . 2 as follows*

Particle roots of olass Si occur in particle stems of class 1,

it

11

«

n Q2 m u

w

n

n

it 2 ,

Examples meku clas3 S2 'long time ago', ko'oyene class Si 'now', yaye clars Si 'here' epo'oso class S2 'furthermore', simoya class S2

'nor', itoa class Si *but'

Chapter fourteen The verb
14.1 General
The verb functions aa the head piece of the verb expression. In structure all verba consist of at least two morphemes, and usually at least three. The verb mny be affixed by one or more suffixes of the word expansion, 11.6. The verb consists of a verb stem, 14.6, with or without one or more suffix of the inner and/or outer verb expansion, 14.7. Verb stems consist of a noun stem or verb base, 14.5, together with a verb marker and in some instances, other elements. Verb bases consist of a verb core, 14.4, and in some cases other elements. Verb cores consist of a verb root, 14.J and in some cases other elements.
Verbs ars divided into simple and complex on the basis of their internal structure, 14.2 Simple verbs are divided into two classes on the basis of their internal structure, 14.2.
Throughout this chapter...... (ao below)
14.2 Simple and comnlex, class G and A verbs
'No types of verb are set up on the basis of their internal structure. Complex verbs include a verb auxilliary, 14.9, whereas simple verbs do not. FUll details of the structure of complex verbs are given in section 14.8. Sections up to 14.8 describe the structure of simple verbs, though it will be seen that most of the statements made also apply to complex verbs. There are very many more simple than complex verbs in any given material, This division into simple and complex verbs correlates with both phonological and grammatical features, since tho complex verb is congruent to the phonological class of complex word,
The simple verb is divided into two main classes on the baslB of internal structure. Verbs with a stem of class G, 14.6 are termed G verbs (general), while verbs with a stem of class A are termed A verbs (adjectival). All verb steas consist of a verb base and marker; however, G stems always include a verb classifier whereas A stems do not.

The following sections deal with the various elements of the verb in turn, working up from the root to tha stem and verb expansion*
Throughout this chapter the description of the verb is made on the basis of the definite mood farm of the verb. There are, in fact, two moods, definite and indefinite and full details are given in chapter 15*

14*5

The verb root

14*5*1 General

Every morpheme which occurs as the nucleus of class G 1, G2 or Al verb cores, ie a verb root.
Verb roots are of two olasses, G and A, depending on their occurrence in verb cords*
Roots of both classes are further sub-divided in several waya on the basis of occurrence as elements of some higher grammatical unit*

14.5.2 Clasn G roots

14.5.2.1 General

Every verb root which occurs as nucleus of class Gl or G2 cores but does

not occur as nucleus of olass Al cores, is a member of class G*

All class G roots are bound forms requiring at least two suffixes

A

tho verb classifier and the verb marker, 14*6*

Olass G roots are divided into a number of crisis-crossing classes*

These divisions constitute a complete cross-classification of root, not a

sub-classification within a major classification. Thus every G root is

assigned to seven classes from these seven sets of classes. In some instances

there are sub-divisions within the classes and these are, in contrast, a

Bub-olassification*

lA.J.2.2 Classification on tho basiB of prefixation

p. 88

ClasB 0 roots are divided into three olasses on tha basis of their

prefixation, aa follows*

Class 01 roots sometimes occur with a prefix, l4«5»5

* 02 " always

H

tt tt it except when part of a complex verb,

"H GniJ I never

H

II M

H•

Claes 01 roots are sub-divided as follows I

Ola roots occur with prefix order 1 and/or prefix order 2,

01b H

it

n

«

"

1 or

"

"

2,

Qlo "

n

tt

a

ti 1 o n l y f

Old "

«

■

"

" 2 only,

Gle "

"

“

"" 1 and prefix order 2 only when order 1 also pres

Qlf H

ft

tt

H

(1

£

H

Glass Gl roots are also sub-divided as follows 1

H« HHIt2 M

Glk roots occur with the ko- form of prefix order 1, lA«5»5

Gil

t

"

n«

«

tt

There is no clear cut correlation between classes a-f and i and k. It is found,

however, that almost all k initial verbs belong to class i. The majority of

roots belong to class Glk.

Clas3 G2 roots are sub-divided as follows*

02a roots occur with prefix order 1 and/or prefix order 2 ,

G2b "

"

""

* 1 or

"

" 2.

Excmples
nara- ’break1 Gib root, lmo- 'sleep* Glc root, tetu- 'cut* Old root,

plru- 'nudge* Gle root, kehyo- 'snap' Gif root, pasi- 'press*

G2a root, tuvo- 'stir' G2b root.

14.5.2.5 Classification on the basis of occurrence in A2 cores

Class G roots are divided into two classes on the ba-is of whether or not they function as the nuclei in class A2 cores, 14.4.5, as follows*

l4*5*2«2 Classification on tha basia of prafixation

p. 88

Claes 0 roots are divided into three olasses on tha basis of their prafixation, aa follows I

Class 01 roots sometimes occur with a prefix, 14.5*5

" G2 " always
" 05 " never

"

» « it except when part of a complex verb,

H " " H.

Class Gl roots are sub-divided as follows I

Gla roots occur with prefix order 1 and/or prefix order 2,

Gib "

»

*m

» 1 or

*

8 2,

Glo «

"

"

«

" 1 only,

Old H Gla «
h

"

*

*

«

«

*

h

«

n

" 2 only,

" 1 and prefix order 2 only when order 1 also present

tt 2 M

"

»

1H

*t

2 rt

"

Olass Gl roots are also sub-divided as follows!

Glk roots occur with the ko- form of prefix order 1, l4.5«5

Gli N

"

B W i—

nit

it

m

^

There is no clear cut correlation between classes a-f and 1 and k. It is found, however, that almost all k initial verbs belong to class i. The majority of roots belong to class Glk*

Clas3 G2 roots are sub-divided as follows!

02a root9 occur with prefix order 1 and/or prefix order 2,

G2b "

"

««

« 1 or

"

"2.

Examples

nara- ’break' Gib root, imo- 'sleep* Gle root, tetu- 'cut' Old root, plru- 'nudge* Gle root, kehyo- 'snap* Gif root, pasl- 'press* G2a root, tuvo- 'stir* G2b root.

14.J.2.5 Classification on the basis of occurrence in A2 cores

Class G roots are divided into two classes on the ba-is of whether or not
they function as the nuclei in class A2 cores, 14.4.5, as follows!

GY roots occur as the nucleus of A2 cores,

p. 89

GZ " do not occur as the nucleus of A2 cores.

Class GY is a small class and it is further sub-divided as follows! GYa

roots drop their initial syll- ble when occurring in A2 cores and in complex

verbs. This syllable is always a single vowel or yu-,

GYb roots occur in A2 cores and complex verbs unchanged*

Examples

miye- 'stretch GYb root, yupunini- 'bend' GYa root, alu'o- 'raise*

GYa root, pih- 'go* GZ root, noi- 'see* G2 root*

14.J.2.4 Classification on the basis of occurrence in verb bases

G verb bases ar6 of three classes, K, X and 0 and in certain circumstances

the class of verb base is determined by the verb root which they contain,

14.5.4. Class G rootsare, therefore, dividedintothree classes GK, GX,

and GO on the basis of whether theydetermine a base ofclass K, X or 0 when

they occur as the nucleus of cores which function as bases without any extensor, as follows 1

GK roots occur in class K bases,

Qx it

n «n

x*

GO *

" " "0 "

Examples

pore- 'give* GX root, oposi- 'look for' GK root, pih- 'go' GO root*

14.5.2.5 Classification on the basis of occurrence in stems of classes I, J or T

Verb stems are divided into three classes, I, J, and T, 14.6.4.2 on the

basis of their function as verbs of class I, J or T, 11.4.2.4 and verb roots are

accordingly divided into three classes on the basis of thsir occurrence in these verb stems, as follows 1

GI roots occur in stems of classes I or T,

GJ '

" "■ " «

J or T

Glass QH roots occur in staras of classes I or J. Examples tuvo- 'stir* GH root, imo- 'sleep* GI root, nik- 'eat* GJ root.

14*5*2*6 Classification on the basis of occurrence in stems of classes E and N

Noun stems occur containing verb stems together with the noun derivational suffixes -e and -ne. 14*6*4*5 and 12*5 *5 * G roots are, therefore, divided

into two classes on the basis of their occurrence in such verb stems when no

verb prefix occurs, as follows|

Class GS roots occur in stems of class E,

hqjjii

«

m

wn

"N*

Examples tetu- 'cut' GE root, omo- 'carry* GN root, pore- 'give* GE RS9T.

14.5*2*7 Classification on the basis of occurrence in stems of classes R and S

Verbs are divided into two classes, R and S on the basis of their function

in clauses containing a NXi, 11*4*2*5* Verb stems are divided accordingly

into two classes, R and S, 14*6.4.4* and verb roots are divided on the basis

of their occurrence in these verb stems*

Class GR roots occur in stems of class R,

» GS "

" ""

" " S.

Ex-mples

pore- 'give* GS root, nik- 'eat* GR root*

14*5.2.8 Classification on the basis of stress

As described in 4.5*4.2 all ciass G verbs which contain a G root and which

do not contain a vowel cluster involving the first three syllables, 4.5*5*1

are assigned to a stress class on the basis of the stress class of the G root.

G roots are, therefore, divided into three stress classes as follows!

Olass GSl roots occur with verbs of stress classl

n

G 52

**

tt

tt

n

ti

it 2

n

m

m

a rt

tt 55 ^

In sample material 69% of roots belong to class S5» 25% to S2 and dfa to Si* Examples ihika- 'teaoh' GSl root (cf. ihikaso, ihikasoti), epem- 'ask' GS2 root (of. epemo, epemonuti), namu- 'take1 GSJ root (namukopo, namukopoti),

14*5*5* Olass A roots

lA.J.J.l General Every verb root which occurs as the nucleus of an Al core, but not as the
nucleus of a Ql or G2 core is a member of class A* Olass A roots are divided into criss-crossing sets of classes. However
there are only five such sets of classes in the case of A roots and only two of these have a basis similar to the classes of G roots*

l4.5.5»2 Classification on the basis of suffixation

Class A roots are divided into two olasses on the basis of whether they are bound or free forms, as follows!

Class Ab roots do not function as free forms,

H Af

function as free forms» forms

Bound forms are followed by an extensor except in complex verb forms when there may or may not be an extensor. Class Af is a very small class. Examples

harara- ’red* Ab root, konoko— ’be startled* Ab root, s o ’ope 'visit*

Af root, eno ’many* Af root, suna 'strong' Af root,

14.5.5»5 Classification on the basis of occurrence in G cores

Class A roots are divided into two classes on the basis of their occurrence

in class

G cores, 14.4.2 as follows*

Class Al

roots occur in G5 cores,

B A2

" do not occur in G5 cores*

Class A2

is a small class*

p. 92

Clasa Al roots ara sub-divid«d into two sub-classes on the basis of

whether they determine a base of class K or X when they occur as the nucleus

of G cores which function as bases without any extensor, as follows,

Glass AIK roots occur in class K bases,

• A1X H

* " »X

"

Class AlX is & small class*

Exnmples

suna ‘strong1 AlK root, eloke 'happy* AlX root, so'ope 'visit* A2root*

1A.5*5*4 Classification on thebasis of occurrence in stems of classes I, J and T

Class A roots ara divided into two classes on the basis of their occurrence in verb stems of classes I, J and T, 14*6*4.2.

Class Al roots occur in stems of class I or T,

m

AJ "

" h « « » jorT,

The majority of A roots belong to class I.

Beamples hanai- 'big' Al root, komomo 'look* AJ root

14*5*5.5 Classification on thebasis of occurrence in stems of classes Z, K and N

Class A roots are divided into three classes on the basis of whether they

occur in stems of olasses K, N or Z, 14.6.4.5*

Class AKo roots occur in stems of class I,

«ANm

"

bn

11 AZ * B m m

h

8 N,

n H Z*

Class AZ is a small class and so is clars ANj the large majority if A roots belonging to class AKo* Examples

eloke 'happy' AKo root, ikasu- 'sad* AN root, uhye- 'bright* AN root,

eo'ope 'visit* AZ root, suna 'strong* AKo root*

l4.5.5*6 Classification on the basis of stress classes

As described in 4*5.5»2 class A verbs which contain aA root and which

p. 95 do not contain a vowel cluster involving the first three syllables of the verb, are assigned to a stress class on the basis of the stress class of their A root.

A roots are, therefore, divided into four stress classes as follows!

Class AS1 roots occur in verbs of stress olassl,

h

^£2 " M n n n n H H

a

it

n

u

a

n

b

h

j

tt AS4 "

In sample materials, 50% A roots were of class S5» 5^% of class S2, 10% of olass S4 and 8$> of class Si. Examples

hyahya- 'bladk' AS5 root, suna 'strong' AS4 root, kohiyana 'care for' AS2 root.

14.4 The verb core

14.4.2 General

Every morpheme or gnoup of morphemes which occurs as the nucleus of a verb base, is a verb core*
Verb cores are of various types but all include a nucleus which is either a verb root, or another type of verb core, or a noun stem. Verb cores are of two classes A and G depending on their occurrence in verb stems A and G. Cores of both classes are further divided on the basis of their structure.

14.4.2 Class G cores

Every core which occurs as the nucleus of a class G verb base is a olass G verb core.
Class G cores are sab-divided into a number of classes on the ba«is of their internal structure as follows,

Class G 1 cores consist of a Gl or GJ root,

# G2 "

N

H n G2 root together with a prefix of orders 1 or 2

HqjH

»

""Al"

"

« gA "

"

* " AJ core "

i

*

«

« « «^ V

A large majority of G cores belong to class Gl Bx1moles nara- 'break' Gl core, ipasi- 'press' G2 core (i- past-), kosuna 'make strong' G5 core (ko- suna) kopiti'i- 'be dirty' G5 core, ikomohi- 'play' OA core (i- komohi-).

lA.A.J Class A cores

Every core which occurs as the nucleus of a class A feerb base is a class A verb core.

Class A cores are sub-divided into a number of classes on the baels of their internal structure, as follows*

Class Al cores consist/ of a Al root

« A2 *

"

" " Gy "

" AJ " "

" H noun stem together with ko- prefix order 5 *

A large majority of A cores belong to class Al*

A 5 cores are divided into two classes, g and h, on the basis of whether or not they occur in G5 cores, see 12 .2 .8 , for classification of noun roots on this basis*

Class AJg cores occur in G5 cores, " AJh " do not occur in G5 cores*
Class A5g is a very small class* Examples

suna 'strong' Al core, harara- 'red' Al core, miye- 'stretch' A2 core,

koyeno 'be married (lit, have a wife)' AJh core (ko- yeno), kopiti'i 'be dirty'

14.5 The verb base

14.5.1 General

Every morpheme or group of morphemes which occurs as the nucleus of a verb stem, is a verb base*
Verb bases are of various structures but all include a nucleus which is always a verb core. Some verb bases include one or more prefix and/or one or more extensor suffix. Verb bases are of two classes, G and A, depending on their occurrence as the nucleus of 0 and A verb stems respectively. This classification into two classes of base, G and A, is also supported by difference in their internal structure* Class G basas alone include a prefix, while class A bases include an extensor suffix much more frequently*

14.5*2 G bases consisting of G core and prefix(eo)

G bases consisting of G core and one or more prefixes are found as followst Gl cores with prefix order L and/or/? 2 (in accordance with the root class of
the core nucleus, 14*5*2.2)

G2 cores with a second prefix of order 1 or 2,

DJ 11

“ ** prefix order 2

G4

m

»

h

«

it

2

G5 h

Hn an

1 or 2

Symbolization Pxl - prefix order 1

Examples konara- ’make break* Glcore and Pxl (ko- nara-), ikapasi- •make pressed' G2 core and Px2 (i- kapasi-), ikosuna 'make strong' G5 core and Px2 (ikosuna)

14.5.5 Bases consisting of core and one or more extensor suffixes
14.5.5.1 General

All bases may include one or more extensor suffixes. All A bases which have a Al core with a nucleus of a verb root of class Ab, or which have a A2

p» 96 core, always inoluds at least one extensor* In unallotted material A bases are found with one extensor, or lees commonly with two and rarely with three* In unelicited material up to three extensors are given. ’Then more than one extensor occurs with A bases usually one of the following is found, -hi, -ke, -pe, -pi and of these -ke occurs most frequently*
G bases may include one or more prefix in addition to an extensor. However, G bases are found to include an extensor much less frequently then A bases and in unelicited material there are only a veyy few examples of G bases with more than one extensor*

14.5*5*2 Classes of extensor

In certain circumstances extensors determine whether a base is in class

K, X or 0, 14*5.4 SSctensors are, therefore, divided into three classes

according to the base class with which they occur, asfollows*

Extensor class K occurs with a class K base,

n

R X tt

it n n x «

It

I

t

Q

H

H

H

N

Q

t

t

Examples

kipohi- 'wash clothes1 includes extensor -hi of class 0, kipohyeve- ’wash feet* includes extensor hyeve of class X, contrast kipoheoti and kipohyevesoti*

14.5 ,5. 5 Orders of extensor

A problem arises from the fact that forms with more than one extensor are given freely in elicited material but seldom occur in unelicited material* '■/hen the speech of older and younger persons is compared, it is found that younger persons seldom use verbs with a base including more than ond extensor, nor do they use as wide a range of extensors as older persons. However, since there are a number of unelicited examples of verbs with two extensors, an attempt ha9 been made to arrange a selected number ofextensors inorders according to their relative sequence whdn more than one extensor occurs. These orders are numbered outwards from the core.

Table of orders

P. 97

1

2

5

4

5

6

7

89

10

11

- 1o

-1

-tata -pu*i -mo -hyeve -no'e -me -po'e -ke'a -pe

-emo -neku

-so'o

-na

-pi

-ope

-su *1

-pa

-ku

-sa

-hi

-ke

Hie members of any order are mutually exclusive with the other members of the

same order, except that any two of order 11 may occur in the same form; -pe

and -pi preceding -ku, and -ku preceding -ke, but otherwise wih no fixed

order. Members of any order may occur with members of another order with

the following exceptional (these limitations are only stated once for each

pair of dxtensors)

extensor -i

doesyf not occur with _ io, -mo, -na

varies in sequence with Order 6

-emo

order 2 -10

-opa

" 4, -na

5,6, -mo, -na, -sa

-neku -' o -tata -pu*l

"4, —su 'if 7, 8, 10 8, 9

5

5

ft

2, 7

-au'i -a o'o -mo -hyeve -ne 'a

6.7.9.10 8, 9 2.5.4.8.10 10, -su1!
10

6
<5, 9 9, -30*0, -80

-so
-me -na -pa -po*e -e 'e

2,5
2.5.5.6.9 2.7.9 5,6,7, 1 8

p. 98

Bolow are listed all the extensors so far found* It ia possible that other extens

occur but nonetheless the class of extensor suffixes may be regarded a closed

class with a limited membership, in contrast, for example, to the verb root

class which is potentially unlimited* In the following list the class of each

extensor is given. ’Jhere no class is given, no example has been found of the

extensor in a class G base* Some extensors are closely parallel to nouns with

a similar meaning and such nouns are given in brackets*

-akene (akene) 'at the

back', c Ibbs X, na'akenesovo 'heturned around*

-emo (emo'u) 'word', class X, sama'emoti 'speaking differently'

-he 'frequently', class X, pihoheiso 'he's always going*

-hi 'used of soft things like cloth or hair', class 0, muyahltl 'soft hair'

-hi 'plural', class K, ivohlkovone 'they died'

-hi 'poorly, not very ...*, harasohiketl 'many strands of not quite red thread'

-hyeve (hyeve) 'foot*, class X, kipohyeveso *he washed his feet'

-ikene (ikene) 'behind', class 0, oko'ikene'kisotj 'it stood behind*

-inuku (Inuku) 'forehand', kopltinukutj 'dirty forehead'

-ina 'lips', class X, hararainetl 'his lips are red*

-kava (kava'o) 'branch*, movokayatine 'the branch is dry*

-ka 'plural*,hararaketi 'several

red things*

-keno (keno) 'ear', class X, sipokenosoa 'he touched his

ear*

-ke'e 'back of animal, top of table etc', class X, kopltike'eti 'a dirty top'

-kiri (kiri) 'nose*, class X, komokiriBinova 'he wrinkled up his nose*

-kose (kose'u) 'body', purukose 'a cylindrical body'

-ku (kuveo) 'inside', hararukutj 'it's red inside*

-kuno *hip, thigh', class X, samakunoti 'his thigh is crooked'

-me (tneu) 'outside', class X hyahyameti 'twilight, (dark outside)'

-mo 'outside (seems to be more temporary than -me) class K, hyahyamona it's

dark (e.g. from clouds in contrast to twilight etc.)'

-moko 'used of corn', avo ahiyamoko 'it's not yet yellos (corn on stalks)'

-muku 'center* class X, tiumukuti

*the core is hard *

-ouyo (rauyo) 'body', payamuyo'koe 'a fat animal (has fat body)'

P. 99

-na 'large pieces', class K, gaganatl it's clelan (pieces of squash)

-neku 'inside', class 0, eveseneku'klsoa 'he climbed up into (a boat)'

-noke 'neck', class X, tetunokesoti 'his neck ia cut'

-none (none) 'face front', clasr 0, kopltlnone 'It (front ofhouse) is dirty*

-no'e 'waiet class X, lkano'esoyaa 'itsknotted at the waist*

-no'e 'liquid*, class K, ituvono*ekoti 'stirred up water'

-nu (anu) 'throat', class 0, tetunoa 'it is cut at throat'

-ope (one) 'under', class X, sama'opeti 'crooked underneath'

-pa 'throughout', class % K, hararapatl 'red throughout*

-paho (paho) 'mouth*, class X, kopitipahotj 'dirty mouth'

-pe (pe'u) 'flat and wide objects', class 0, kalipetl 'narrow sheet (of paper)*

-pi 'completely', class X, aunisovoti 'completely wrapped'

-po*e (poehyeve) *base, trunk*, class X, sunapo'etj *a strong tree trunk'

-puyu (puyu) 'knee', class X, kipopuyusoti 'he washed his knee*

-pu'i 'round object', class X, alupu'isoti'he climbed up (apole)'

-so 'long, thin object*, class K, hararasoti 'it's red (rope)'

-taki (taki) *arm', class X, kopititakiti 'a dirty arm*

-tata *body', class X, sunatatatj 'a strong body*

-tere 'buttocks', class X, kopititeretl 'dirty buttocks'

-toko 'back of neck' class X, ohopitokosoti 'he beheuded'

-tumune (tumune) 'in front', class X, okoturaune'klsoti 'he stood in front'

-uke (uke) 'eye', class 0, samauketj

'cross-eyed'

-usi 'seat*, class X, hyipuluusi'koe 'bird without a tail (thing itsits on)'

-voko 'among', class X, ipuhivokosoa *he appeared among them'

-vo'u (vo'u) 'hand', class X, kamaravo'utj 'a burned hand'

-sa'a (sa'a) 'chest', class X, kopitisa'ati 'a dirty chest*

-so'o (poiso'o) 'side', class X, komitiso'oiyea 'closed eye on one side.'

-su'i 'middle, abdomen*, class X, kopososu'isoa 'it burst (a bag in the middle

-'e 'thorough', class K, isone'jjkeovo 'cleared thoroughly*

-'i *general shape*, class K, harara'iti 'something red'

-'o 'referring to persons, large objects' class 0, hyahya'oti 'negfcoe* -'u 'completely', class X, rama'uso 'covered completely*

14.5*4 Glasses og 0 base

p. 100

All class G bases are divided into three classes on the basis of their

distribution with the classifier suffixes, 14.6.2 as follows!

Olass K bases

are I

1* All bares ending with a class K extensor,

2. All bases, not ending with an extensor whichhavea Gl or 02 core with a root of class GK as core nucleus

5* All bases not ending with an extensor which haye/ a GJ core with a root of class AlK as core nucleus

4. All basesnot ending with an extensor v?hichhave a G5core.

Class X bases

are !

1. Allbases ending with a class X extensor,

2. Allbasesnot ending with an extensor which have a Gl or G2 core with a root of class GX as core nucleus,

5» All bases not ending with an extensor which have a GJ core with a root of class AlX as core nucleus,

4. Allbases not ending with an extensor which have a q4 core* Class 0 bases are I

1. Allbases ending with a olass 0 extensor,

2. Allbases not ending with an extensor which have a Gl or G2 core with a root of class GO as core nucleus*
Samples

tetu- 'cut1, verb base of class jf K (Gl core with root GK without extensor),

tetuhyeve- taut foot1, verb base of class X (Gl core with extensor of class X.

lA.5»5 Verb prefixes

Verb prefixes function in two ways; to form cores and to extend cores

in bases* Prefixes are arranged in two series. Orders 1 and 2 occur with

G cores andbases, while order J occurs with noun stems to form A cores.

Orders 1 and 2 are numbered outwards from the verb cores in the sequence in

which they occur when both are found in one verb.

Order 1 is prefixed to,

02 roots to form 02cores, Al roots to form GJ cores,

AJ " "

" 04", and to G l and 05 coresto form bases.

Order 2 is prefixed to 02 roots to form G2 cores and to 01, 2, 5

A and 5 cores to form bases*

Order 5 is prefixed to noun stems to form AJ cores.

Order 1 consists of one member i

(ko- ka- i-) (i- V) 'causative'

(i- V-) occurs with Gli roots only, lA.J.2.2

V- to roots with initial vowel (V is vowel of same quality as following

1- elsewhere,

vowel)

(ko- ka- i-) occurs elsewhere

1- to roots and cores with k as initial syllable

ka- to roots with a as vowel of initiil syllable

ko- elsewhere

Order 2 consists of one membert

i- e- V- 'be in state of...'

e- to roots having e as vowel of initial syllable

V- to vowel initial roots and cores

i- elsewhere

Order 5 consists of one membert

(ko- koX'-) (ka- ka'-) 'verbalizer, posses....*

(ka- ka'-) to noun roots with a as vowel of initial syllable

ka'- to vowel initial roots

p. 102 (ko- ko'-) elsewhore
ko'- to vowel Initial roots ko- to consonant initial roots Examples 0 base otetu- 'bo cut* Q base e-Px2, tetu- Gl core, kosuna 'make strong' GJ coro ko- Pxl suna Al root koyono 'be married', A? core, ko- PxJ, yeno noun stem

14.6 Tho verb stem

14.6.1 General

Every form consisting of at least two morphemes, which does notinclude an auxilliary and which functions as head piece of a verb expression, is a verb stem*
Verb stems are of various structures but always include either a verb base or noun stem as nucleus and a verb marker* There are two classes of verb stem, G and A* G stems always include a classifier suffix as well as a marker, while A stems never include such a marker*

14.6.2 Classifier suffixes

All class G stems include a classifier suffix which always occurs immodiatily

after the verb base. There ara two classifier suffixes,

-k- and -is-. The -k- classifier has three forms <

-k- occurs in verb stems with a GK base,

-s- " -0- "

h nn « «»

" M GX base, or a noun stem, h n go base. (-0- is used as a symbol for zero)

An alternative analysis is possible in that there is some evidence to

suggest that the three forms of the -k- suffix could be treated as three

different morphemes. In the case of a very small number of forms both a -k-

and -s— classifier have been found. Hiese words are* ikohiuko, ikohiuso

'to have flowers', kauha'iko, kauha'iso 'to clean by sweeping', ikouhye'ekoa,

ikouhye 'esoa 'to beautify', ikalisokoa, ikalisosoa 'to make small',

p. 105
ikonoko'iko, ikonoko'iao 'to worry*. All these forms are 0 verbs derived from A cores, having one or more prefixes.
The alternatives would seem to be a) to retain the present analysis since only a very small number of these forme are found1 these forms listed above would be noted as exceptions, or b) retain the present analysis but set up a class of bases which could occurwith -k- and -s- which would be regarded as separate morphemes rather than allomorphs of the one morpheme. This would entail a slightly revised series of statements for root classes, base classes, and extensor classes K, X and 0. Since after attemnts to elicit them, no further forms occurring with both -k- and -s- have been found, the first analysis Baems to give a clearer overall picture of verb stems.

1A,6.J Marker suffixes

There are tvo marker suffixes, the direct marker and indirect marker, and

verb stems 41ways include one of these markers. The selection of the direct or indirect marker has grammaticalimplications and these are described in 15*4 .

The direct marker is -o -0 ( 0 is used as a symbol for zero) - 0 occurs in class G stems

-0 8 * « A "

The indirect marker is (-eo -aa) (iyeo -iyea)

-eo -ea occur after a consonant

-eo occurs when followed by verb suffixes orders 1 or 2

-ea " elsewhere

-iyeo -iyea occur after a vowel,

-iyeo occurs when followed by a verb suffix of orders 1 or 2

-iyea

" elsewhere.

Examples

piho 'he goes' pih- G base, with -o direot marker

pihea 'he goes' pih- G base, with -ea indirect marker

harara'i 'it's red' harara'i A base, with -0 direct marker

harara'iiyea 'it's red', harara'i Abase, with -iyea indirect marker.

14*6*4 Classes of stems

p. 104

14.6.4.1 General

Verb stems ara divided Into three sets of classes on the basis of thair occurrence aa elements of some other grammatical unit. This classification is not a sub- classification of the division into G and A stems though as will be seen it has some correlation with it.

14.6.4.2 Classification on the basis of occurrence as verbs of classes I, T and J

Verb stems are divided into three classes on the basis of their occurrence as verbs of classes I, T and J, 11.4.2.4. Stems of classes I, T and J always function as verbs of classes I, T and J respectively.
Verb stems containing a noun root are always members of class I. Verb stems with verb roots are assigned to stem classes I, J and T as follows* Stems of class I include either a root of class Gl 14*5.2.5, or Al, 14.5.5 .4, or a root of class GH and the prefix order 2* Stems of class J always include a root of class GJ, l4»5»2.5 and AJ, 14.5 .5 .5 * Stems of class T include either a root of class T or a root of class GH, Gl or GJ and the prefix order 1. Stems of class I only occur with a suffix of order 2a when they also occur with the suffix of order C, 14.7.2-5 Example* ituvoko 'it is stirred', kotuvokoa 'he stirs it', -tuvo GH root, with prefix order 2 functions In stem class, L, but with prefix order 1 functions in stem of class T. kaha'i 'it has fruit* stem of class I, ha'i noun stem.

14.6.4*5 Classification on the basis of occurrence with noun derivational suffixes

Four classes of verb stem are set up on the basis of the occurrence of verb stem9 with the noun derivational suffixes, 12*5*5* Class E stems occur with NdSx -e and consists of all verb stems which include

p* 105
a prefix order 1 and allnon-pre£ixed verb stems with roots of olasB E. 14.J.2.6.

All such stems and roots are of class 0*

Class N stems occur with NdSx —ne and consists of all verb stems which include

a prefix order 2 and allnon-prefixed verb stems with roots of

clas s N. The

majority of such roots and stems are of class 0.

Class K stems occur with NdSx -ko and consists of all verb stems without

a prefix which contain roots of class Ko. l4*5*J.5. All such roots and stems

are of class A* which
Class Z stem9 consist of all verb stems yffflXlfars not members ofclasses E, N and K.

All such stems have roots of class Z. Therearevery fewmembers of thisclass*

Examples

poreso 'give' E stem, with E root* ituvoko *be stirred' N stem, with

prefix order 2, contrast kotuvoko 'to stir' E stem, with prefix order 1

(cf. ituvone 'something stirred', kotuvoe 'stirring')

14.6.4.4 Classification on the basis of occurrence as verbs of classes R and S

Verb stems are divided into two classes on the basis of their functi on/

aa verbs of classes R and S, 11*4.2.5*

Class R sterna occur as class R verbs

Kg"

MH

"S *

Olass R and S stems containing verb roots, contain a root of class R and S

respectively, 14.J.2.7* Stems containing other root elements are of class

R «ith one exception. In theory it would be necessary to sat up classes R

and S below the stem level to take care of the fact that stems containing noun roots may be of class R or S, however this has not been done since there

is only this one example.

14.7 Ihe verb expansion 14.7*1 G eneral

Verb stems are expanded in two ways, by a verb expansion and by a word

expansion, 11*6. Tho verb expansion is divided into the inner and outer expansion* Suffixes which occur between the olasaifier suffix and marker in class G stems are grouped together as members of the inner expansion, while suffixes that follow the marker are grouped together as members of the outer expansion.
14.7.2 The verb inner expansion
All class G stems may be suffixed by one or two suffixes of the verb suffixes of orders A, B and C. If more than one suffix occurs it is usually A or B with 0 since A and B seldom occur together. However most commonly only one suffix occurs. These suffixes always occur between the verb classifier and the verb marker*
In the case of class A stems, these suffixes occur less often and when found follow the verb marker* In no case haa a class A stem been found with one of these suffixes and the indirect marker*
Orders A, B and 0 are lettered outwards from the classifier and when more than one occurs, this sequence is always found* Order A consists of one member 1 -VpY- 'again, away, to go back in time or
space '* Order B consists of one member 1 -VponV- 'to go or come whdn doing action' Both these suffixes include a vowel, o, either before and;or after, when suffixed to a form ending with a consonant, or when followed by a form beginning with a consonant* Order C consists of one membert -ino- 'indirect object indicator'*
When orders B and C occur together, the contracted form -poino- is found, this mcy be contrasted to the regular form -pino- when orders A and C occur together* *foen order A is followed by the direct marker and then by the suffix -a (suffix of order 2 of the verb outer expansion) the contraction -paa is found* This is in contrast to the sequence poa which occurs elsewhere, as in kutipoa •he believes him'*

Examples

'

pihopo 'he goeB back' pih- Q base, -0- classifier, -op-SxA, -o marker,

poresopono 'he went and gave' pore- G base, -s- classifier, -opon- Sx B,

-o- marker|

kahya'ainoa 'he wanted him* kahya'a A base* -ino SxC, -0 marker -a 3x2

vanesopolnoa 'he went and bought for him' vane- G base,-a- clarifier -o marker

opon -3xB, -ino SxO, -a Sx2*

1 4 , 7 0 The verb outer expansion

All verb stems may be suffixed by one or more suffix of the verb

suffix

orders 1 -

These suffixes always occur after the marker suffix, and, in the

case of class A stems, after any suffix of the inner expansion. The orders

are numbered outwardsfrom thestem and when morethan one suffix occurs

they

are found in the sequencewhich tha numbers suggest.

Table of orders

1

2

-vo

5

4

5

-nu '1st per obj.' -a 'Jrd per -ti 'non-specific'

-nekene

'reflexive* -pi '2nd "

" indirect -Yvo

'then'

'continuous from

-a 'Jrd " "

object*

thebeginning'

-Vvl 1st " $1.B

-koko 'reciprocal*

-kono 'passive'

V indicates a vowel which 1b identical to the vowel which inmediately precedes it,

The sequence -k- classifier, -o marker, -koko Px2,contracts to -koko. ’s’hen

the indirect marker -eo occurs, the sequence -keokoko occurs.

Order 5 occurs in forms which also contain the suffix -ino Sx 0.

Order 5 h&s only beenfound with Btems having an indirect marker. When both

suffixes oforder 2 and 5occur in the sane verb form, the first

suffix is

linked with the suffix of order C and has an indirect object function, e.g.

poresinonaa 'he gave it to me' (pores-V stem, -ino Sx 0, -nu Sx2, -a Sx5)

isukinopea 'he hit him for me'. The sequence -nu followed by -a (Sx 2 and 5)

In

no .nan.

p. 108 Suffixes of order 2 are divided into two classes, 2a, and 2b, on the basis of their function in the verb expression* The class 2a consists of -nu, -pi, -a and -Vvi, while the class 2b consists of -koko and -kono* Examples pihe'evo 'Go, then!' plhe G stem, -Vvo Sx 4, komiti'lyeatinekene 'blind from birth', komiti'iyea A stem with indirect marker, -ti Sx4, -nskene Sx5*
14.8 The complex verb
14*811 General
All verbs which include a verb auxilliary are complex verbs. In addition to the auxilliary, complex verbs have a head piece which consists of either a verb form of at least a verb core, or a noun stem. On the basis of the differing structures of tha head piece, eight classes of complex verb are established. These ara described in the following sections while 14.9 gives details of the verb auxilliary. The phonological structure of oomplex verbs is given in 4.5*8 and 5*4*
In the case of complex verbs which have a head piece consisting of re­ duplicated elements, these are normally reduplioated from the definite mood form of the verb. Reduplication of the verb in the indefinite mood form is occasionally found when a negative expansion occurs.
In the case of complex verbs all suffixation of the verb and word expansions occurs on the auxilliary element of the verbs; never on the head piece.
Complex verbs are members of the following classes of verbs, N, D, J and R, 11.4.2.
14*8.2 C la ss 1 complex verb
Eve?~y complex verb having a hend piece consisting of a verb base and being marked by glottal junction between the head piece and auxilliary, is a member of class 1. This verb base may include an extensor. The final syllable of the head piece is marked by full stress and this syllable is frequently of

p. 10? high or very high pitch. In usuage c Ib b s o complex verba are found when there ifl emphasis on the action or Btnte described. This class of complex verb occur more frequently than any other. Scamples pore'o'kisonu 'he made ne a gift', pore'o'— V base, pore— G core — 'o extensor, ahyi'klsoa 'she gave him a bath', ahyl- V base and G core* payapu'i'koe 'it's grown (used of something round) paya- A core, pu'i extensor*
14.8*5 Class 2 complex verb
Every complex verb having a head piece consisting of a verb baee and without glottal junction between the head piece and auxilliary, is a member of class 2. In the case of A bases there is usually an extensor. FUll stress falls on the final syllable of the head piece and features of very high pitch and extended length mark the same syllable. In usage class 2 complex verbs ara found when one action is being done to the exclusion of others, or when something is one thing rather than another. This class of complex verb is infrequent in occurrence. Examples pono-koe 'she's staring (used of baby when constantly staring at someone)' ahyi-kisoa 'she's bathing him) (not doing something else)
14*8*4 Class 5 complex verb
Every complex verb having a head piece consisting of a verb stem is a member of class 5* There is glottal junction between the head piece and auxilliary. FUII stress f a l l s a cco rd in g to the stress class of the verb root or noun root of the verb stem in the normal way. In usage class 5 complex verbs are found when there is a greater degree of emphasis on the action going on or on the state being described than that in connection with class 1*

Examplas lko'iparaso'kisoa 'he made him a present* ahyikovo'koe 'he's taking a bath'

14*8*5 Class 4 complex verb

Every complex verb having a head piece consisting of a core, base or stem with the first syllnble reduplicated, is a member of class 4* Thera is glottal junction between the reduplicated vowel and initial vowel when the fora has an initial vowel syllrble. Full stress falls on the initial syllable of the head piece and higher than average pitch also marks this syllable* In usage clas3 4 complex verbs are found when there is some intensity in the aotion or state* Examples haharara-koe 'very red', harara- A core; e'eso'kisoa 'we really know', eso G stem; ako a'aitive'akoeye 'it's not very sweet', aitive A stem in indefinite mood form*

14.8*6 Class 5 complex verb

Every complex verb having a head piece consisting of a core reduplicated

once, is a member of class

There is glottal junction between the head piece

and auxilliary and between the cores. FUll stre s falls on the first syllable

of the core and reduplicated core. In usage class 5 complex verbs are found

when the action or state is intermittent or constantly repeated*

Examples

namu'namu'klsoa 'he is constantly taking hold of something (taking up and

putting down repeatedly)', namu- G core; ka'arine'ka'arine'koe 'sick off and

on', ka'arine A core.

14.8*7 Claaa 6 oomplex verb

Every complex verb having a hiad piece consisting of a core and reduplioated core without glottal Junction between the two cores, is a member of class 6. There is glottal junction between the head pieoe and auxilliary. FU11 stress fallB on the final syllable of the head pieoe* In usage class 6 complex verbs are found when the action or state is very definite or complete* Examples nanunanu'kisoa 'he took hold firmly (wouldn't let go), namu- G core, puhyipuhyi'koe 'it is definitely full right up' puhyi- A core.

14.8.8 Class 7 complex verb

Every complex verb having a head piece consisting of a core and reduplicated core with the first syllable of each core reduplicated in the same manner as described for class 4, is a member of class 7» There is glottal junction between the cores and between the head piece and auxilliary. FU11 stress falls on the first syllable of each reduplicated core* In usage class 7 complex verbs seem to be the most emphatic of all complex verbs* They occur infrequently* ©c amples u'upori'u'upori'koeyoti 'she's always very thin indeed' upori- A core.

14.8.9 Class 8 complex verb

Every complex verb having a head piece consistingof a noun Btern, with

or without an extensor, is a member of class 8* There is glottaljunction

between the head piece and auxilliary. Flill stress falls on the final syllable

of the head piece. Olass 8 complex verbs occur very infrequently. Examples

ipovohi'koeti 'it's poor cloth', ipovo N stem, -hiextensor,

ipara'kisoa 'he made a present', ipara N

stem*

l4.9 Tha verb auxilliary
There are two verb auxilliaries, koe and kiso* These function in verbal constructs and are similar to independent forms which have a similar structure and stress pattern. Both auxilliaries are always marked by full stress which falls on then in the sane way as stress falls on the simple verb. Both auxilliaries have a stress pattern similar to that of class A verbs, see 4.A.
In many respects the auxilliaries are similar to verb cores, however the only extensor that occurs with them is he-. Suffixds of the verb inner and outer expansion occur with both auxilliaries. Word suffixes when occurring are also added to the auxilliary of the complex verb. The categories of person, chapter 17, also mark the auxilliaries.
The auxilliary koe has an allomorphlc form ko- which occurs whenever the auxilliary is suffixed. The auxilliary kiso has the form Iso as indefinite mood form.
In usage there would seem to be a difference between the two auxilliaries which correlates with the extra-linguistic categories of state (koe) contrasted with action (kiso). Thus harara'i koe means 'it is red' while harara'i kisoa means 'he makes it red'* Examples yunuku'yakoe 'Be quiet!' yukoe is the second person form of the indefinite mood of koe (akoe). ako namunamu'isaa 'he didn't take hold firmly*| includes the indefinite mood form iso, of kiso and the suffix -a Sx 2.

