Entry to appear in the forthcoming Wiley‐Blackwell Encyclopedia of Global Human Migration (Editor for the entries on prehistory: Peter Bellwood.)
[N.B. This entry targets particularly the Central Andes, and the last five millennia before the Spanish conquest. Earlier questions of first settlement are covered by other contributors.]
* Pre‐publication version — please do not cite without the authors’ permission *
SOUTH AMERICA, ANDES: ARCHAEOLOGY
David Beresford‐Jones & Paul Heggarty
Dept. of Linguistics, Max Planck Institute for Evolutionary Anthropology, Leipzig
1. MIGRATION OR EVOLUTION IN THE ANDES?
The Andean region is one of humanity’s rare independent hearths of agriculture and cradles of ‘pristine’ civilisation, its prehistory thereby of significance to the wider story of humankind. It also offers a vignette of the tension long at the heart of archaeological thinking, between explanations of change in the past based upon either migrations of human populations, or autochthonous development. For while a great deal of change is visible in the archaeological record for the Andean region, and indeed phases of expansion and movement of material culture, the extent to which these were accompanied by the permanent, large‐scale movement of people has long remained a moot point. Recent years have seen a revival of interest in migration in the ancient Andes. On the one hand, aside from the archaeological record, there are other, complementary windows on the Andean past, too: from linguistics, anthropology and ethnohistory. All of these do in fact offer rather powerful evidence positively in favour of a significant role for migration in the Andean past and fresh attempts are being made to synthesise data from these different disciplines (Heggarty & Beresford‐Jones 2010). On the other hand, new ‘bioarchaeological’ analyses (of human skeletal and dental traits, and stable isotopes) are opening up the prospect of testing hypotheses about population dynamics by measuring biological relatedness (see reviews by Tung 2008 and Sutter 2009). Additionally, in the Andes many ancient societies practised deliberate skull modification during infancy, providing another, immutable marker of group identity. Studies of modern population genetic variation may eventually also offer insights into prehistoric population dynamics, although in the Andean region in particular such studies may be compromised by precisely the sorts of mass migrations that we review here. Nonetheless, by carefully combining these new bioarchaeological data with findings from other disciplines we may now hope to come to a more balanced view: neither invoking migration to explain all change in the past, nor entirely abandoning it as a useful explanatory factor.
–1–

Our review here will travel backwards in time through the five millennia or so of Andean civilization, upon which the Inca Empire encountered by the conquistadors in 1532 was but the icing on the cake. At the most recent stages of Andean prehistory ‘migration’ may mean the actual movement of a population, but at remoter time‐depths where evidence is scanty population dynamics here may well be better described as ‘demic expansion’: the more gradual process whereby one population mixes with and ‘drowns out’ another.
At first sight the Andean context may not seem very conducive to any form of major population movement, under any definition. This is one of the most topographically extreme regions on Earth. Several cordilleras run north‐south down the spine of South America, rising abruptly from the arid Pacific coast up to altitudes second only to the Himalayas, before descending just as precipitously to the vast, flat basin of the humid Amazon to the east. Uniquely among alpine regions, the Andes also span the Tropics. Together these circumstances entail extreme ecological diversity: no less than 84 of Holdridge’s 103 ‘life‐zones’ worldwide, among them environments able to support cultivation and dense populations even at great altitudes. The development of civilization played out here through some 6000 m of altitude variation with extraordinary, tropical environmental diversity across “horizontally condensed” space (Shimada 1985: xi). Far from impeding population mobility, however, the Andean landscape has in fact only made it all the more necessary.
2. ANDEAN INSTITUTIONS OF MOBILITY
Spanish texts from the early colonial period relate the mytho‐histories of the Incas, their contemporaries and predecessors, and duly greatly enrich our understanding of times on the eve of Spanish conquest, and back before it for a time‐span as yet unclear. These accounts are sometimes contradictory, and were recorded through the distorting prism of the conquistadors’ world‐view, but despite differing on many details, they nonetheless hold a few core strands in common.
One such core strand of Andean origin myth is that of a complementary relationship between a local, indigenous group and outsiders who arrived in the distant past as conquering invaders. The Incas’ own origin myths cast them in precisely this latter role when arriving in the Cuzco region, from either Paqariqtambo or Lake Titicaca. The subsequent relationship between locals and outsiders defines “political life within the territory occupied by the two groups” (Urton 1999: 40). It is invariably asymmetric: one group dominates the other. Moreover, it is often defined by different subsistence lifestyles, occupying distinct but complementary ecological niches. Ethnology attests to such relationships in which invading ‘lláqwash’ camelid pastoralists of the high tundra co‐existed in tense yet intimate relationship with aboriginal ‘wari’ agriculturalists within the lower, inter‐montane valleys. Indeed, the wari‐lláqwash dyadism turns out to be just one among a range of “institutions of Andean complementarity” (Salomon 1985: 520). Many such social relationships unfolded to harness the tremendous ecological diversity encountered within relatively short distances across extreme altitude differences.
Perhaps the most famous example is John Murra’s “vertical archipelago”, invoked to explain, in conspicuous contrast to Mesoamerica, the absence of markets from the ethnohistorical and archaeological record for
–2–

much of the Andes. It arose when a single ethnic group established colonies to control simultaneously several geographically dispersed ecological tiers, thereby gaining access to a broader range of agricultural products (Murra 1985: 3). The result was that distinct ethnic groups occupied mosaics of territory encompassing diverse, ecologically complementary regions (“discontinuous territoriality”, Shimada 1985: xix), In effect, then, rather than hindering migration, the fractured topography of the Andean landscape actually drove it, a dynamism writ large into the very institutions and fabric of the Inca Empire.
3. THE INCA EMPIRE
In 1438 the Incas were just one among a mosaic of fractious petty chiefdoms that characterised the southern Andean highlands during the Late Intermediate Period (c. AD 1100‐1438). That year however marked their final victory over their bitter local rivals, the Chancas, and by the time the Spanish arrived, a mere one hundred years later, the Incas controlled a realm stretching over 4000 kilometres from Ecuador to Argentina and Chile, comprising over eighty distinct ethnic groups.
The Incas’ meteoric first expansion out of their Cuzco homeland was achieved through military force, after which however the empire turned to consolidation through various imperial institutions. A road system covering some 23,000 km was built — or rather, renovated and expanded from a previous great age of expansion — across the length and the breadth of the empire. Together with its associated bridge and tambo lodge infrastructure, this constituted the logistical heart of the empire: facilitating the movement of goods and people on a grand scale. Yet in the Andean context by far the more important was the latter. For as we have seen, an apparent Andean ideal was to integrate distinct economic zones within a single community, circumventing the need for market exchange. Archaeological evidence suggests that within the empire, inter‐regional exchange of staple products was limited (D’Altroy & Earle 1985).
Rather than as goods, then, taxation was extracted in the form of labour — what Godelier (1977: 188) calls the “Inca mode of production”, whereby long‐standing Andean traditions of reciprocal exchanges of labour were elaborated into a system of rotating corvée service (mit’a), in exchange for food and drink provided at state‐sponsored feasts. Through the mit’a, ‘taxpayers’ rendered some forty different kinds of state duties, including farming, herding, masonry, military service, mining and portage: armies were raised and major public works constructed (D’Altroy & Schreiber 2004: 267). At some point during the course of empire this came to involve the permanent relocation of entire communities from their place of ethnic origin (mitmaqkuna), either to carry out particular productive activities (kamayuq) according to the empire’s changing economic needs, or to head off potential revolt by relocating loyal populations amidst recalcitrant ones, and vice versa. Naturally, it is very difficult to assess from archaeological data the precise numbers of people moved in this way, although clearly they were significant: some estimates run as high as a quarter to a third of the Empire’s entire populace (D’Altroy & Schreiber 2004: 266). Migration was thus a vital instrument of Inca imperial policy.
Nonetheless, there are indications, too, that scholars may have been misled by the wealth of (semi‐)historical evidence that we have on the Incas, into over‐stating some of the empire’s impact in these and other respects. The expansion of Quechua, for instance, one of the greatest language families of the
–3–

New World, is commonly attributed entirely to its use by the Incas as a lingua franca. Yet historical linguists have long appreciated that most of Quechua’s expansion over the so‐called ‘Continuous Zone’ across the Central Andes in fact long predates the Inca ‘Late Horizon’ (Heggarty & Beresford‐Jones, this volume, Fig. 1). Nor are language dispersals and population resettlements the only ‘Inca’ traits whose roots in the Andes in fact go back far earlier.
4. THE MIDDLE HORIZON
Max Uhle in 1903 was the first to recognise that the Incas had long been preceded by an earlier, underlying ‘horizon’ — a period for which the archaeological record shows some degree of unity or interaction across great expanses of the Central Andes. Between the Horizons are ‘Intermediate Periods’ during which any such pan‐Andean unity breaks down into societies much more regionally limited and fragmented, especially in the highlands. In principle, then, it is to the Horizons (and perhaps also to their immediate aftermaths) that we should look first for evidence of migrations and population movement. The ‘Middle Horizon’, long before the Incas (c. AD 600–1100), was bipolar: a Wari Empire, with its heartland in Ayacucho, south‐central Peru; and a more vaguely perceived sphere of influence of Tiyawanaku1, by the shores of Lake Titicaca in the Bolivian Altiplano. So similar was their iconography that both were initially conflated, but the two are now recognised as holding sway over territories mutually exclusive and following entirely distinct trajectories in all aspects of their economy and society. Indeed, evidence from the borderlands between them in the Moquegua Valley suggests that their relationship was often one of open military conflict. The precise nature of the influence or power that Tiyawanaku and Wari exerted far beyond their respective homelands has long been a matter of debate, now being enriched by new bioarchaeological evidence. Both were agents of population movement on significant scales; but whereas Wari’s influence was largely expansive, Tiyawanaku’s was largely inwards, towards its monumental ceremonial core.
At 3850 metres above sea level on the Altiplano, Tiyawanaku was the highest urban centre of the ancient world. The idea that it served as centre of pilgrimage is an old one, on the lines of other examples in the ancient Andes such as Pachacámac in the Lurín Valley, and Cahuachi in Nazca. Yet the latest archaeological (Janusek 2004) and osteological (Blom 2005) evidence suggests that the monumental site was a lodestone for permanent immigration from across the southern Andes by communities who nonetheless continued to maintain “ties to their homeland for many generations” (Tung 2008: 675).
Far beyond, on the Tiyawanaku periphery, the vertical archipelago model has long been invoked to explain why its material culture is found in ecological niches very different to its Altiplano core. Recent bioarchaeological studies (Blom et al. 1998, Knudson 2009) do seem to confirm that Tiyawanaku
1 We eschew here the popular ‘pseudo-indigenous’ spelling Tiwanaku as doubtless erroneous, omitting the second syllable -ya- suggested both by etymology and by the original Hispanicised version Tiahuanaco. For further discussion of nomenclature and spelling in the Andes, see the supplementary information to Heggarty & BeresfordJones (forthcoming b).
–4–

established diaspora colonies in Moquegua (Goldstein 2005). Elsewhere, however — in the Azapa Valley on the Chilean coast, the eastern valleys of Bolivia, and the San Pedro de Atacama oasis — individuals buried with Tiyawanaku artefacts turn out to show none of the isotopic (Knudson 2009), dental (Sutter 2009) or cranial modification (Torres‐Rouff 2002) signatures that might suggest that they were migrants from the Altiplano. Across most of its periphery, then, Tiyawanaku’s influence extended in other ways. And around AD 1000 the Altiplano core of Tiyawanaku collapsed, setting in train a final act of mass movement as its colonies in Moquegua dispersed to new locations along the coast and further inland (Owen 2005, Sutter 2009).
Wari, meanwhile, was something quite different: an empire that expanded from its eponymous urban centre to control directly the central and southern coast of Peru between Chancay and Acarí, and the highlands over an even greater extent, from Ancash to Sicuani (Menzel 1967: 147). At its apogee around AD 800, its capital at Wari was vast, covering some 15 km2; today the largest archaeological site in South America. Speculative population estimates for the city range between 50,000 to 100,000 (Benavides 1991: 56). It was by any measure an enormous ancient city: even half a millennium later, Venice, the largest city in Europe, had a population of under 50,000 (McEvedy & Woodroffe 1992: 75). Survey data indicate how the populations in surrounding areas were gradually drawn into the vast agglomeration that was Wari (Schreiber 1992: 88). Indeed the Wari archaeological record indicates movements of people across the Andes on a far larger scale than in the Intermediate Periods that came before and after it.
Material culture indicative of Wari influence is distributed throughout the highlands and along the south‐ central coast of Central Peru, save for the very far south. Sites in the Cuzco region, meanwhile, and Wari itself, have yielded significant quantities of ceramics from Cajamarca, almost 1000 km to the north. As Menzel (1964: 152) observes, “their abundance [at Wari itself] is such as to suggest that there were colonies of northerners established at the imperial capital”. Barracks‐like residential facilities are a dominant feature of Wari architecture, commonly interpreted as housing for mobile labour or military personnel (McEwan 1991: 117). The major Wari sites were, it seems, “occupied by large numbers of people, both foreigners from Wari and local peoples” (D’Altroy & Schreiber 2004: 274). And some of these sites were enormous. Pikillaqta, for instance, was but part of the intense Wari occupation of the Cuzco region. Yet this single component of the Wari periphery covers an area greater than the later Inca imperial capital of Cuzco (McEwan 1991: Fig. 2).
The Wari Middle Horizon was, in large part, based upon the intensification of food production to supply distant urban populations, and undertook great state‐sponsored public works to achieve this (Schreiber 1992). Indeed, Isbell (1988: 182) credits Wari with the development of that uniquely Andean form of ‘state finance’: the “Inca mode of production”. So fundamental and enduring were the innovations wrought by Wari that they defined the subsequent course of Andean civilization, and settlement patterns even to this day (Isbell 1988: 182, Schreiber 1992: 260). In fact the roots of much ‘Inca’ statecraft turn out to lie in the Middle Horizon: including the road network, which the Incas only rehabilitated and extended; and the khipu record‐keeping device. Moreover the Wari Empire doubtless also drove at least one of the major language expansions in the Andes — again with powerful connotations of population movements. (In our view the language that Wari spread was Quechua, though alternative hypotheses also exist: see Heggarty & Beresford‐Jones, this volume.)
–5–

5. FURTHER BACK IN TIME
As we move back into remoter periods our evidence for any distinction we might wish to draw between migration and demic expansion becomes ever more obscured by the passage of time. The Early Horizon, for instance, centred on the monumental site of Chavín de Huantar in Ancash, north‐central Peru, is far less clearly defined, although many would still agree with Burger (1993: 74) that it is “not a stylistic chimera as some have contended, but a real pattern”.
Elsewhere (Heggarty & Beresford‐Jones 2010: 179‐80) we have drawn attention to the correspondences in broad scale and timing between: the first major language family expansions in the Andes; the “real pattern” that the archaeological record of the Early Horizon represents; and earliest time for which we can unequivocally assert that maize has become ubiquitous in the archaeobotanical record. Our own view is that it was only at this point in Andean prehistory that a number of gradual processes in the development of food production in the region finally intersected to tip agriculture here across an expansive intensification threshold. We hypothesise that it was the significant incorporation at last of a true cereal, maize, that was crucial to this coalescence of a geographically expansive agricultural package — a “mobile food chain”, to use Jones’ (2007: 144) term.
At greater time depths still, Sutter’s (2009) analysis of dental traits in prehistoric Andean mortuary contexts suggests that there were at least two migrations into the Andean region, the first of which presumably occurred following the first population of the Americas by Palaeolithic populations moving across the Beringia land bridge during the Late Glacial Maximum. Yet Sutter’s evidence also suggests that there was a second, much later wave of demic expansion driven by food production that “followed a north‐ to south route along the Andean highlands and later proceeded from the highlands to the coastal valleys” (Sutter 2009: 21). The timing, driving process and indeed direction of the latter stage of this proposed expansion, show some correlation with our own proposal. It is of course true that the earliest evidence of Andean complex society is to be found on the Pacific coast (Shady Solís 2008). Nonetheless, as Julio C. Tello long since observed, the major expansions clearly visible in the archaeological record — Chavín, Wari, Tiyawanaku, and the Incas themselves — all spread out of the Andean highlands, rather than the other way around.
REFERENCES
Benavides C., M. 1991. Cheqo Wasi, Huari. In W. H. Isbell & G. F. McEwan (eds) Huari Administrative Structure: Prehistoric Monumental Architecture and State Government, 55‐70. Washington D.C. Dumbarton Oaks
Blom, D.E. 2005. Embodying borders: human body modification and diversity in Tiwanaku society. Journal of Anthropological Archaeology 24: p.1‐24.
Blom, D.E., Hallgrímsson, B., Keng, L., & Buikstra, J.E. 1998. Tiwanaku “colonisation”: bioarchaeological implications for migration in the Moquegua Valley, Peru. World Archaeology 30(2): p.238‐261.
–6–

Burger, R.L. 1993. The Chavin Horizon: stylistic chimera or socioeconomic metamorphosis? In D. S. Rice (ed) Latin American Horizons, 41‐82. Washington D.C. Dumbarton Oaks
D’Altroy, T.N., & Earle, T.K. 1985. Staple finance, wealth finance, and storage in the Inka political economy. Current Anthropology 26(2): p.187‐206.
D’Altroy, T.N., & Schreiber, K.J. 2004. Andean empires. In H. Silverman (ed) Andean Archaeology, 255‐279. Oxford: Blackwell
Godelier, M. 1977. The concept of “social and economic formation”: the Inca example. In Perspectives in Marxist Anthropology, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press
Goldstein, P. 2005. Andean Diaspora. The Tiwanaku Colonies and the Origins of South American Empire. Gainsville: University Press of Florida.
Heggarty, P., & Beresford‐Jones, D. 2010. Agriculture and language dispersals: limitations, refinements, and an Andean exception? Current Anthropology 51(2): p.163‐191.
Isbell, W.H. 1988. City and State in Middle Horizon Huari. In R. W. Keatinge (ed) Peruvian Prehistory: An Overview of Pre‐Inca and Inca Society, 164–89. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press
Janusek, J.W. 2004. Identity and Power in the Ancient Andes. Tiwanaku Cities Through Time. Routledge.
Jones, M. 2007. Feast: Why Humans Share Food. Oxford University Press.
Knudson, K.J. 2009. Tiwanaku influence in the south central Andes: strontium isotope analysis and Middle Horizon migration. Latin American Antiquity 19(1): p.3‐23.
McEvedy, C., & Woodroffe, D. 1992. The New Penguin Atlas of Medieval History 2nd ed. London: Penguin.
McEwan, G.F. 1991. Investigations at the Pikillacta site: a provincial Huari centre in the Valley of Cuzco. In W. H. Isbell & G. F. McEwan (eds) Huari Administrative Structure: Prehistoric Monumental Architecture and State Government, 93‐120. Washington D.C. Dumbarton Oaks
Menzel, D. 1964. Style and time in the Middle Horizon. In J. H. Rowe & D. Menzel (eds) Peruvian Archaeology: Selected Readings, 146‐164. Palo Alto: Peek
Murra, J.V. 1985. The limits and limitations of the “vertical archipelago” in the Andes. In S. Masuda, I. Shimada, & C. Morris (eds) Andean Ecology and Civilization: An Interdisciplinary Perspective on Andean Ecological Complementarity, 15‐20. Tokyo: University of Tokyo Press
Owen, B. 2005. Distant colonies and explosive collapse: The two stages of the Tiwanaku diaspora in the Osmore Drainage. Latin American Antiquity 16(1): p.45‐80.
Salomon, F. 1985. The dynamic potential of the complementarity concept. In S. Masuda, I. Shimada, & C. Morris (eds) Andean Ecology and Civilization: An Interdisciplinary Perspective on Andean Ecological Complementarity, 511‐531. Tokyo: University of Tokyo Press
Schreiber, K.J. 1992. Wari Imperialism in Middle Horizon Peru. Ann Arbor: Museum of Anthropology, University of Michigan.
–7–

Shady Solís, R. 2008. America’s first city? The case of Late Archaic Caral. In H. Silverman & W. H. Isbell (eds) Andean Archaeology III: North and South, 28–66.
Shimada, I. 1985. Introduction. In S. Masuda, I. Shimada, & C. Morris (eds) Andean Ecology and Civilization: An Interdisciplinary Perspective on Andean Ecological Complementarity, xi‐xxxii. Tokyo: University of Tokyo Press
Sutter, R.C. 2009. Prehistoric population dynamics in the Andes. In The Foundations of South Highland Andean Civilization : Papers in honor of Michael Moseley, 9‐38. Los Angeles, California: Cotsen Institute of Archaeology, UCLA
Torres‐Rouff, C. 2002. Cranial vault modification and ethnicity in Middle Horizon San Pedro de Atacama, Chile. Current Anthropology 43: p.163‐171.
Tung, T.A. 2008. Life on the move: bioarchaeological contributions to the study of migration and diaspora communities in the Andes. In H. Silverman & W. H. Isbell (eds) Handbook of South American Archaeology, New York: Springer
Urton, G. 1999. Inca Myths. London: British Museum Press.
–8–

