Language Diversity Endangered
≥

Trends in Linguistics
Studies and Monographs 181
Editors
Walter Bisang Hans Henrich Hock Werner Winter
Mouton de Gruyter Berlin · New York

Language Diversity Endangered
edited by
Matthias Brenzinger
Mouton de Gruyter Berlin · New York

Mouton de Gruyter (formerly Mouton, The Hague) is a Division of Walter de Gruyter GmbH & Co. KG, Berlin.
Țȍ Printed on acid-free paper which falls within the guidelines
of the ANSI to ensure permanence and durability.
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Language diversity endangered / edited by Matthias Brenzinger. p. cm. Ϫ (Trends in linguistics. Studies and monographs ; 181)
Includes bibliographical references and indexes. ISBN 978-3-11-017049-8 (hc. : alk. paper) ISBN 978-3-11-017050-4 (pbk. : alk. paper) 1. Language attrition. I. Brenzinger, Matthias, 1957Ϫ P40.5.L28L36 2007 306.44Ϫdc22
2006035522
ISBN 978-3-11-017049-8 ISSN 1861-4302
Bibliographic information published by the Deutsche Nationalbibliothek The Deutsche Nationalbibliothek lists this publication in the Deutsche Nationalbibliografie; detailed bibliographic data are available in the Internet at http://dnb.d-nb.de.
” Copyright 2007 by Walter de Gruyter GmbH & Co. KG, D-10785 Berlin All rights reserved, including those of translation into foreign languages. No part of this book may be reproduced or transmitted in any form or by any means, electronic or mechanical, including photocopy, recording or any information storage and retrieval system, without permission in writing from the publisher. Cover design: Christopher Schneider, Berlin. Printed in Germany.

Preface

The present volume aims to familiarize interested readers with the extent and variation of the accelerating phenomena of language endangerment. They will find global overviews on endangered languages in chapters dealing with all major geographic regions of the world. These contributions provide insights into the specific areal dynamics of language endangerment, past and present. In addition, the authors discuss numerous key issues concerning the documentation of endangered languages. This book is aimed not only at scholars and students from the various sub-disciplines of linguistics, but also addresses issues that are relevant to educators, language planners, policy makers, language activists, historians and other researchers in human science.
The volume comprises updated versions of presentations from the Colloquium Language Endangerment, Research and Documentation – Setting Priorities for the 21st Century held in Bad Godesberg from February 12th–17th, 2000 and sponsored by the Volkswagen Foundation. Besides the present publication, the colloquium had a substantial impact on the genesis of the UNESCO report Language Vitality and Endangerment, as well as the Recommendations for Action Plans. Between 2001 and 2003, a UNESCO ad-hoc expert group on endangered languages (co-chaired by Akira Yamamoto and Matthias Brenzinger) collaborated with the UNESCO Intangible Cultural Heritage Section in Paris to draft a preliminary version.
I wish to thank the Volkswagen Foundation for their financial support in organizing the colloquium. Thanks also to Monika Feinen, cartographer at the Institut für Afrikanistik, University of Cologne, for her professional contribution. I would like to thank Anke Beck (Mouton de Gruyter) for her sustained support in this enduring publishing project. Thanks are also due, of course, to the authors of the volume and to all colleagues who contributed by sharing their experience in the study of endangered languages. I am particularly grateful to the Research Institute for Languages and Cultures of Asia and Africa at the Tokyo University of Foreign Studies, Tokyo for enabling me to finish the book manuscript during my stay there as a visiting professor in 2005–06.

Tokyo, April 2006

Matthias Brenzinger

Table of Contents

Preface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

v

Matthias Brenzinger

Language Endangerment Throughout the World . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ix Matthias Brenzinger

Chapter 1 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

Classification and Terminology for Degrees of Language

Endangerment

Michael Krauss

Chapter 2 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

9

Threatened Languages in Hispanic South America

Willem F. H. Adelaar

Chapter 3 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 29 Endangered Languages of Lowland Tropical South America Denny Moore

Chapter 4 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 59 Endangered Languages of Mexico and Central America Colette Grinevald

Chapter 5 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 87 Endangered Languages in USA and Canada Akira Yamamoto

Chapter 6 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 123 Language Endangerment in Northern Africa Matthias Brenzinger

Chapter 7 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 140 Endangered Languages in West Africa Roger Blench

Chapter 8 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 163 Endangered Languages in Central Africa Bruce Connell

viii Table of Contents
Chapter 9 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 179 Language Endangerment in Southern and Eastern Africa Matthias Brenzinger
Chapter 10 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 205 Endangered Languages in Europe Tapani Salminen
Chapter 11 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 233 Language Endangerment in the CIS Olga Kazakevich and Aleksandr Kibrik
Chapter 12 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 263 Endangered Languages of the Middle East Jonathan Owens
Chapter 13 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 278 Language Endangerment in China and Mainland Southeast Asia David Bradley
Chapter 14 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 303 Endangered Languages of South Asia George van Driem
Chapter 15 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 342 Warramurrungunji Undone: Australian Languages in the 51st Millennium Nicholas Evans
Chapter 16 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 374 Threatened Languages in the Western Pacific Area from Taiwan to, and Including, Papua New Guinea Stephen A. Wurm
Chapter 17 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 391 The Languages of the Pacific Region: the Austronesian Languages of Oceania Darrell Tryon
Indexes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 411

Language Endangerment Throughout the World
Matthias Brenzinger
1. Introduction
Questions concerning the origin of human language have recently regained significant scholarly attention and it is expected that ongoing studies may produce important new insights into basic issues of language evolution. One of the most fundamental questions in this context is: Was there ever a Homo sapiens proto-language which existed some 100,000 or 200,000 years ago and then gave rise to large number of very distinct languages about 12,000 years ago, which for their part have been reduced to the approximately 6,000 of today? No matter what possible scenario for language genesis may be conjectured, it seems most likely that the large number of languages spoken on earth in some distant past dramatically dropped when hunter-gatherers changed to a pastoral lifestyle and even more so, when humans become sedentary farmers. The few thousand languages currently spoken are remaining relics of a once much richer pool of languages, and the shrinking of language diversity has accelerated during the last few thousand years.
The currently disappearing and endangered languages of the world, featured in the present volume, are essential sources for studying not only diachronic and synchronic aspects of human language. They are of eminent importance in attaining knowledge on human prehistory in general. Languages are formed by and reflect the most basic human experiences. Without proper scientific documentation, the decline of these languages will result in the irrecoverable loss of unique knowledge that is based on specific cultural and historical experience. Furthermore, the speech communities themselves will often suffer from the loss of their heritage language as a crucial setback of ethnic and cultural identity.
2. Indicators for assessing language vitality
The evaluation of the state of vitality of any language is a challenging task, as one has to consider different, intertwining factors. Speech communities are complex and patterns of language use within these commu-

x Matthias Brenzinger
nities vary and, in addition, are difficult to explore. Even the number of speakers is not always a clear indicator of language vitality. Languages spoken by thousands of people might be endangered, while others with a few hundred speakers may be vital and stable for the time being.
General indicators for the assessment of language vitality and also indicators for selecting languages for documentation were proposed and circulated prior to the colloquium Language Endangerment, Research and Documentation – Setting Priorities for the 21st Century by the organizer (Brenzinger 2000). These indicators were discussed at the colloquium, and are employed (some in a modified form) in the tables in the following contributions to this volume.
The indicators of Set A aim at capturing various levels of endangerment by considering a) the percentage of speakers within a population, b) the extent of language transmission, c) loss of functions in language use, and d) attitudes towards one’s own language. Language endangerment is an ongoing process, and all indicators therefore serve to capture changes within the speech community.
The indicators of Set B relate to the question of ranking endangered languages most urgently in need for documentation. The scientific (linguistic) value is mainly assigned by considering the genetic status of an endangered language, and the second indicator is the current status of its documentation. The third indicator, namely research conditions, has been removed from the list as they are too varied and complex to be reduced to mere numbers. Furthermore, conditions for fieldwork are subject to constant changes.
Discussions of these indicators at the colloquium served as a starting point for the work of an UNESCO Ad-hoc expert group on endangered languages that collaborated with the UNESCO Intangible Cultural Heritage Section in Paris. Between 2001 and 2003 the team drafted a report entitled Language Vitality and Endangerment, as well as, Recommendations for Action Plans. A final version of the report and the recommendations were prepared by linguists, language planners, representatives of NGO’s, as well as members of endangered language speech communities at a meeting at the UNESCO headquarters in Paris in March 2003. The final document identifies nine core factors that may help to assess and understand the language situation of specific endangered languages.
Factor 1 Intergenerational language transmission Factor 2 Absolute numbers of speakers Factor 3 Proportion of speakers within the total population

Language Endangerment Throughout the World xi

Factor 4 Factor 5 Factor 6 Factor 7
Factor 8 (Factor 9

Loss of existing language domains Response to new domains and media Material for language education and literacy Governmental and institutional language attitudes and policies, including official language status and use Community members’ attitudes towards their own language Amount and quality of documentation)

By applying these factors to individual languages, a 5 to 0 grading system has been proposed in the UNESCO report. For instance, grade 5 with factor 1 shows that all members of the community are also speakers of the heritage language. Grade 0 states that all speakers of the language have passed away. All factors may be applied to a given language, and the table of numbers, which is obtained in this way, can help to characterize the kind and state of endangerment for a language. The tables may serve as instruments not only for the assessment of the current situation of a community’s language, but also for the formulation of appropriate support measures for language documentation, maintenance, or revitalization.
Factors from (1) to (8) are applied to assess a language’s vitality and its state of endangerment by capturing the dynamics of the processes of a given language shift situation. The single most crucial factor among them is intergenerational language transmission (1), which determines the extent of language acquisition among the children within a community. Languages without any young speakers are obviously seriously threatened by extinction. The proportion of speakers within a community (3) addresses among others, a rather important aspect of language vitality: is the language still an essential asset for being regarded a member of the community or not? If membership of the community is possible without speaking the heritage language, this language is highly endangered from within the community.
External threats may derive from the introduction of formal education or new job opportunities for the members of a minority group. These changes may result in the loss of domains (4) in which the heritage language has still been used. A shift in religious affiliation of a community might also result in the shift to another mother tongue, a language that is associated with the new religion (5). Not only Arabic, but also Hausa and Dyula, for example, spread as first languages in West Africa along with Islam. Factor (6) relates to the stage of development of a given language (“Ausbau”). Does the community have an orthography? Have the community members agreed on a common standard form for writing the language? Are teaching and learning materials for the language available? Is

xii Matthias Brenzinger
there literature, such as newsletters, stories, religious texts, etc. published in that language? Factor (7) deals with the government’s policies towards that language and factor (8) assess the speakers’ attitudes towards their ethnic language.
Finally, factor (9) aims at helping to determine the urgency for documentation by focusing on the quantity and quality of already existing and analyzed language data. This last factor is the remaining attempt to provide an indicator for the ranking of languages in urgent need for documentation, previously addressed in Set B above. Serious problems with the endeavor of prioritizing languages for documentation have been pointed out by Tryon (p. 438, this volume). He claims that the results gained from factors 1–8 might be overruled by criteria which arise in factor 9: The utmost importance of documenting language isolates, and the attempt to reach coherent language descriptions by choosing languages which are still spoken, not only remembered. While for the question of language documentation, factor 9 is the most crucial, it might be prove to be rather irrelevant for language revitalization efforts, as discussed by Grenoble and Whaley (2006: 4–5).
3. A global overview of endangered languages
Michael Krauss (University of Fairbanks, Alaska) opens the volume by proposing a refined terminology for categorizing degrees of language endangerment by considering the single factor language transmission. His scale comprises three basic categories, namely safe, extinct, and endangered, with the latter category being further refined by 5 subcategories.
The other chapters are assigned to regions and together capture the global extent of language endangerment. In addition, they analyze a wide range of different threats to individual languages and most importantly, draw attention to specific issues relevant for the research on and documentation of endangered languages.
Willem F. H. Adelaar (Leiden University, The Netherlands) reviews the complex history of language replacement in Hispanic South America from pre-colonial times to the present. Quechua, as the language of the Inca Empire, played a significant role in diminishing language diversity before Spanish and the European conquerors became a threat to South American languages and even to the people themselves.
Denny Moore (Museu Goeldi, Brasilia) presents a thorough overview of the enormous number of endangered languages of Lowland Tropical

Language Endangerment Throughout the World xiii
South America. In discussing linguistic research and documentation carried out on these languages, he points out fundamental differences between non-missionary and missionary linguists in the important issues of training national and native linguists.
Colette Grinevald (University Lyon 2, France) shares her comprehension of the situation of endangered languages of Mexico and Central America with an activist approach. She approves achievements in language work on endangered languages that are reached by local, national and regional research institutions and calls for giving support to them. One concrete need in this respect is the training of Amerindian linguists.
Akira Yamamoto (University of Kansas, USA) presents an overview of endangered languages in the USA and Canada. He contrasts the language situation in three communities in some detail and discusses the language work going on in these communities. His main emphasis, however, is on issues that relate to the ethics and pragmatics of fieldwork.
Matthias Brenzinger (University of Cologne, Germany) focuses on endangered languages in Northern Africa. The spread of various “world” religions has had a major impact on the language map in this part of the world, the spread of Arabic along with Islam being the most significant.
In a second contribution, Brenzinger starts off with the endangered Khoisan languages of Southern Africa and moves on to deal with the Eastern African situation. The role of migration waves for language replacement is examined, followed by a typology of the various present settings of language replacement in this part of the world.
Roger Blench (Cambridge, UK) analyses the situation of endangered languages in West Africa by employing statistical methods. He captures national and regional differences, and stresses the importance of the still great number of languages for which no information exists at all.
Bruce Connell (York University, Canada) summarizes information on endangered languages of Central Africa. A brief account on the language history of the region is followed by an overview of endangered languages. This list is incomplete, as he states, due to the fact that even the most basic information for classifying languages does not exist for several countries in that region.
Tapani Salminen (University of Helsinki, Finland) provides on overview of the endangered language of Europe. The postscript added to his contribution just before the publication underlines a point he previously raises, that not all European languages are well studied and documented, and that even where they are, judgments on whether a language is endangered or not are not easily possible.

xiv Matthias Brenzinger
Olga Kazakevich (Lomonosov University of Moscow, CIS) and Alexandr Kibrik (Moscow State University, CIS) survey the endangered language in the CIS. In their contribution to this volume, they describe the importance of formal education in Russian as a major force in endangering all other languages that are and were spoken in the Russian Empire and the USSR.
Jonathan Owens (University of Bayreuth, Germany) centers his survey of endangered Middle East languages on Afghanistan, the country with the highest linguistic diversity in the region. He reviews linguistic research and provides diachronic information on languages and speech communities.
David Bradley (LaTrobe, Australia) examines the endangered languages of China and mainland Southeast Asia. For many languages, he adds details that are important for their endangerment to the basic statistical information.
George van Driem (Leiden University, The Netherlands) records the large number of endangered language in South Asia. Among other issues, he raises the question of whether it is in fact feasible to set up a universal code of conducting research is feasible.
Nicholas Evans (University of Melbourne, Australia) assesses the situation of Australian languages. He allows for an understanding not only of the linguistic characteristics of these languages, but also mentions aspects of the mythology and culture of the people.
Stephen Wurm † (Australian National University Canberra, Australia), one of the great scholars in the study of endangered languages, summarizes threatened languages in the Western Pacific area from Taiwan to, and including, Papua New Guinea.
Darrell Tryon (Australian National University Canberra, Australia) closes the volume by evaluating the endangerment of the Austronesian languages of the Pacific Region. Among other issues, he discusses practical questions concerning the setting up of local language archives.
4. The scope of the volume and further related topics
Linguists with regional expertise have contributed to the present volume, their investigations outlining the extent of language endangerment and analyzing threats to language and linguistic diversity. While the importance of language diversity in many other respects is acknowledged, the present studies choose to concentrate mainly on issues that relate to languages as resources for scientific research.

Language Endangerment Throughout the World xv
Yamamoto deals with fieldwork ethics, but for the actual linguistic fieldwork, we want to further refer to practical manuals, several of which explicitely consider the documentation of endangered languages (e. g. Newman and Ratcliff eds. 2001).
Language revitalization is an important related issue. Linguists such as, for example, Kenneth Hale and Thomas Kaufman, have been instrumental in setting up community programs that aim at countering language shift processes. For sustained success in language maintenance, however, language revitalization must be “a community-driven, a bottom-up kind of movement”, as pointed out by Grenoble and Whaley (2006: 20). We refer the reader to their book, Saving languages, the key publication on academic and practical aspects of language revitalization.
Skutnabb-Kangas might be consulted on important questions concerning endangered languages and language (human) rights. She examines not only the language policy environment of her own marginalized Saami language, but also of many endangered languages from various countries and continents (Skutnabb-Kangas 2000, 2002).
Even though the volume outlines threats to language and linguistic diversity with a global framework, dimensions of other linguistic variability remain widely ignored. There is no doubt about the fact that the diversity of linguistic variability will continue to evolve as long as humans exist and communicate. Special vocabularies are generated, for example, with the progressing professional specialization and new terminologies develop with achievements reached in technologies. Also peer group-specific speech forms follow rapidly changing fashions and linguistic variability is employed to express affiliations to specific scenes. Even new languages may arise in the formation of young nations.
Regional varieties as well as secret codes and other special languages, i. e. linguistic variability that encapsulates linguistic heritage, seem to be disapearing throughout the world. The formation of nation states with one unifying language, as well as a global coverage – first by mass media and now by the WWW – has fostered the assimilation of regional “dialects” to national standard “languages”.
In these processes, not only regional variants, but also distinct languages are often downgraded to mere “dialects” by national ideologies and as a result disappear, widely unnoticed. They may not be considered in the academic discourse on endangered languages and for that reason also not feature in the present volume. On the Okinawan Islands of Japan, for example, the entire language group of the Ryukyuan languages is about to disappear. The Ryukyuan languages are the only linguistic relatives of the otherwise

xvi Matthias Brenzinger
isolated Japanese language; however, their distance to Standard Japanese is much greater than, for example, the one between German and English (Heinrich 2005). The Okinawan languages are being replaced by Standard Japanese as a result of the Japanization of Okinawa, which started with the annexation of the Ryukyu Kingdom in 1879. In public schools, Okinawan children were educated to become Japanese and they were no longer allowed to speak their own language. Mashide Ishihara describes the policy of “One nation, one people, and one language” (Ishihara 2004) by the government in Tokyo, which made strong efforts to turn the Okinawans into loyal Japanese-speaking citizens. The U.S. occupation of Okinawa after WWII, which – at least formally – ended in 1972, marks the final stage of the fade of the Ryukyuan languages. The Americans tried to separate Okinawa from Japan and for that reason emphasized the distinctiveness of the Ryukyuan language and culture. This US policy, however, fostered the Japanization movement and today, even the remaining – mainly elderly Ryukyu-speakers – themselves refer to their languages as Japanese “dialects”.
Several contributions to the volume mention regions for which even the most fundamental information on minority languages does not exist, such as in Amazonia and parts of the African continent. During the past few years, financial support from various institutions and foundations allowed for quite a number of studies on endangered languages, for example, in The Endangered Languages of the Pacific Rim program of the Japanese government and the DOBES (Dokumentation bedrohter Sprachen) program of the Volkswagen Foundation, Germany. Other important programs for language documentation were set up by the Rausing Foundation, UK and the Netherlands Organization for Scientific Research (NOW). Even though the Endangered Language Fund, USA and the Foundation of Endangered Languages provide relatively small grants, they have nevertheless had a significant impact on the discussions and the actual research of endangered languages. Research on language endangerment and the documentation of endangered languages will progress further, and we hope that the present volume will be a useful reference in these endevours and encourage further discussions and studies on endangered languages.

Language Endangerment Throughout the World xvii
References
Brenzinger, Matthias 2000 Selection and ranking of endangered languages most urgently in need for documentation. Discussion paper prepared for the colloquium Language Endangerment, Research and Documentation – Setting Priorities for the 21st Century, February 12th–17th 2000.
Dwyer, Arienne; Brenzinger, Matthias and Akira Y. Yamamoto 2003 Safeguarding of endangered languages, The endangered language fund newsletter 7,1: 1–4.
Grenoble, Lenore A. and Lindsay J. Whaley 2006 Saving languages. An introduction to language revitalization. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Heinrich, Patrick 2005 Reversing language shift in Okinawa Island, in Crawhall, Nigel and Nicholas Ostler (eds.) Creating outsiders: Endangered languages, migration and marginalization. (Preceedings FEL IX, Stellenbosch, South Africa, 18–20 November 2005), Bath: FEL. 137–144.
Ishihara, Mashide 2004 One nation, one people, and one language: Becoming Japanses in Okinawa, ᐔᚑ 13, 14, 15 ᐕᐲ⑼ቇ⎇ⓥࡼٜഥ୴ (ၮ⋚ A)‫ޟ‬ᣣ☨ߦ߅ ߌࠆหൻ᡽╷ߣ 20 ਎♿ᴒ-‫⎇ޠ‬ⓥᚑᨐႎ๔ᦠ (℄⃿ᄢቇᴺቇૡ 2004 ᐕ 3 ᦬⊒؅) 237–244. (Research report to the Grant-in-Aid for Scientific Research, “Nichibei ni okeru Doka-Seisaku to 20-seiki Okinawa”, 2001–03: 237–244).
Newman, Paul and Martha Ratcliff (eds.) 2001 Linguistic fieldwork. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Skutnabb-Kangas, Tove 2000 Linguistic genocide in education – or worldwide diversity and human rights? Mahwah, New Jersey, London: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates. 2002 Irelands, Scotland, education and linguistic human rights: some international comparisons, in Kirk, John M. and Dónall P. Ó Baoill (eds.) 2002 Language planning and education: Linguistic rights in Northern Ireland, the Republic of Ireland, and Scotland. (Belfast Studies in Language, Culture and Politics, 6), Belfast: Cló Ollscoil na Banríona, 221 – 266.

Chapter 1 Classification and Terminology for Degrees of Language Endangerment
Michael Krauss

1. The following is a suggested framework or schema for classifying languages according to degree of viability, from ‘safe’ to extinct, with terminology and designators.

’safe’

a+

e

stable

a– all speak, children & up

n d a n g e r

i

instable;

n

eroded

d e

definitively

c

endangered

l

severely

a some children speak; all children speak in some places
b spoken only by parental generation and up
c spoken only by grandparental

e d

i

endangered

n

e

critically

generation and up d spoken only by very few,

endangered

of great-grandparental generation

extinct

e no speakers

The schema and discussion do not address definition of “language” vs. “dialect” for example, or the type of rapid linguistic evolution or “decay” (such as loss of inflection, incorporation of loan words) which is considered by some also as “endangerment”.
The three basic categories are ‘safe’ and extinct, with everything in between endangered, by far the largest category, to be taken up last.
2. The term ‘safe’, designated a+, I have adopted as a technical term, so keep that in single quotes, to be used with caution, though perhaps that is inconsistent with the rest, also proposed as technical terms. ‘Safe’ are those languages which are not only being learned as mother-tongue by children as the norm, but which we predict will still be being so learned

2 Michael Krauss
for the foreseeable future, i. e. throughout this new century, still having at least a viable community, critical mass, of children speakers in the year 2100. Such would be a very large proportion of languages which are now spoken by a million or more, including children, and/or are firmly supported by the power of a state or regional government, this including also, though the population may be well below a million, e. g. Icelandic or Faroese, 250,000 and 40,000 respectively. The total number of ‘safe’ languages may thus currently be about 300 out of 6,000 or 5%, the majority of those being both spoken by over a million and supported by state power, used in educational and media domains. Sometimes, however, state support does not suffice, as in the notorious case of Irish, already severely endangered before it gained that support, or, more often, a million does not suffice without that support, as in the case of Breton, or Quechua. Even so, other factors may prevail, as in the case of Yiddish in conservative or Hasidic communities, which might classify Yiddish, perhaps the most famously “dying” language, in the elite class of ‘safe’ — to put the enormity of the endangered class in perspective — where Yiddish may well be at the 95th percentile for ‘safety.’ Probably no language with fewer than 10,000 speakers could anywhere be classified as ‘safe’, and 10,000 is probably at least at the 65th percentile for language speakership size, the median size being closer to 5,000. (It remains a major study, not addressed here, to consider factors detracting from language ‘safety,’ such as genocidal violence, industrial development, environmental degradation, demographic intrusion or upheaval, urbanization, indifference, television exclusively in the dominant language, along with the whole spectrum of attitudes, both of the minority and dominant language speakers).
3. Extinct, designated e, are languages no longer spoken or even potentially spoken (remembered) by anyone, so for which no new documentation can be obtained. Questionable cases of recent extinction of course are common, perhaps more common than cases where it is certain that not a single speaker anywhere survives. Borderline cases exist too, where a few words or phrases are remembered, which could be quite valuable in determining at least the genetic position of an otherwise undocumented language, though there is no one able to generate sentences in it. Such cases might be designated e+. Perhaps still more difficult to classify, but probably e+, are languages for which there are no fluent speakers or persons able to generate new sentences, but for which there are persons who may remember extensive rote ritual or epic text, such as Ainu yukar. (Similarly, however, there are or have been languages with extensive writ-

Classification and Terminology for Degrees of Language Endangerment 3
ten literature but with no native speakers, such as Hebrew until the late 19th century, Coptic, or clerical Latin, regularly used in ritual. Commonly these may have new text generated in writing may even be the only written language for the community, and may have persons potentially capable of conversation in them under special conditions. Along with other types, such as Esperanto or pidgins, these may perhaps be designated by the proposed scale, or something parallel to that, some perhaps even so high as ‘safe,’ however restricted their domain may remain. These, or any language sufficiently documented, have also the potential to be revived and will be considered at the end of this discussion.).
4. Between ‘safe’ and extinct is the entire spectrum of endangered languages, probably 95% of the 6,000. The term endangered is clearly adopted from its use in the field of biology, where “endangered species” are defined as “in danger of extinction throughout all or a significant portion of their range”, as distinct from “threatened species”, defined as “likely to become endangered within the foreseeable future throughout all or a significant portion of their range”. For language we have agreed to use the term endangered much more broadly, to include a large category, perhaps already a third of “endangered” languages, which are no longer spoken by children; those would correspond in biology to species which have lost the capacity to reproduce. Rather than use terms like “dying”, “doomed”, “terminal”, or even “moribund” or “non-viable”, which might well have a discouraging or negative effect, we extend the term endangered to include those too, however euphemistic that use may seem, trusting that the term endangered may itself be sufficiently alarming. For our purposes, I do not see either that a distinction between threatened and endangered for language would be very useful; since we are using “endangered” already as a euphemism for a status much graver than what “endangered” means in biology, it seems wrong to compound the obfuscation by calling merely “threatened” (not yet endangered) what does in most cases correspond to “endangered” in biology. Perhaps in further elaboration of a separate study of factors endangering a language, “threatened” might be defined to designate an upper minority of the category of stable but unsafe languages, to double or triple the number of non-endangered languages (‘safe’ 5% + threatened 5–10% more).
4.1. At the top of the scale in the endangered category is the class designated a, stable. So long as a language is being learned as mother-tongue by the children, it remains classified as stable. This would generally require that virtually all children are so learning the language, in the family,

4 Michael Krauss
and actually speaking it not only to their elders but to each other. Home is the essential domain, and so long as home use remains stable, though another language may be used increasingly in school, work, religion, etc., the language remains stable, however threatened it may be by factors external to the home. Failure of a language to expand into new technological domains may indeed increase the threat to it, but need not necessarily reclassify it as less than stable. A language might remain stable if it is merely the “norm” that children learn and speak it in the home, so long as cases where that is not so are truly exceptional, or are common only in a diaspora, e. g. permanently urbanized families, at some remove from the core area. The term stable seems detachedly realistic and not leading to complacency, so long as one remembers that that is merely the top category, still the majority worldwide, though probably for not much longer, of endangered languages. The use of the term stable is partly inspired by the phrase “Stabilizing Indigenous Languages” in the title for a series of North American conferences.
4.2. For the next subclass of endangered languages, incipiently in decline, I see no qualifier better than instable or partly stable, designated a–. (The designators, it is time to explain, are partly derived from the American public school grading system, where a is ‘excellent’, b ‘good’, c ‘fair, average’, d ‘poor’, and f ‘failing’, and a– is less than a but closer to a than to b, b+ better than b but closer to b than to a, etc. They have the advantage of being more iconic than a numeral system, where it is not immediately clear whether the lower number 1 or I as opposed to the higher number 4 or IV is better.) There are clearly two different types of a– situations, both defined as where some of the children speak the language. The first type, instable, is where “some” of the children speak the language, e. g. some of the children in a single village, or scattered through a wider area, perhaps still a majority, but not constituting a stable or critical mass. Instable includes also a situation where the children speak the language some of the time, i. e. to elders, but amongst each other speak the replacing language, so seem destined to speak that to their spouses and children. The other subtype of a– might be partly stable or eroding, where for a more complex situation of several communities where the children all speak the language in one or more parts of it but there also is part or parts where only some children speak the language, especially where a clear geographical distinction is not easy to make. If it is easy to make such a distinction, then a further dimension of the designator system should be used, more than one designator separated by a comma, here namely a, a–, meaning that in a part of the language area all children are learning the

Classification and Terminology for Degrees of Language Endangerment 5
language, but in another part only some children are learning it. The language in that case as a whole would be a–, partly stable or eroding, but could be further designated as stable plus instable. The term instable (c. f. instability) is used as a technical term instead of “unstable”, in order to avoid the connotation of “mentally unstable”.
4.3. The next subclass is b, definitively endangered (and definitively in decline) for lack of a better term, meaning that the language has passed the crucial basic threshold of viability, is no longer being learned as mother-tongue by children in the home, that the youngest speakers are of the parental generation, or more precisely that the youngest generation of which all are speakers is the parental generation. (That age could of course vary widely in different parts of the world, minimum probably from 15 to 20.). This might include also situations where the parents not only can but do speak the language to their children, yet permit the children regularly to respond in the replacing language, so that the children hardly become active speakers of the endangered language. Designated with variants of b, such as b–, might be cases where some of the parents speak the language, or where more uniformly the youngest speaker age is 25 or 30, again meaning in a different way that some parents speak the language. Another type of finer designation might be b+, for where the youngest speakers may be 5 or 15, but the intergenerational transmission is definitively interrupted. If the youngest speakers are already even five, the language has probably been definitively abandoned. Though numerically more children may still be able to speak it than cannot, the language should probably be designated b+ rather than a–, because of the dynamic, which is always more important than sheer numbers. The system allows also for two more types of complexity. The first is as shown above, two designators divided by comma, e. g. here a,b for two communities or distinct geographical areas, in one of which all speak the language, in the other only parents and up. The second type, which I have very often used, is joining two designators with a hyphen, ambiguous in American notation as the same symbol as a minus sign, e. g. a–b, for a complex or continuum which ranges from all children speaking the language to only parents and older speaking it. Perhaps the joining symbol should not be used so ambiguously, so that a situation ranging from where some of the children speak the language in one part to where only parents and up speak it would be a–b, thus allowing very finely also, e. g. for a–b+, a–b–.
4.4. The next subclass is severely endangered, c, where the youngest speakers are of grandparental generation, middle aged (mutatis mutandis age span of 35 –60 or even wider) where parents cannot teach the language

6 Michael Krauss
to their children. I have picked “severely” over “seriously endangered”, which implies that it is not “serious”, or “gravely endangered”, too funereal. This is by far the most common basic category for indigenous North American languages, for example, both because of historical timing and the breadth of the age-span. More complex distinctions such as a–c, c–, can of course be used. For example, the long Inuit continuum I have designated a–c, for a in Greenland and Eastern Canada, but not Labrador, b in Central Canada and a few parts of Alaska, c in Western Canada and most of Alaska. Another type of fine designation that I occasionally used in my circumpolar report was –c, for where the youngest speakers were in the range 35–40, i. e. youngish for grandparent but closer to c than to b; this should, according to the above, be better symbolized c+.
4.5. The last subclass before extinct is critically endangered, d, for languages of which the youngest speakers are in the great-grandparental generation, and are also very few, often fewer than 10 for most American languages, and constituting the second largest class, after c, for the U.S. Languages very close to extinction, with all speakers at the very end of life expectancy, and fewer than 10, could be designated d–. In this class too the numbers could be problematical. e. g. in the case of Hawaiian (not counting Ni’ihau, the one isolated island which is a), where the youngest speakers throughout are over 70, but with a large enough population that there may be still a thousand such elders, some of whom also could become centenarians; such a language might well resist extinction longer than small languages designated c where the number of speakers is 10, some aged only 55, but of whom none might reach 80. Sheer numbers should only secondarily be a factor in the classification however, the Hawaiian case being far less frequent than the smaller language populations. For languages in class d it should also be noted that the further toward extinction a language moves, the more the actual language ability of the last speakers may become an issue. Often neither academic linguistics nor community language interest can afford to discount speakers with less than eloquent or complete command of a language in this category; a designation of d– might well include or consist only of a very few speakers with less than complete competence, or very rusty speakers or semispeakers. Some languages, e. g. Sayan Samoyed, resisted extinction for a generation or more on that basis, possibly also Ubykh now.
5. Finally, the designations so far have dealt only with unidirectional movement from stable downward to extinct. One type of exception would be languages traditionally learned in adulthood, e. g. as I have heard

Classification and Terminology for Degrees of Language Endangerment 7
about Tarascan in Mexico, where children learn only Spanish, but are expected to learn in young adulthood Tarascan and henceforth to speak that with other adults. It would be important to note other such cases. Possibly, Esperanto and pidgins could have similar special designations, or secret or ritual languages, such as Demiin, Coptic or clerical Latin. Before considering and designating those, however, we need to consider another type more frequent and important for our purposes, increasingly the result of community programs for reversal of language loss. One example is Hawaiian, which might be designated a, d–a; the a is for Ni’ihau, the small isolated island where the children all still speak the language, and d–a is for the rest of the islands, where until recently the only speakers were the generation of those now past 70 or 75, but where some younger adults began learning the language about 20 years ago, instituted the Punana Leo (Language Nest) movement now spanning kindergarten through high school (all basically taught through the medium of Hawaiian, graduates of which are now raising native Hawaiian-speaking children). Maori in New Zealand had probably reached a designation of b–c (maybe a–c), but the Kohanga Reo movement (parent to its Hawaiian counterpart) has now produced many child speakers; Maori thus might be designated b–c– a (or a–c–a). Cornish was indeed extinct for about a century, and insofar as revivalist claims are correct, that there are now some native-speaking Cornish children, could be designated e–a, or if not, then b–a. Irish is still a in some of the Gaeltachtaí (Irish-speaking districts), but has many more speakers who actually do speak it to each other as a second language and whose children are native speakers of it e. g. in Dublin, so Irish generally might be designated a, b–a. A pidgin in the process of becoming a creole might also be designated b–a.
Possibly, using x+ instead of the –y device used occasionally in my circumpolar paper, the designation –b might be reserved for languages learned only in adulthood or school, such as Tarascan, Esperanto, pidgins, or clerical Latin, where the state of decline is not relevant. Sanskrit however, reportedly has children speakers, so should accordingly be designated –a. Also, until the late 19th century, Hebrew, which is now of course, a+, and still may have more second-language than native speakers, might be designated as –a+! Finally, cases like Ainu or successful results of the California-type master-apprentice program, insofar as one or very few adults have successfully learned the language from a last aged speaker, might be designated d–b, noting that the hyphen in those loss-reversal cases does not signify a range of speakers throughout the intermediate generations. Presumably terms could be assigned to various types of loss

8 Michael Krauss
reversal, e. g. revived (from extinction) for Cornish, e–a, or even e–b; revitalized or restabilized or restored, variously, for cases like c–a, d–a, d–b; renativized for Sanskrit or Hebrew, –b–a, nativized or creolized for pidgins, also –b–a.

Chapter 2 Threatened Languages in Hispanic South America
Willem F. H. Adelaar
1. Introduction
In the western part of South America language endangerment is not a recent phenomenon. The process of linguistic reduction may have started during the 15th century with the conquest wars conducted by the Incas of Cuzco. At the height of their power the Incas dominated the Andean region from southern Colombia to the centre of Chile with the inclusion of all the coastal areas. The Incas introduced the habit of relocating entire populations from newly conquered areas to places in the centre of the empire, where they could be controlled more easily. Conversely, loyal populations from the centre were taken to the borders for reasons of defense. This practice, known as mitma, may have favored the use of the imperial language (Quechua) to the detriment of the original languages of some of the affected populations.
2. The linguistic consequences of conquest and colonization
The spread of epidemic diseases during the 16th century, as well as the actions of the Spanish conquerors, who had introduced them, had a devastating effect upon the ethnic and linguistic diversity existing in the area under discussion. Several coastal populations disappeared during the 16th and 17th centuries. If they had languages of their own, these fell into oblivion before they could be described or documented. An example is the Quingnam language, which was spoken along the Peruvian coast near Trujillo and further south. The survivors assimilated with the newcomers and turned to Spanish. Coastal cities such as Lima and Trujillo became predominantly European in culture and in language, as well as in the physiognomy of their inhabitants.
In the highlands of what are today Bolivia, Ecuador and Peru, the presence of the indigenous population remained strong. A language of communication and administration, known as ‘the general language of the Inca’, was widely used in the Inca Empire. If not as a mother tongue, it was used as a second language by most of the Inca’s subjects, who often main-

10 Willem F. H. Adelaar
tained local languages as well. This ‘general language of the Inca’ was a variety of the linguistic family later to become known as Quechua. In the former Inca Empire the Spanish authorities initially favored the use of three languages, in order of importance, Quechua, Aymara and Puquina. It shows the great interest of the Spanish rulers for the southern half of the former Inca Empire with its rich mineral resources. The languages spoken in the northern half of the former empire were seriously neglected and remained largely unstudied and undocumented (cf. Adelaar 1999). Standardized varieties of Quechua and Aymara were introduced in the aftermath of the 3rd Church Council of Lima (Tercer Concilio Limense 1582– 83). They became instruments of Christianization and, in the case of Quechua, interregional contact. All other languages fell victim to neglect and were gradually replaced either by Quechua, or by Spanish. The relatively unimportant Puquina language also suffered that fate. Aymara survived in a much reduced part of its original territory, i. e. the area surrounding Lake Titicaca. The only language that benefited from the colonial policy was Quechua. It became more and more important. The introduction and stabilization of Quechua in the highlands of Bolivia and Ecuador, where it had hardly been present before, was remarkably successful.
In those parts of the Andes that did not originally belong to the Inca Empire (Colombia) or where its influence had been superficial (Chile) similar policies were followed. Muysca (Chibcha) and Quechua obtained an official status in the kingdom of Nueva Granada, present-day Colombia (Triana y Antorveza 1987: 163–70); Araucanian maintained a dominant position in Chile. The policy followed with regard to Muysca was not successful. The language died out during the 18th century. In Paraguay and adjacent areas, Guaraní became the leading language, its use being stimulated by the Jesuit missions. Today, Paraguayan Guaraní is the only native American language whose position can be considered unthreatened. The number of its speakers is growing constantly and comprises more than 90% of the population of Paraguay. Large areas of what are today Argentina and Chile, as well as the Gran Chaco region, remained untouched by colonization until the 19th century. In those areas the native languages were not immediately threatened.
The influence of colonial rule in the Amazonian lowlands bordering on the Andes was of an intermittent character. In central Peru, an initially successful mission among the Asháninca and other Amazonian tribes was interrupted in 1742 by the rebellion of Juan Santos Atahuallpa. On the other hand, several numerous tribes, such as the Panatahua of the Huallaga river valley, disappeared as a result of epidemic disease introduced by

Threatened Languages in Hispanic South America 11
the mission (Santos 1992). The plains of what is now eastern Bolivia were the scene of severe warfare during the first 150 years of colonization. In 1692 the Jesuits succeeded in establishing a successful mission among the Chiquito Indians (Marzal 1992, I: 421– 55). They favored the use of the Chiquitano language at the cost of the languages of many other ethnic groups sharing the Chiquito culture and way of life, who were incorporated into the missionary domain. Another missionary experiment took place further west in the Moxos region, an old cultural area with an extraordinary linguistic diversity. In Moxos many of the local languages were preserved, although most of them are moribund today.
The policy of the Spanish colonial authorities with regard to the native languages changed radically in 1770. Three years before, the Jesuits, who were active protectors of the natives and their languages, had been expelled from the empire. Henceforth, forced ‘Castilianization’ (Hispanicization) became the rule, following the model of the Romans, who also had succeeded in imposing their language upon the populations they had conquered. The failed indigenous rebellion of 1780– 81, headed by Tupac Amaru II, a descendant of the Inca elite, entailed a further repression of the use of the indigenous languages (cf. Triana y Antorveza 1987: 514–15).
Unfortunately, the independence of the Andean nations initially did not bring any improvement in the status of the native languages. All new states sustained the ideal of homogeneous European-style nations with a single national language, Spanish. The indigenous legacy was to be disposed of as soon as possible. It is in this period that we have to look for the roots of the profound feeling of inferiority that the Andean populations continue to nourish with respect to their native languages and which has been the cause of the major language shift that takes place in the Andes today. In the meantime previous shifts in language loyalty continued to be operational, as Aymara gained terrain on the Uru languages, and Quechua on Aymara and on the Zaparoan languages of the Ecuadorian Amazon. However, varieties of Quechua now became threatened throughout the Andes. The Chilean Araucanians conquered new territories in central and southern Argentina and imposed their language on the vanquished Tehuelche, Teushen and Gününa Küne (cf. Censabella 1999: 89–96).
3. Language loss through genocide
The new nation-states turned their attention towards areas to whose possession they considered themselves entitled and which had never been

12 Willem F. H. Adelaar
brought under Spanish control. The fierce resistance of the local Indians led to downright genocide in Argentina and in Uruguay. The last nomadic Indians of Uruguay were surrounded and slaughtered in 1831. The survivors were enslaved (Pi Hugarte 1993). The power of the free Indians of central and southern Argentina was broken in two successive campaigns, in 1833 under general Juan Manuel de Rosas, and above all in 1879, when general Julio Argentino Roca launched his infamous Conquista del Desierto ‘Conquest of the Desert’, preceded and accompanied by heated nationalist rhetoric. The campaign of 1879, which continued with a somewhat lower intensity until 1885, destroyed all hopes of a peaceful solution. Thousands of Indians were killed, native settlements destroyed, the survivors, including several famous chiefs, taken prisoner. Due to the harsh conditions of the campaign, many of them died in custody. The extermination war in the Pampas and Patagonia was followed by similar, but less effective actions in the Gran Chaco region (Martínez Sarasola 1992).
Tierra del Fuego became the scene of a particularly nasty case of genocide. The inhabitants of its main island, the nomadic Ona or Selk’nam Indians, were wiped out by headhunters hired by cattle-raising landowners, with the passive support of the Argentinian and Chilean authorities, mainly between 1890 and 1910 (Martínez Sarasola 1992: 311–15). At one time 500 died after eating whale meat that had been poisoned on purpose. Many Onas sought the protection of the Salesian mission, where starvation and disease caught up with them. In 1899 nine Onas were exhibited as ‘cannibalistic Indians’ in a cage at the World Fair in Paris. The Onas never gave up their language. Their language died in the 1970s with the death of the last full-blooded tribe members. Another tragic case is that of the Yahgan or Yamana, who inhabited the archipelago south of the main island of Tierra del Fuego. This once numerous southernmost nation on earth fell victim to diseases imported by missionaries. Most of them died between 1880 and 1910. Among the survivors only a few aged people remember the language. The Alacaluf or Kawesqar, who once inhabited the immense area of channels and fjords between Tierra del Fuego and the Chonos archipelago, are still present, but their number is now reduced to 28 (Viegas Barros, ms.). Their chances of survival are limited.
Another episode of postcolonial violence, which had consequences for the survival and distribution of peoples and languages, were the atrocities that accompanied the exploitation of wild rubber in the upper Amazon basin between 1880 and 1914. In 1894 the notorious rubber-baron Fitzcarraldo machine-gunned the Toyeri, a subgroup of the Harakmbut in the southern Peruvian jungle because of their refusal to work for him (Gray

Threatened Languages in Hispanic South America 13
1996). Survivors escaped to areas near the Andean slopes, where they had to fight an internecine war with their relatives over diminished resources. Rubber extraction companies, such as the Peruvian Casa Arana, persecuted and enslaved thousands of Amazonian Indians with utmost cruelty, causing tremendous mortality among them. Most severely hit was the area of the Putumayo river at the border between Colombia and Peru. Huitoto Indians were incited to hunt down members of other tribes, such as the Andoque and Bora. The atrocities are described in the Casement report (Casement 1988). The production of this report, presented to the British Parliament in 1911, was motivated by the fact that a British company held a considerable economic interest in Arana’s activity in the area. As a consequence of deportations and forced labor, fragments of Indian tribes ended up a thousand miles away from their original habitat. The effects of the rubber-boom can still be felt today. Many until then thriving native groups were split up or fell down to critical numbers. The number of speakers of their languages was of course affected accordingly.
4. Language shift in the Andes
The second half of the 20th century brought a great deal of interest in the Andean languages and their situation. Several languages were documented and described. The distribution and the dialectal variety of Aymara and Quechua were thoroughly studied. The native languages became a political issue in 1975, when the military government in Peru issued a decree declaring Quechua to be the second national language along with Spanish. This measure had little immediate effect and was never seriously implemented, but the change in attitude of the dominant groups is significant. One issue that was raised was the question whether a unique standard variety had to be selected for Quechua, or several standards corresponding to the local dialectal variety, which is considerable in Peru. As a result six different dialects of Quechua were selected to be standard varieties. Grammars and dictionaries of these varieties were published by the Peruvian Ministry of Education and the Instituto de Estudios Peruanos (Escobar 1976).
At present, the multicultural and plurilingual character of Bolivia and Ecuador is duly recognized at different official levels. Ecuador furthermore has powerful Indian organizations, who give a high priority to the use of the native languages. The Colombian constitution of 1991 recognizes the cultural rights of all the native groups in the country. In Chile the

14 Willem F. H. Adelaar
Mapuche Indians are also revindicating cultural and linguistic rights. The first experiments with bilingual education gradually developed into largescale programs which now carry the epithet ‘intercultural’, thus showing the intention to preserve the native languages and cultures alongside knowledge of the national language and society. Best known are the experimental programs of bilingual education, run with German state development aid (GTZ – Deutsche Gesellschaft für technische Zusammenarbeit), that were operational in Puno (Peru) and in Quito (Ecuador) during the 1980s and 1990s, as well as the current intercultural bilingual education program PROEIB Andes in Cochabamba (Bolivia).
Although these developments give ground to optimism as to the preservation of the native languages, the reality is less cheerful. The Andean languages, Quechua in particular, are subject to a phenomenon that can be described as ‘massive language shift’. The Quechua language is split up into a multitude of dialects, some of which differ considerably from each other. Therefore, some prefer to speak of ‘Quechuan languages’, which is indeed more correct than the term ‘dialects’. In particular, the varieties of Central Peru (Quechua I) are known for their great diversity and their historical interest. Precisely these Central Peruvian dialects are rapidly disappearing. Whereas in 1940 the percentage of Quechua speakers in the provinces of Junín, Pasco, Tarma and Yauli was still calculated at 75% of the total population (Rowe 1947), it had fallen to less than 10% in 1993 (Pozzi-Escot 1997: 258). In the countryside there are still children who learn the language but their number amounts to only a few percent. If Quechua will survive, its speakers will probably be users of four of five of the more successful dialects, most of which belong to the Quechua IIB and IIC subgroups (following Torero 1964). However, even the so far highly successful Ayacucho dialect (Quechua IIC) is under heavy pressure. During the period of violence of 1980–93 the population of the Peruvian department of Ayacucho dropped by 25%, mainly through migration. The refugees filled the shanty towns of Lima and other coastal towns, where there is hardly any future for Quechua speakers. In the meantime Quechua is rapidly losing ground to Spanish in the Ayacuchan countryside (Chirinos 1999).
As we have seen, the great Andean language shift is probably due to historical causes which continue to have an effect, even though the social conditions are changing. As Cerrón-Palomino (1989: 27) puts it, “Quechua and Aymara speakers seem to have taken the project of assimilation begun by the dominating classes and made it their own.” What the shift amounts to is an increase in the amount of bilingualism, coupled with a

Threatened Languages in Hispanic South America 15
sort of collective decision not to hand on the language to the next generation. Sometimes the shift appears to be quite abrupt. Whereas the parents’ generation still has a poor command of Spanish, the children deny active knowledge of their parents’ language and address them in Spanish. So, a traumatic communication gap appears to exist within the families. Since the same phenomenon of language shift affects large unorganized populations, spread out over hundreds of isolated villages and hamlets, there is very little an outsider can do about it, even with the best of intentions. In this respect, the situation of small language communities, such as those found in the Amazon region, is more favorable, because there are better possibilities to reach the community as a whole.
In the Andean countries the percentage of Quechua and Aymara speakers has decreased in relation to the total population, probably ever since the independence. At the same time, the absolute numbers of speakers of these languages have increased, but much less drastically than the national population in its totality. The Peruvian census of 1993 indicates a number of 3,199,474 of Quechua speakers and 420,215 Aymara speakers of five years and older (Godenzzi 1998) on a total population (all ages) of + 23,000,000. In 1940 the total number of Quechua speakers older than five was 2,444,523 and that of Aymara speakers 231,935 on a total population (all ages) of 6,673,111 (Rowe 1947). In spite of the increase in absolute numbers, we have seen that the situation of Quechua at the local or regional level can be much more dramatic, than at the national level. In the near future we may begin to observe a decrease in the absolute number of Quechua speakers, especially in Peru, where the situation is particularly precarious. The situation in Bolivia, with 2,400,000 Quechua speakers and 1,600,000 Aymara speakers (Albó 1995) on an estimated total population of + 7,500,000, is less dramatic. There is a considerable overlap between the figures of Aymara and Quechua speakers due to cases of bilingualism and trilingualism. The Ecuadorian situation remains unclear as a result of considerable fluctuations in the number of Quechua speakers (1,400,000 to 2,000,000) provided by the statistics.
5. Tables of endangered languages in each country
The languages of Venezuela and those of the Amazonian parts of Bolivia, Colombia, Ecuador and Peru are not included here. For these languages I refer to Denny Moore’s contribution chapter 3, this volume.

16 Willem F. H. Adelaar
Table 1. Indigenous languages of Argentina. Data mainly based on Censabella 1999. For Tehuelche the source is Ana Fernández Garay (personal communication). Many languages have further speakers outside Argentina. The Tupi-Guaraní languages are all very closely related.

Family, Languages Araucanian Mapuche
Chon Gününa Yajich Ona
Tehuelche, Aonek’enk Guaicuruan Mocoví Pilagá Toba Lule-Vilela Vilela
Matacoan Chorote Chulupí, Ashluslay, Nivaclé Mataco, Wichi Quechuan Collas
Santiago del Estero

Speakers
less than 60,000
extinct since the 1960s extinct since the 1970s 4

Population

Trans- Status mission

40,000 to 60,000 (preservation of pre-Araucanian substratum)
200

locally a, b, c

e

e

no

d

most most most

3,000 ~ 5,000 2,000 ~ 5,000 36,000 ~ 60,000

yes

a—

yes

a—

yes a, a—

possibly a few 11 (1974) (merged

no

d, e

speakers

with Tobas)

most all
all

1,200 ~ 2,100

yes

a

200 ~ 1,200

yes

a

(more inParaguay)

35,000 ~ 60,000

yes

a

10,000 ~ 20,000 group not (more in Bolivia) well defined
60,000 ~ 120,000 no ethnic group

yes

a–, b

yes

a

Threatened Languages in Hispanic South America 17

Table 1. cont.
Family, Languages Tupi-Guarani Chiriguano, Ava Mbyá
Tapieté
Guaraní correntino

Speakers
most all no data 100,000 or more

Population
15,000 ~ 21,000 (more in Bolivia) 2,500 ~ 3,500 (more in Brazil) 384 (more in Paraguay) no ethnic group

Trans- Status mission

yes

a, a–

yes

a

c

yes

a–

Table 2. Indigenous languages of Chile. Data from various sources: Álvarez-Santullano Busch 1992; Gundermann 1994; Martinic 1989; Poblete and Salas 1997, 1999

Family, Languages Alacalufan Kawesqar, Alacaluf Araucanian Huilliche Mapuche
Atacameño Atacameño, Kunza
Aymaran Aymara

Speakers
28
a few 1,000 200,000 ~ 500,000
only words and expressions are remembered
16,000

Chon Ona, Selk’nam Quechuan Quechua Yahgan Yahgan, Yamana

extinct since the 1970s
no data
2 (1994)

Population
28
928,500 (census 1992) 2,000

Transmission
possibly

Status c

probably not c

yes

a–

e

33,000 (more in

locally

b

Bolivia and Peru)

e

many outside Chile

100 (mixed)

no

d

18 Willem F. H. Adelaar

Table 3. Indigenous languages of Paraguay. The figures for the Gran Chaco area are based on the DGEEC census of 1992 and alternative counts discussed in Melià (1997). Many groups of the Lengua-Mascoi family (all closely related) now live in mixed communities. The Tupi-Guaraní languages are all very closely related. Lyle Campbell (personal communication) observes that the number of Chorotí speakers must be substantially higher

Family, Languages Guaicuruan Emok-Toba, Toba Qom Lengua-Mascoi Angaité Guaná
Lengua, Enxet Sanapaná Toba Mascoi Matacoan Chorotí, Manjui, Yofuajá Chulupí, Nivaklé Mak’á Tupi-Guaraní Aché, Guayakí Guarayo, Guarani-eté Mbyá Chiripá, Nhandeva
Paí Taviterã, Kaiwá
Tapieté
Zamucoan Ayoreo Chamacoco

Speakers
755
971 24 9,387 789 1,312 208 7,780 990 538 24 2,435 1,930
500
123
815 908

Population
781 ~ 1,030
1,647 84 (probably more) 9,501 ~ 13,050 1,063 ~ 1,358 2,057
229 ~ 274 (more in Nivaclé communities) 7,934 ~ 12,504 1,061
639 ~ 883 1,254 ~ 2,111 4,744 ~ 10,990 6,918 ~ 8,602
8,026 ~ 8,750
1,351 ~ 1,789
814 ~ 1,708 908 ~ 1,281

Transmission
yes
most mixed with other groups
most most most
yes
yes yes
yes yes
yes assimilating to Paraguayan
Guaraní assimilating to Paraguayan
Guaraní assimilating to Paraguayan
Guaraní
yes yes

Status
b
c d a– b a– a a a a c a a–
a
d
a a

Threatened Languages in Hispanic South America 19

Table 4. Indigenous languages of Bolivia: Highlands, Gran Chaco and Eastern plains. Data based on Albó 1995:19 and the Censo Rural Indígena de Tierras Bajas [Rural indigenous census of the Lowlands], cf. Rodríguez Bazán 2000; for Paunaca: de Haan personal communication; for Iru-Itu (Uru): Muysken personal communication

Family, Languages
Aymaran Aymara mixed language Callahuaya Uru-Chipayan Chipaya Iru-Itu, Uchumataco, Uru Quechuan Quechua Arawakan Chané
Paunaca Chiquitoan Chiquitano, Besïro Matacoan Mataco, Weenhayek Tupi-Guaraní Chiriguano, Guaraní boliviano Tapieté Zamucoan Ayoreo

Speakers
1,600,000 a few 1,000 1
2,400,000 possibly extinct (more in Argentina) a few 5,855
1,811
33,670
70 771

Population
1,000 142
47,086 2,081 36,917 74 856

Transmission
yes probably not
yes no
yes
no locally
yes
yes yes? yes

Status
a, a– c a– d
a e? c a–
a
a c a

20 Willem F. H. Adelaar

Table 5. Indigenous languages of Peru: Highlands and coast. Data based on the 1993 census of INEI (Chirinos 2001). The figures for Aymara and Quechua have been corrected for the original exclusion of children aged between 0 to 4. The figure of Quechua II includes Amazonian Quechua speakers (c. 27,000)

Family, Languages
Aymaran Aymara Jaqaru Kawki Yungan Mochica Quechuan Quechua I

Speakers
466,000 725 11 extinct in the 1950s 750,000

Quechua II 2,675,000

Population 2,000

Transmission
yes yes no
yes (locally not)
yes (locally not)

Status
a, a– a–, b
d e a, a–, b, c, d a, a–, b, c, d

Table 6. Endangered Quechua varieties in Peru. Contains some examples of endangered Quechuan varieties in Peru (data from Pozzi-Escot 1998; Godenzzi 1998)

Variety Alto Pativilca (QI) Cajamarca (QII) Chachapoyas (QII) Huanca (QI) Lamas (QII) Pacaraos (separate)
Yaru (QI)
Yauyos (QI)(QII): several dialects

Speakers
no data 10,000 a few elder speakers 35,000 15,000 a few elder speakers in group of 900 38,000 (less than 10% of population) no data

Transmission in decay locally no only in a few districts locally no
very little transmission
locally

Threatened Languages in Hispanic South America 21

Table 7. Indigenous languages of Ecuador: Highlands and Coast. Data based on Juncosa (ed.) 1997; Haboud 1999

Family, Languages
Barbacoan Coaiquer, Awá, Awapit Cayapa, Chachi, Cha’palaachi Colorado, Tsachila, Tsafiki
Chocoan
Emberá
Quechuan Quechua (Highlands) Quechua (Amazonia)

Speakers
all all all
all 1,405,000 ~ 2,000,000 14,000 ~ 30,000

Population
2,000 ~ 3,000 (more in Colombia) 7,600 2,000
60 (more in Colombia)

Trans- Status mission

yes

a

yes

a

yes

a

yes

a

yes a, a–, b

yes

a

Table 8. Indigenous languages of Colombia: Highland, Coast and Llanos. Data provided by J. Landaburu and based on Arango and Sánchez 1998. Additionally, González and Rodríguez 2000

Family, Languages Arawakan Achagua Piapoco
Goajiro, Wayuunaiki Barbacoan Coaiquer, Awapit Guambiano Totoró Cariban Opon-Carare
Yucpa, Yuco

Speakers Population

most all
all

280 4,470 (more in Venezuela)
140,000 (more in Venezuela)

most most 4

12,940 18,000 ~ 20,780 3,650

probably

extinct

all

1,500 ~ 3,530

Trans- Status mission

yes

a–

yes

a

yes

a

a–

yes

a–

no

d

e?

yes

a

22 Willem F. H. Adelaar

Table 8. cont.

Family, Languages Chibchan Barí, Dobocubí Chimila Cuna, Tule
Ika, Arhuaco, Bíntucua Kankuamo, Atánquez Kogui, Kaggaba Tunebo, U’wa Wiwa, Damana, Arsario, Malayo, Guamaca, Marocasero, Sanká Chocoan Emberá
Wounaan, Waunana Guahiboan Cuiba
Guahibo, Sikuani
Guayabero Macaguane, Hitnu Makú-Puinave Puinave Paezan Páez, Nasa Yuwe
Quechuan Inga(no)

Speakers
all most all all all all all
most all
all all all all
all?
40,000 or more
all

Population
3,530 900 1,160 (more in Panamá) 8,600 ~ 14,300 extinct in 1970s 7,000 ~ 9,770 3,000 ~ 7,010 1,850 ~ 2,800
71,000 (more in Panamá) 7,970
2,270 (more in Venezuela) 21,425 (more in Venezuela) 1,060 184 ~ 542
2,000 ~ 5,380
80,000 ~ 119,000
17,860 ~ 26,000

Transmission
yes yes yes yes yes yes yes
yes yes
yes yes yes yes
yes
yes, locally
yes

Status
a a– a a e a a– a
a a
a a a– a
a
a, a–
a

Threatened Languages in Hispanic South America 23

Table 8. cont.
Family, Languages Salivan Piaroa, Dearuwa, Wo’tiheh Sáliba Sebundoy Camsá, Sebundoy Tinigua Tinigua

Speakers Population

most in decay

797 (more in Venezuela)
1,304

most

4,020 ~ 4,736

2

Trans- Status mission

yes

a

no

c

yes

a

no

d

24 Willem F. H. Adelaar

Caribbean Sea

52

60 61 62 64

56

57 59 58

49 55 63

65 50
49 75 53 54 71 68 46 12h 74

69 66 73 67 72
51 70

47

48

EQUADOR 12f

12g

COLOMBIA

North

Atlantic

Ocean

12c

12b 43

12d

44a 44

45 44c

41

44b 42

12e P E R U

35 B O L I V I A

20 20 37
12

39 40
33

20 36 12

13

38

15 11

19 12

10 9

13 11

33

9

15 10

34

PARAGUAY

24 23 25

26

32

6

27 28 30 22

31 29

12a

7

14 14

5 8 16

South Pacific Ocean CHILE
outh Atlantic Ocean

ARGENTINA

1

1

18

2

S

4 17

3 21

Map 1. Hispanic South America

Threatened Languages in Hispanic South America 25

Added letters refer to specific dialects of Quechua I and Quechua II.

1 Mapuche

36 Chipaya

2 Gününa Yajich (Gününa Küne)

37 Iru-Itu (Uchumataco)

3 Ona (Selk’nam)

38 Chané

4 Tehuelche (Aonek’enk)

39 Paunaca

5 Mocovi

40 Chiquitano (Besïro)

6 Pilagá

41 Jaqaru

7 Toba

42 Kawki

8 Vilela

43 Mochica

9 Chorote (Chorotí)

44 Quechua I

10 Chulupí (Ashluslay, Nivaclé)

44a Alto Pativilca

11 Mataco (Wichi, Weenhayek)

44b Huanca

12 Quechua II (Collas)

44c Yaru

12a Santiago del Estero

45 Pacaraos Quechua

12b Cajamarca

46 Coaiquer (Awá, Awapit)

12c Chachapoyas

47 Cayapa (Chachi, Cha’palaachi)

12d Lamas

48 Colorado (Tsachila, Tsafiki)

12e Yauyos

49 Emberá (Catío, Chamí, Sambú)

12f Ecuadorian Highlands Quichua

50 Achagua

12g Ecuadorian Lowlands Quichua

51 Piapoco

12h Inga (Ingano)

52 Goajiro (Wayuunaiki)

13 Chiriguano (Ava,Guaraní boliviano) 53 Guambiano

14 Mbyá

54 Totoró

15 Tapieté

55 Opon-Carare

16 Guaraní correntino

56 Yucpa (Yuco)

17 Kawesqar (Alacaluf)

57 Barí (Dobocubi)

18 Huilliche

58 Chimila (Ette Taara)

19 Atacameño (Kunza)

59 Cuna (Tule)

20 Aymara

60 Ika (Arhuaco, Bíntucua)

21 Yahgan (Yamana)

61 Kankuamo (Atánquez)

22 Emok-Toba

62 Kogui (Kaggaba)

23 Angaité

63 Tunebo (U’wa)

24 Guaná

64 Damana (Wiwa, Arsario, Malayo

25 Lengua

Guamaca, Marocasero, Sanká)

26 Sanapaná

65 Wounaan (Waunana)

27 Toba Mascoi

66 Cuiba

28 Mak’á

67 Guahibo (Sikuani)

29 Aché (Guayakí)

68 Guayabero

30 Guarayo (Guarani-eté)

69 Macaguane (Hitnü)

31 Chiripa (Nhandeva)

70 Puinave

32 Paí Taviterã (Kaiwá)

71 Páez (Nasa Yuwe)

33 Ayoreo

72 Piaroa (De’aruwa, Wotiheh)

34 Chamacoco

73 Sáliba

35 Callahuaya

74 Kamsá (Sebundoy)

75 Tinigua

26 Willem F. H. Adelaar
References
Adelaar, Willem F. H. 1999 Unprotected languages: The silent death of the languages of northern Peru. In Herzfeld and Lastra (eds.) Las Causas Sociales de la Desaparición y del Mantenimiento de las Lenguas en las Naciones de América [Trabajos presentados en el 49o. Congreso Internacional de Americanistas, Quito, Ecuador, julio 7–11, 1997] Hermosillo, Sonora: Editorial Unison. 205–222.
Adelaar, Willem F. H., with the collaboration of Pieter C. Muysken 2004 The languages of the Andes. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Albó, Xavier 1995 Bolivia plurilingüe: una guía para planificadores y educadores, vol. 1– 3. La Paz: CIPCA and UNICEF.
Álvarez-Santullano Busch, María Pilar 1992 Variedad interna y deterioro del dialecto Huilliche. Revista de lingüística teórica y aplicada (RLA) (Concepción–Chile) 30: 61–74.
Arango Ochoa, Raúl and Enrique Sánchez Gutiérrez 1998 Los pueblos indígenas de Colombia 1997. Bogotá: Tercer Mundo and Departamento Nacional de Planeación.
Casement, Roger 1988 Putumayo: Caucho y Sangre [Relación al Parlamento Inglés (1911)]. Quito: Ediciones Abya-Yala.
Censabella, Marisa 1999 Las lenguas indígenas de la Argentina. Una mirada actual. Buenos Aires: Editorial Universitaria de Buenos Aires.
Chirinos Rivera, Andrés 1999 Lealtad o utilidad de las lenguas indígenas en el Perú y Bolivia. Mirando más allá del año 2000. Lecture presented at the symposium: Informe sobre las lenguas del Mundo. La situación latinoamericana. Cochabamba: UNESCO and PROEIB Andes, March 1999. 2001 Atlas lingüístico del Peru. Cuzco–Lima: Ministerio de Educación and Centro Bartolomé de Las Casas.
Cerrón-Palomino, Rodolfo 1989 Language policy in Peru: a historical overview. In Hornberger (ed.) 11 – 33.
Crevels, Emily and Willem F. H. Adelaar 2001–04 South America (online reports on endangered languages of Argentina, Bolivia, Chile, Ecuador, French Guyana, Guyana, Paraguay, Peru and Suriname). In K. Matsumura (ed.), UNESCO Red Book of Endangered Languages. Tokyo: The International Clearing House of Endangered Languages (ICHEL) (www.tooyoo.l.u–tokyo.ac.jp/ichel/archive/southamerica.html).

Threatened Languages in Hispanic South America 27
Escobar, Alberto (ed.) 1976 Serie de seis Gramáticas referenciales y seis Diccionarios de consulta de la lengua quechua. Lima: Ministerio de Educación and Instituto de Estudios Peruanos.
Godenzzi, Juan Carlos 1998 Transfondo: ‘Cultura de paz, bilingüismo e interculturalidad.’ Coiné, Boletín informativo de temas lingüísticos del Departamento de Humanidades de la Universidad del Pacífico. Año 1, No. 2. Lima: Universidad del Pacífico.
González de Pérez, María Stella and María Luisa Rodríguez de Montes 2000 Lenguas indígenas de Colombia. Una visión descriptiva. Santafé de Bogotá: Instituto Caro y Cuervo.
Gray, Andrew 1996 The Arakmbut: mythology, spirituality, and history in an Amazonian community. (Arakmbut Indians of Amazonian Peru, 1). Providence: Berghahn.
Gundermann Kröll, Hans 1994 Cuántos hablan en Chile la lengua aymara? Revista de lingüística teórica y aplicada (RLA) (Concepción-Chile) 32: 125–139.
Haboud, Marleen 1999 La situación lingüística de las lenguas en Ecuador. Lecture presented at the symposium: Informe sobre las lenguas del Mundo. La situación latinoamericana. Cochabamba: UNESCO and PROEIB Andes, March 1999.
Hornberger, N. H. (ed.) 1989 Bilingual education and language planning in Indigenous Latin America. (International journal of the sociology of language, 77). Berlin, New York: Mouton de Gruyter.
Juncosa, José E. (ed.) 1997 Monografías mínimas del Ecuador. Tsachila – Chachis – Cholo – Cofán – Awá-Coaiquer. Serie Pueblos del Ecuador No 14. Quito: Abya-Yala.
Klein, Harriet E. Manelis and Louisa R. Stark 1985 Indian languages of the Paraguayan Chaco. In Klein and Stark (eds.) South American Indian languages. Retrospect and prospect. Austin: University of Texas Press. 802–845.
Martínez Sarasola, Carlos 1992 Nuestros paisanos los Indios. Vida, historia y destino de las comunidades indígenas en la Argentina. Buenos Aires: Emecé.
Martinic, M. 1989 Los canoeros de la Patagonia occidental. Población histórica y distribución geográfica (siglos XIX y XX). El fin de una etnia. Journal de la Société des Américanistes (Paris) 75: 35–61.

28 Willem F. H. Adelaar
Marzal, Manuel M. 1992 Utopia posible. Indios y jesuitas en la América colonial (1549–1767). 2 Vols. Lima: Pontificia Universidad Católica del Perú, Fondo Editorial.
Melià, Bartomeu 1997 Pueblos indígenas en el Paraguay. Fernando de la Mora, Paraguay: Dirección General de Estadística, Encuestas y Censos (DGEEC).
Pi Hugarte, Renzo 1993 Los indios de Uruguay. Colección Pueblos y Lenguas Indígenas 3. Quito: Ediciones Abya–Yala [Originally Madrid: Ediciones MAPFRE].
Poblete M., María Teresa and Adalberto Salas 1997 El aymara de Chile (fonología, textos, léxico). Filología y Lingüística (San José: Universidad de Costa Rica.) 23,1: 121–203; 23,2: 95–138. 1999 Fonemas yamana (yagan). Estructura fonológica de la palabra. Revista de lingüística teórica y aplicada (RLA) (Concepción-Chile) 37: 107 – 122.
Pozzi-Escot, Inés 1998 El Multilingüismo en el Perú. Cuzco: Centro de Estudios Regionales Andinos “Bartolomé de Las Casas” and PROEIB Andes.
Rodríguez Bazán, Luis Antonio 2000 Estado de las lenguas indígenas del Oriente, Chaco y Amazonía bolivianos. In Queixalós and Renault-Lescure (eds.) As Línguas Amazônicas Hoje [The Amazonian languages today] São Paulo: Instituto Socioambiental. 129–149.
Rowe, John Howland 1947 The Distribution of Indians and Indian languages in Peru. The Geographical Review (New York) 37: 202–215.
Santos, Fernando 1992 Etnohistoria de la Alta Amazonía, Siglos XV–XVIII. Colección 500. Años No 46. Quito: Abya-Yala, Movimientos Laicos para América Latina (MLAL).
Torero Fernández de Córdova, Alfredo 1964 Los dialectos quechuas. Anales Científicos de la Universidad Agraria (Lima: Universidad Agraria de La Molina.) 2: 446–478.
Triana y Antorveza, Humberto 1987 Las lenguas indígenas en la historia social del Nuevo Reino de Granada. Biblioteca “Ezequiel Uricoechea” No 2. Bogotá: Instituto Caro y Cuervo.
Viegas Barros, J. Pedro n. d. La lengua de los Chonos del sur de Chile. Una comparación con el Qawasqar y el Yagan. Buenos Aires. (unpublished manuscript)

Chapter 3 Endangered Languages of Lowland Tropical South America1
Denny Moore
The languages discussed in this chapter are found in a vast region which roughly corresponds to lowland South America: the Amazonian regions of Bolivia, Peru, Ecuador, and Colombia, as well as all of Brazil, Venezuela, Guyana, Suriname, and French Guiana. Present figures indicate the presence of about 300 indigenous and creole languages in this region, though the number would be less if mutually intelligible dialects were not listed as separate languages. The available figures (and those presented here) are unreliable, but give some idea of the situation of these languages which can be compared to the situation in other world areas.
South America is noted for linguistic diversity. Nichols (1990: 479) estimates the continent has about 90 linguistic stocks, conservatively defined, compared to 14 stocks in Africa. Kaufman and Golla (2001: 48) estimate 50 language families and 50 isolates in South America. Lizarralde (2001: 266) estimates that there were “possibly 1,200 indigenous groups” in native South America before European contact, and that 65 percent of the native languages became extinct. Kaufman and Golla (2001: 48) estimate 550 native languages in pre-Columbian South America, of which 300 survive. The Andean highlands are rather different from the lowlands culturally, linguistically, and even genetically (Simoni et. al. 2001). The earliest pottery in the New World (8,000 to 6,000 B. P.) is in Amazonia (Roosevelt 1994: 5). According to Roosevelt (1994), the floodplains of Amazonia supported dense populations organized in chiefdoms which were quite different from the surviving indigenous cultures in the present-day tropical forest. The arrival of the Europeans ultimately decimated the chiefdoms, though there was a long and eventful period of interaction between them and the Europeans.
The surviving native lowland societies are mainly in the hinterlands, where sustained contact has been relatively recent. In Eastern Brazil, for example, few native groups still speak their language. Rodrigues (1993) estimates that 75% of the native languages of Brazil have already disappeared. There are still indigenous groups in Amazonia who live with no

30 Denny Moore
contact with national society. Even today these groups usually lose twothirds of their population from diseases when they enter into sustained contact. This mass death is completely unnecessary since the diseases responsible for it are all preventable or treatable, but the necessary assistance measures are seldom carried out, and both the general public and specialists, such as anthropologists, often accept the deaths as routine and normal.
Scientific knowledge of the languages of lowland South America is still limited. In Brazil, for example, according to the estimates of Franchetto (2000: 171) there is good description for only 19% of the native languages, some description for 64%, and nothing for 13%. The national capacity for linguistic research varies greatly from country to country, with Brazil, Colombia, and Venezuela seemingly the most developed in scientific linguistics (leaving aside French Guiana, which is formally a part of France and undergoing recent development). In Brazil the scientific investigation of indigenous languages only began in the second half of the twentieth century but is developing at an accelerating pace. In the last 15 years 23 doctoral dissertations involving indigenous languages were defended in Brazilian graduate programs (including one by a foreign missionary linguist). Of these, 16 included analysis of language structure. Aside from these, 17 doctoral dissertations involving indigenous Brazilian languages were defended in graduate programs abroad (including three by foreign scientists). Of these, 15 included analysis of language structure. Characteristically for the region, the number of linguists with only an M.A. is disproportionately high: about one hundred M. A. theses involving indigenous languages have been defended in Brazil in the last 15 years.
Progress in the development of national centers for linguistics in the region increases the national capacity for dealing with the question of endangered languages and their documentation, though much more remains to be done. At least in Brazil there has been too little respect for linguistic description, which is often disparaged, more prestige being attributed to partial descriptions with theoretical pretensions. The first published complete description of an indigenous language by a Brazilian linguist in decades is the grammar of Kamaiurá by Seki (2000). Real dictionaries (not wordlists) and text collections are still rare in Brazil. Recent support by the Volkswagen Foundation for projects documenting the Kuikúro, Trumái, and Awetí languages of the Xingu is having an excellent impact on the level of documentation being carried out.
In my experience, the nature of scientific underdevelopment is not generally understood. Underdevelopment is not the lack of something; rather it is a positive system which intends to maintain itself and which will re-

Endangered Languages of Lowland Tropical South America 31
act against developmental efforts which might threaten it. Those wishing to promote scientific development should anticipate possible resistance by those most heavily invested in the underdeveloped system. Where development does not occur it is the result of human decisions and not of mystical factors or lack of innate capacity.
Though it is often believed that the presence of missionary linguistic organizations will help develop linguistics in the Third World, the facts from Latin America prove the contrary. Of the non-missionary Brazilian linguists with a doctorate, none owes his training principally to missionary organizations. There is an inverse relation between missionary presence and the development of national scientific linguistics. In Brazil, for example, the position of missionary linguists has declined steadily as more and more well-trained Brazilian linguists have appeared. In Bolivia, by contrast, where there are relatively few national linguists specializing in indigenous languages, the great preponderance of linguistic investigation is carried out by missionary organizations, which have little interest in producing non-missionary Bolivian linguists.
There are relatively few non-missionary foreign linguists active in lowland South America, in spite of the many research opportunities and the possibility of interesting collaborations with national entities and indigenous organizations. With a few exceptions, such as the regions of Colombia involved in armed conflict, there is reasonably secure access to research sites in the region. In Brazil anyone conducting scientific research in a native community must have the authorization of the National Indian Foundation, which entails having the permission of the community and formal affiliation with a Brazilian scientific institution. Foreigners must also have a research visa, which in principle takes 120 days to obtain, though delays are common and at least a third of foreign applicants fail to follow instructions and must repeat steps. In the other countries of the region the authorization process is probably less regulated than in Brazil. In Bolivia, for example, it is possible to conduct research on indigenous languages without special authorization. Linguists who have worked in other world areas are often surprised that in Brazil there is a firm expectation that the linguist will do something of practical use for the community and will collaborate with national linguists. In my experience, foreign linguists and Latin American linguists have very different attitudes toward missionary organizations. For most North American linguists, if these organizations eliminate native religions and do not develop national scientific linguistic capacity in the countries where they work, that is acceptable and even natural, especially if the missionaries are “nice” and do some “good lin-

32 Denny Moore
guistics” and perhaps offer data or other favors. By contrast, for most Brazilian linguists the elimination of native religions and the lack of interest in national scientific development are simply unacceptable-period.
Given the small size of most of the surviving groups of the lowlands, it is not surprising that many of their languages are in serious danger of extinction within one or two generations. This is especially true where history and social forces remove the contexts in which the language was always used. Intermarriage, dispersion in search of work or training, and minority status in relation to other indigenous languages in the same community tend to undermine transmission of the language over time. At least in Brazil the native communities are interested in documentation of their language and culture and usually welcome scientists willing to assist them in that respect. Methods for language revitalization are not generally known or employed yet in lowland South America, though there is considerable activity in literacy in the native language. In Brazil many such literacy efforts are hampered by orthographies which do not reflect the phonology of the language, by competing multiple orthographies, and by a lack of objective evaluation of results. In such cases the written materials developed will be of doubtful value to future generations since the pronunciation cannot be recovered from the written form.
In the tables that follow, an attempt is made to review the status of each of the languages of lowland South America. However, most of the data presented is questionable, since in this region few efforts are specifically aimed at collecting the information relevant for determining the degree of endangerment of languages, which are often spoken in remote locations. One general problem is the confusion of population size with the number of speakers, the latter being more important for possible endangerment. For example, Rodrigues (1986: 72 and 1993) estimates the number of speakers of Yawalapití as 135, whereas according to Seki (1999) only 13 people are really fluent in the language, due to encroachment by neighboring languages. The number of speakers of Torá is estimated as 256 by Rodrigues (1986: 81, 1993), and as 250 by Aikhenvald and Dixon (2000: 343), but according to a website for the Torá (www.socioambiental.org/website / epi/tora/tora.htm), they only speak Portuguese. The effect of this confusion is to underestimate the degree of endangerment. Data on the transmission of languages is generally missing, though this is one of the most important facts for endangerment. With time and the cooperation of specialists in various regions, it would be possible to obtain a more realistic and detailed picture of the status of the lowland languages, and this should be a priority.

Endangered Languages of Lowland Tropical South America 33
A further difficulty in the data presented below is the confusion of ethnic or political groups with languages. For example, within the Mondé family Gavião and Zoró are listed as separate languages, though they speak slightly different dialects of the same language. Some of these confusions are corrected, especially if they are relevant for endangerment and there is no doubt about the correction. The data in each table is country-specific; that is, the population of a group is the population in that one country, which will be different from the total population if the group exists in other countries. The amount of study on each language, which is also country-specific, is a very rough estimate of doubtful reliability, based on available information. Languages with little or no significant scientific description are rated 0; those with a M.A. thesis or several articles are rated 1; those with a good overall sketch or doctoral thesis on some aspects of the language are rated 2; and those with reasonably complete descriptions are rated 3. Because of the fragility of the data, the only languages for which an endangerment status is attributed are those which are obviously in very severe immediate danger. These (77 in all) are marked as “d”, “d, e” or “e”. These letters refer to the Krauss definitions on the degrees of language vitality in chapter 1, this volume: “d” – “critically endangered” and “e” – “extinct”. This obviously does not imply that the other languages are not endangered. The languages status was generally not marked if another dialect with a sizeable number of speakers or a fair-size community of speakers in another country exists. Notice that the most endangered languages tend also to be the languages with the least description. In some cases the language so marked may already be extinct, but it is better to indicate the language since it sometimes happens that a language thought to be extinct may have a few speakers somewhere, if a careful search is made. An attempt was made to retain the language names (variants are in parentheses) commonly used in each country, together with the classification usually recognized, though with occasional modifications. Principal and supplementary sources of information are indicated in each table. For countries other than Brazil, where my knowledge is very limited, considerable reliance was placed on As Línguas Amazônicas Hoje (= LAH) (Queixalós and Renault-Lescure 2000) and data kindly supplied by Willem Adelaar and Mily Crevels from their database on languages of the region. The map displaying the approximate locations of urgently endangered languages was created by Reinaldo Shinkai.

34 Denny Moore

Table 1. Brazil

Language Dialects, Groups

Speakers

Tupí Stock

Tupí-Guaraní Family

Akwáwa

Parakanã

most

Suruí do Tocantins

most

Asurini do Tocantins

most

Amanayé

any?

Anambé

6

Apiaká

0?

Araweté

most

Asuriní do Xingu

most

Avá-Canoeiro

most?

Guajá

all

Guaraní

Kaiowá

Mbyá (in Ar, Pa)

Nhandéva (in Ar, Pa)

Kaapór / Urubu-Kaapór most

Kamayurá

most

Kayabí

most?

Kawahíb

Parintintin

Diahkói

Juma

Karipúna

Tenharin

Uru-Eu-Wau-Wau

all

Kokáma

Kokáma (in Co, Pe)

320

Omágua / Kambeba

[240]

Língua Geral Amazônica / Nheengatú

= coastal Tupi-Guarani altered by contact (Co, V)

Tapirapé

380

Population
624 185 233 66 105 43 230 81 14 370 25,000 total
500 364 1,200
130 30 7
360 106
5 few?
>6,000?

Trans- Studies Status mission

high?

0

high?

1

high?

2

none?

0

d, e

none?

1

d

?

0

d, e

high

0

high?

0

0

d

high

1

2

high

2

high

3

high?

1

2

med high

low?

2

d

low?

0

d, e

med

1

1

Endangered Languages of Lowland Tropical South America 35

Table 1. Brazil (cont.)
Language Dialects, Groups Tenetehára
Guajajara Tembé
Wayampí / Waiãpi / Oiampi (FG) Xetá Zo’é / Puturú Arikém Family Karitiana Awetí Family Awetí Juruna Family Juruna / Yuruna / Yudjá Xipaia / Shipaya Mawé Family Mawé / Sateré-Mawé Mondê Family Aruá Cinta-Larga
Cinta Larga, Zoró, Gavião dialects of one language
Gavião Mondê Suruí / Paitér Zoró Puruborá Family Puruborá Mundurukú Family Kuruáya Mundurukú Ramarama Family Karo / Arara Tuparí Family Ajurú / Wayoró Makuráp

Speakers Popula- Trans- Studies Status

tion

mission

10,200

1

800

variable 1

498

most?

high?

2

[8]

3

152

all

d

high

1

all

171

high

2

all

100

high

1

all

212

high

1

2?

15?

none

2

d

most? 5,825

good

2

12?

36

all

643

low

0

d, e

high

1

all

360

3 semi? ?

all

586

all

257

high

2

none?

0

d, e

high

1

high

0

?2 semi 20?

none

0

d, e

3?

10?

none?

0

d, e

most

3,000

high

3

most

130

good

2

10?

38

129

low

0

d, e

med?

1

36 Denny Moore

Table 1. Brazil (cont.)
Language Dialects, Groups Mekém / Mekens / Sakirabiár Tuparí Akuntsu Macro-Jê Stock Boróro Family Boróro Umutina / Omotina Krenák Family Krenák Guató Family Guató Jê Family Akwén
Xakriabá Xavánte Xerénte
Apinayé Kaingáng
Kaingang do Paraná Kaingáng Central Kaingáng do Sudoeste Kaingáng do Sudeste
Kayapó
Gorotire Kararaô Kokraimoro Kubenkrankegn Menkrangnoti Mentuktíre / Txukahamãe Xikrin
Panará / Kren-akore / Kren-akarore Suyá
Suyá Tapayúna / Beiço-de-Pau

Speakers Population

25

70

Trans- Studies Status mission

low

2

d

most? 204

med-low 1

7

7

high

0

d

914

1

100

10?

99

5 [40]

700

2

low

d

low

1

d

low

2

d

0?

4,952

none

e

most

7,100

high?

1

all?

1,552

1

718

high?

2

20,000

2

total

4,000 total

high

1

all

197

high

2

all

223

high

1-2

63

Endangered Languages of Lowland Tropical South America 37

Table 1. Brazil (cont.)

Language Dialects, Groups Timbíra
Canela Apaniekra Canela Ramkokamekra Gavião do Pará / Parkateyé Gavião do Maranhão / Pukobiyé Krahô Krenjê / Kren-yé Krikatí / Krinkatí
Xokléng Karajá Family Karajá Javaé Karajá Xambioá Maxakalí Family Maxakalí Ofayé Family Ofayé / Opayé / Ofayé-Xavante Rikbaktsá Family Rikbaktsá / Erikpaksá Yathê Family Yathê / Iatê / Fulniô / Carnijó Arawá Family Banawá-Yafí Deni Jarawára Kulína (Pe) Paumarí Yamamadí / Jamamadí / Kanamantí Suruahá / Zuruahá

Speakers Population
336 883 333 150
1,198 ? 420 1,650

most 1,860 10
most
25

750 1,900 250
594
87

most?

690 2,788

120 570 160 2,500 539 250
143

Trans- Studies Status mission

high

2

high

1

high

1

low

1

good

2

high

1

none

0

1

0?

d

med?

1

med?

1

high

1

high

1

high

3

high

1

low

3

high

1

high

0

38 Denny Moore

Table 1. Brazil (cont.)

Language Dialects, Groups

Speakers

Aruák Family (Arawak, Maipure)

Apurinã / Ipurinã

Baníwa do Içana / Kurripako (Co, V)

Baré (V)

0?

Kampa / Axíninka (Pe)

[Mawayana] (Gu, Su)

>10

Mehináku

close to Waurá

all

Palikúr (FG)

Paresí / Arití / Haliti

Píro

Manitenéri (Pe)

Maxinéri (Bo)

Salumã / Enawenê-Nawê

Tariana

Yurupari-Tapúya / Iyemi (Co) 100

Terena / Tereno

Wapixana (Gu)

Warekena (Co, V)

Waurá

close to Mehinaku

all

Yawalapití

8

[Bora Family]

[Miranha]

dialect of Bora (Co)

few?

[Guaikurú Family]

[Kadiwéu]

most

Jabutí Family

Djeoromitxí / Jabutí

30?

Arikapú

3

Karib Family

Aparaí / Apalaí (FG)

most

Arara do Pará / Ukarãgmã all?

Population
2,800 3,189 [5,000] 2,170 763 >10
160 722 1,200 [530]
[345] 253
1,630 15,000 5,000 476
226 184
400
[900]
67 6
[150?] 165

Trans- Studies mission

med

2

high

3

none

1

0

none?

0

high

1

1

1

0

0

high

0

very low 2 1
variable 1 2

high

1

none

1

0

high

2

low

1

none

0

high

2

high?

1

Status d
d d d d

Endangered Languages of Lowland Tropical South America 39

Table 1. Brazil (cont.)

Language Dialects, Groups Bakairí Galibí do Oiapoque (Gu, Su, FG, V) Hixkaryána Ingarikó / Kapóng / Akwaio (Gu, V) Kalapálo
Kalapalo, Kuikúro, Matipú, Nahukwá are dialects of one language
Kuikúru Makuxí (Gu) Matipú
very close to Nahukwá?
Mayongong / Makiritáre / Yekuána [Nahukwá] Taulipáng / Pemóng (V, Gu) Tiriyó / Tirió / Trio (Su, Gu?) Txikão / Ikpeng Waimirí / Waimirí-Atroarí Wayána (FG, Su) Wai-Wai (Gu) Katukína Family Kanamarí Katawixí Katukina do Rio Biá / Pedá Djapá Txunhuã-Djapá / Tsohom-Djapá Makú Family Bará / Kakua (Co) Dow / Kamã Húpda (Co)

Speakers most
most?
most
most most
few most? most most all all all most? all?
most? 10? few? 30?
220 83 1,800

Population 570 37

Transmission
good low?

[550] 1,000

high good

353

good

364 [500] good

15,000

high?

62

low

180

high?

86

good

200

high?

380 [900] high

189 611 [150?] 1,366

high high med? high

1,300 250 250
100

1,800

high

Studies
2 0
3 1
1
2 3
0 0
1 1
3
2 1 1 2
1 0 0
0
1 1

Status
d d, e
d

40 Denny Moore

Table 1. Brazil (cont.)

Language Dialects, Groups

Speakers

Nadëb / Guariba

400

Yuhúp (Co)

400

Mura Family

Mura

?any

Pirahã

all

Nambikwára Family

Nambikwára do Norte / 323 Mamindê / Latundê / Nakarotê

Nambikwára do Sul

all

Sabanê

7 active

Pano Family

Amawáka (Pe)

Arara / Shawanauá

Arara, Shanenawá, Yamináwa, 9?
Yawanawá dialects of one
language

Katukina do Acre / Katukina Pano

Kaxararí

Kaxinawá (Pe)

Korúbo

Marúbo

Matis

all

Matsés / Mayoruna (Pe)

Nukini

any ?

Poyanáwa

2

Shanenawá

Yamináwa / Jaminawa (Pe)

Yawanawá

Tukano Family

Arapaço

Bará / Barasána (Co)

Desána (Co)

[Jurití] (Co)

Population
1,400 179
[346]
[721] [30]
[220]
300
400
220 3,387 40 960 178 640 400 385 [300] 270 200
317 40 1,458 [50?]

Transmission

Studies
1 1?

Status

none

0

d, e

high

3

med

1

good

2

none

1

d

0

1

1

0

2

0

d

high

2?

high

1

high

1

none ?

0

d, e

none

0

d

1

0

0 0 1

Endangered Languages of Lowland Tropical South America 41

Table 1. Brazil (cont.)

Language Dialects, Groups

Speakers

Karapanã (Co)

Kubewa / Kubeo (Co)

Makúna / Yebá-masã (Co)

Pira-Tapuya / Waíkana (Co)

Siriáno (Co)

Tukano (Co, V)

Tuyúka (Co)

Wanano (Co)

Txapakúra Family

Kujubim

2

Oro Win

few?

Torá

0?

Urupá

?

Warí / Pakaanova

Yanomami Family

Ninam / Yanam

466

Sanumá (V)

462

Yanomám / Yanomae (V) [4,000]

Yanomami (V)

6,000

Isolated Languages

Aikaná / Masaká / Kasupá

Iránxe

very close to Mynky

Kanoê

8

Kwazá / Koaiá

25

Máku

1

Mynky

Trumái

51

Tikúna (Co, Pe)

Creole languages

[Galibi Marwono]

[Karipuna do Norte]

Population 40 219 34 926 [10] 2,868 518 506
[50] 40 25 [250] [150] 1,300
9,000
175
250 61 15 [40] [1] 69 94 23,000
[860] [672]

Transmission

Studies
0 0 0 0 0 3 0 0

Status

none

0

d

d, e

0

e

0

e

3

high

2

high

2

high

2

high

3

med?

1

2

low

1

d

low

3

d

none

1

d, e

low

2

d

3

0 1

42 Denny Moore
Language names and classification in table 1. are adapted from Instituto Sócio Ambiental 2001a. Population figures are generally taken from Instituto Socio Ambiental 2001b. Modifications and additional information, indicated in brackets, are taken from Rodrigues 1993, Centro de Documentação Indígena 1987, Dixon and Aikhenvald 1999, and various other sources, including personal communications. Amount of study estimates are taken from Rodrigues 1993, Dixon and Aikhenvald 1999, and a miscellany of other sources.

Table 2. Colombia
Family, Languages Arawak Family Baniva (V, Br)
Cabiyari Curripaco (V, Br) Guarequena (V, Br) Tariano (Br) Yucuna Bora Family Bora (Pe) Maraña
dialect of Bora (Br)
Muinane Caribe Family Carijona Huitoto Family Nonuya Ocaina (Pe) Uitoto / Minica (Pe) Macú Cacua / Bara (Br) Hupda (n Br) Nukak Yuhup (Br)

Speakers Population

Trans- Studies Status mission

6,948 with Curripaco

few?

277

low?

0

d

6,948

2

few

25

few?

255

none?

d

381

1

388

1

457

263

1

30 passive 234

1

d

3

199

few

126

6,604

0

d

d

3

300?

high

few 100

high

700-1,000 high

1

200

high

1

Endangered Languages of Lowland Tropical South America 43

Table 2. Colombia (cont.)

Family, Languages Tucano Family Barasána (Br) Carapana (Br) Coreguaje Cubeo (Br) Desano (Br) Guanano / Wanano (Br) Macuna (Br) Piratapuyo (Br) Pisamira Siona (Ec) Siriano (Br) Tanimuca / Retuarã Tatuyo Tucano (Br, V) Tuyuca (Br) Yuriti (Br) Tupi-Guarani Family Cocama (Pe, Br) Geral / Nheengatu (Br, V) Peba-Yagua Family Yagua (Pe) Isolated Languages Andoke Cofán (Ec) Ticuna (also Pe, Br)

Speakers 25 few

Population

Trans- Studies Status mission

939 [1,891] 412 1,731 4,616 2,216 1,113 571 [922] 474 54 468 [700] 715 277 [1,149] 294 7,305 570 610

3 1 1 1 2 1
d 1
1 2 2 1

285 [767]

d

some 100s

279
304 1,061 5,578

low?

3

high?

1

2

Language names and population estimates are adapted from Montes Rodrigues 2000 and Centro Colombiano de Estudos de Lenguas Aborigenes (C.C.E.L.A.) 2000. Other population estimates, in brackets, are from website “Etnias Indígenas de Colombia” 2001.

44 Denny Moore

Table 3. Venezuela

Family, Languages Arawaka Añu / Paraujano (Co?) Baniwa (Br, Co) Baré (Br) Kurripako (Co, Br) Piapoko (Co) Warekena (Co, Br) Wayuu / Guajiro (Co) Caribe Akwayo (Gu, Br) Eñepa / Panare Kariña / Galibi (Br, Gu, FG, Su) Mapoyo Pemon (Br, Gu) Yabarana Yekuana / Maiongong / Maquiritari (Br) Yukpa (Co) Cibchan Family? Barí / Motilón Guajibo Family Guajibo / Sikuani Kuiva / Cuiba (Co) Puinave-Makú Family Puinave (Co) Sáliva Family Mako (Co?) Piaroa (Co) Sáliva (Co) Tukano Family Tukano (Co, Br)

Speakers Population

[very few] [few] [100]

13,000 1,129 1,209 2,760[?] 1167 409 [179,31]

[semi]

few? [3,133] [45,000]
[178] 21,000 318 2,619
[4,174]

1,503

9,221 [856]

774 [240]

345 8,938 79

731

Trans- Studies Status mission

1

d, e

low

2

c

low

1

d

1

1

2

c

[high] [2]

high

3

1

none

1

d

good

1

low?

c

2

1

good

2

d

d

good

1

1

Endangered Languages of Lowland Tropical South America 45

Table 3. Venezuela (cont.)

Family, Languages Tupi-Guarani Family Yeral / Nheengatu (Co, Br) Yanomami Family Yanomami (Br) Sanema (Br) Isolated Languages Jodi / Yuwana Pumé / Yaruro Uruak / Awaké (Br?) Warao (Gu)

Speakers Population
100s?

Trans- Studies Status mission

7,069 373 [1,500]

good good

257

good

1

d

6,000

2

few

[45]

d

25,000

2

Adapted from González Ñañez 2000 and Ruette 2000. Other information, in brackets, is mostly from the Database on Endangered Latin American Languages, compiled by Crevels and Adelaar. The status “endan” (endangered) is attributed by González Ñañez to Baré, Baniva, Jodí, Máku, Mapoyo, Puinave, Sáliva, Warekena, Yabarana.

Table 4. Peru

Family, Languages

Speakers**

Population**

Arawá Family

Culina (Br)

[400]

[400]

Arawak Family

Asháninca (Br) 52,232 [26,000] [30,000]

Campa Caquinte

229 [250-300] [250-300]

Chamicuro

126

[10-20]

(100-150) [2]

Iñapari

4 [4]

Machiguenga w/out [5,700-13,000] [6,400-13,000] Cogapacori

Trans- Studies Status mission

[yes] 3 [3]

[yes] 3[3]

[yes] [1]

c

[no]

[1]

d

[no] [1] d, e yes 2 [2]

46 Denny Moore

Table 4. Peru (cont.)

Family, Languages

Speakers**

Population**

Trans- Studies Status mission

Nomatsiguenga [2,300-4,500] [2,300-4,500] [yes] [1]

Piro/Yine w/out [2,150] Mashco-Piro (Br)

[2,150]

[yes] 3 [3]

Resígaro

11 [11]

with Bora,

[some] [2]

d

Ocaina

[5,500-10,000]

Yanesha / Amuesha [1,750-8,000]

[locally] 2 [2]

Bora Family

Bora (Co)

[260-2,000] [260-3,000] [locally] 2 [2]

Cahuapana Family

Chayahuita

[7,900-12,000] [7,900-12,000] [yes] [2]

Jebero

few [elders, [2,000-3,000] [doubt- [1]

d

interest in

ful]

revival]

Harkmbut-Katukina Family

Harakmbut

[830-1,000] [900-1,000]

[yes] [3]

Huitoto Family

Huitoto [Murui] (Co?)

[1,100-3,000] [1,100-3,000] [some] [2]

Huitoto [Muinane] [50-100]

d

(Br? Co?)

Ocaina (Co)

188 (150-250) 150 [54-150]

few

[1]

d

Jíbaro Family

Achuar (Ec)

[2,800-5,000] [2,800-5,000] [yes] 1 [2]

Aguaruna (Ec)

45,137

[34,000-39,000] [yes] 3 [3]

[34,000-39,000]

Candoshi

[1,120-3,000]

[-Shapra]

[Candoshi Family]

[1,120-3,000]

[yes]

Huambisa

[4,000-10,000] [4,000-10,000] [yes] [2]

[Munichi Family]

[Munichi]

[3 in 1988]

no

[2]

e

Pano Family

Amahuaca (Br) 247 [190-1,000] [190-1,000] [locally] [3]

c

Endangered Languages of Lowland Tropical South America 47

Table 4. Peru (cont.)

Family, Languages

Speakers**

Population**

Trans- Studies Status mission

Capanahua

[50-120]

[400]

no 1 [3] d

Cashibo-Cacataibo [1,150-1,500] [1,150-1,500] [yes] [2]

Cashinahua (Br) [750-1,000] [750-1,000]

[yes] [3]

[Chitonahua]?

[35]

d

[Mastanahua]?

[100]

d

Mayoruna / Matses (Br)

[890-2,500] [890-2,500]

[yes]

[Sharanahua]?

[350-450]

[350-450]

[yes]

Shipibo-Conibo

20,168

[13,200-16,085] [yes] 1 [2]

[13,200-16,085]

Yaminahua (Br) [380-1,000] [380-1,000]

[yes] [1]

[Yora(nahua)]? [200]

[200]

Isconahua*

28 [30]

d

Moronahua*

Remo*

Peba-Yagua Family

Yagua (Co)

[760-4,000] [5,000]

[locally] 3 [3]

Shimaco Family

Urarina

[170-3,500] [170-3,500]

[yes]

Tacana Family

Ese Eha [/Huarayo]

[225]

[225]

[most]

Tucano Family

Secoya (Ec, Co) [250-600]

[250-600]

[yes]

Orejón

190-300 [225-260]

[225-260]

[some] 1

Tupi-Guarani Family

Cocama-Cocamilla few [260] (Co, Br)

[15,000]

[no]

[3]

d

Omagua (Ec?)

[nearly

[627 in 1976]

[no]

d, e

extinct]

Záparo Family

Arabela

[50-150]

[300]

few 1 [1] d

[Cahuarano]

[5 in 1972]

d, e

48 Denny Moore

Table 4. Peru (cont.)

Family, Languages
Iquito Taushiro [/Pinche] [Taushiro Family] Isolated Languages Ticuna (Co, Br)

Speakers** 150 [elder] 7 [7 in 1975]
[700-6,000]

Population** [150] [20]
[700-40,000]

Trans- Studies Status mission

[no] 0 [0] d

[no]

d, e

[yes]

* Unknown if dialect or different language. ** Numbers in brackets are from the Database on Endangered Latin American Languages, compiled by Crevels and Adelaar. Numbers in parentheses are from Solis Fonseca 2000 and represent the 1975 census. Other numbers are from García Rivera 2000 and it is unclear if they indicate population or speakers.
Information is also adapted from the map of Pozzi-Escot, Solis, and García Rivera 2000, which considers the following languages “in the process of extinction” (‘c’ or ‘d’ above): Campa Caquinte, Iñapari, Resígaro, Jebero, Ocaina, Amahuaca, Omagua, Iquito, and Taushiro.

Table 5. Bolivia

Family, Languages Arawak Family Baure Machineri (Br) Mojeño Mataco-Maka Family Chulupi (Ar, Pa) Pano Family Chacobo Pacahuara Yaminahua (Pe, Br) Tacana Family Araona

Speakers
40 elders 140 22% use
none?
550 9 137
81

Population Trans- Studies Status mission

631 155 20,805

none

sil/1

d

high

0

med mis/sil/1

dispersed

0

e

767

good

sil/1

9

sil/1

d

161

good

0

90

high

sil/1

Endangered Languages of Lowland Tropical South America 49

Table 5. Bolivia (cont.)

Family, Languages

Speakers

Cavineña

1,180

Esse Ejja (Pe)

502

Reyesano

few elders?

Tacana

1,821

Tupi-Guarani Family

Guarasugwe

0?

Guarayo

5,933

Siriono

399

Yuqui / Bia Ye

125

Isolated Languages

Canichana

3 semi

Cayubaba

2 semi

Itonama

5 elder

Leco

20

More

76

Moseten

585

Movima

2,000

Tsimane

5,316

Yuacare

2,675

Population
1,736 584 4,118 5,058
46 7,235 419 156
583 794 5,099 80 200 1,177 6,516 5,907 3,333

Transmission
med med none med/low

Studies sil/1 sil/1
sil/1

Status d, e

none

0

e

mis/sil/1

mis/2

0

none none none

sil/1

e

sil/1

e

sil/1 d, e

1

d

2

d

sil/1

mis/1

mis/1

sil = study by SIL. mis = study by other mission. Adapted from Rodríguez Bazán 2000, Rodriguez Bazán and Ayreyu Cuellar 2000, and the Database on Endangered Latin American Languages, compiled by Crevels and Adelaar, which includes Albó 1995, Diez Astete and Murillo 1998, and the Censo Indígena Rural de las Tierras Bajas of 1994.

50 Denny Moore

Table 6. Ecuador

Family, Languages Jívaro Family Achuar Chicham (Pe) Shuar Chicham (Pe) Quíchua Family Runa Shimi (Western) Tucano Family Pai Coca / Siona / Secoya (Co, Pe) Zaparoan Family Záparo Isolated Languages A’ingae / Cofán (Co) Wao Tiriro

Speakers
4,000 35,000 1,800 600
24 [1-5] 800 1,200

Population [5,000]
24 [170] [800] [1,200]

Trans- Studies Status mission
1 3
2
1

1

d

1 2

Based on Gnerre 2000, Ushiña S. 2000, Juncosa 2000, and the Database on Endangered Latin American Languages, compiled by Crevels and Adelaar. Numbers in brackets are from this last source.

Table 7. Guyana
Family, Languages Arawak Family Arawak / Lokono (FG, Su) Mawayana (Br, Su) Wapixana (Br) Carib Family Akwaio
Kapon is auto-desig (V, Br)
Carib / Kariña, Galibi / Kali’na (V, Br, FG, Su)

Speakers Population

Trans- Studies Status mission

<10 %

15,500
? 6,900

2

0

e

5,000

1

3,000

Endangered Languages of Lowland Tropical South America 51

Table 7. Guyana (cont.)

Family, Languages Makushi (Br) Patamona
Kapon is auto-desig
Pemon / Arekuna (Br, V) WaiWai (Vr) Isolated Languages Warrau (V) Creole Languages Guyanese
English base
Berbice
Dutch base
Skepi
Dutch base

Speakers

Population 7,750 5,000

500

24

Trans- Studies Status mission

1

1?

c

c

Adapted from Forte 2000, Carmago and Boven 2000b, and the Database on Endangered Latin American Languages, compiled by Crevels and Adelaar. Carmago indicates an “endangered” status for Mawayana, Berbice, and Skepi.

Table 8. Suriname

Family, Languages Arawak Family Arawak / Lokono (Gu, FG) Mawayana (Br, Gu) Carib Family Akurio Carib / Kariña (Br, Gu, FG, V) Sikïyana

Speakers
[700] [5] [10] [800-1,000] [15]

Population
[2,000]
[60]
50 3,000

Trans- Studies Status mission

low

2

none

d

low

0

d

med

3

none

d

52 Denny Moore

Table 8. Suriname (cont.)

Family, Languages

Speakers

Trio / Tiriyó (Gr?, Br)

[1,000-1,200]

Tunayana

[10]

close to Waiwai

Wayana (FG, Br) [500]

Creole Languages, English based

Alaku / Boni

Guyanese

Kwinti

Matawari

Ndjuka

Paramaca

Sranan Tongo / Taki Taki

Saramaccan
English & Portuguese based

Population 1,000[-1,200]
500

Trans- Studies Status mission

high

1

none

high

1

d

Adapted from Boven and Morroy 2000, Camargo and Boven 2000, and the Database on Endangered Latin American Languages, compiled by Crevels and Adelaar. Camargo and Boven give indicate Akurio and Kwinti as in danger of extinction.

Table 9. French Guiana
Family, Languages Arawak Family Arawak / Lokono (Gu, Su) Palikur (Br)

Speakers Population
350
500

Trans- Studies Status mission
1?
1

Endangered Languages of Lowland Tropical South America 53

Table 9. French Guiana (cont.)

Family, Languages

Speakers

Carib Family

Aparaí (Br)

Kali’na / Galibi / Carib (Br, Gu, Su, V)

Wayana (Su, Br)

Tupi-Guarani Family

Émérillon

200

Wayãpi (Br)

Creole Languages

Ndyuka
English base

Aluku / Boni
English base

Paramaka
English base

Saramaka
English & Portuguese base

Guyanais
French base

Population
2,000 1,000
400+ 500

Trans- Studies Status mission

2 1

1

c

3

Adapted from Grenand 2000, Queixalós 2000 and Camargo and Boven 2000c. Camargo indicates Émérillon as endangered.

54 Denny Moore

Caribbean Sea 24

Caracas

North

VENEZUELA 25

Georgetown

GUYANA

Paramaribo

Atlantic

Bogotá
COLOMBIA 26
20 22 23 26

27 31

Cayenne SURINAME
FRENCH 2829 GUIANA 28 30

Quito
EQUADOR 1

21

2 3 4 5

19 16
1718 113415 16

20
13 33

6 7 12 3532

34

Rio Negro

28

13 32 15 Amazon

Manaus 38

36

Madeira

59 60

Rio

37 39 B R A Z I L

Belém 61
62

Ocean

Rio Xingu Rio Tocantins Rio São Francisco

11 10
PERU Lima

Rio Branco

Porto Velho

9

68 40

8

69
70 71

7443214734444746583497547154695502 53

56 58 57 63

Brasília 64

72

54 Goiânia

La Paz B O L I V I A

55

Fortaleza Recife
Salvador

Rio Paraguai

Sucre 77

65

66

Belo Horizonte

Rio

São Paulo

Rio de Janiero

67

Santos

Curitiba

Porto Alegre

Paraná
outh Atlantic Ocean

South Pacific Ocean

S

Map 2. Lowland and Tropical South America

Endangered Languages of Lowland Tropical South America 55

Ecuador

26 Baré

48 Puruborá

1 Záparo

27 Uruak (Awaké) 49 Kujubim

Peru

Guyana

50 Mondê

2 Arabela

28 Mawayana

51 Akuntsu

3 Cahuarano

Suriname

52 Kwazá (Koaiá)

4 Taushiro [/Pinche] 28 Mawayana

53 Sabanê

5 Jebero

29 Akurio

54 Umutina (Omotina)

6 Chamicuro

30 Sikïyana

55 Guató

7 Munichi

Brazil

56 Apiaká

8 Iñapari

13 Kokáma

57 Yawalapití

9 Mastanahua?

15 Omágua (Kambeba) 58 Trumái

10 Chitonahua?

23 Tariána

59 Xipaya (Shipaya)

11 Isconahua?

26 Baré

60 Kuruáya

12 Capanahua

28 Mawayána

61 Anambé

13 Cocama-Cocamilla 31 Máku

62 Amanayé

14 Iquito

32 Poyanáwa

63 Avá-Canoeiro

15 Omagua

33 Korúbo

64 Akwén/Xakriabá

16 Ocaina

34 Txunhuã-Djapá 65 Krenák

17 Resígaro

35 Nukini

66 Ofayé (Ofayé-Xavante)

18 Huitoto [Muinane] 36 Katukina do Rio Biá 67 Xetá

Colombia

(Pedá Djapá)

Bolivia

13 Cocama

37 Katawixí

68 Pacahuara

16 Ocaina

38 Mura

69 More

19 Nonuya

39 Torá

70 Cayubaba

20 Carijona

40 Oro Win

71 Reyesano

21 Cabiyari

41 Kanoê

72 Leco

22 Pisamira

42 Djeoromitxí (Jabutí) 73 Canichana

23 Tariano

43 Arikapú

74 Baure

Venezuela

44 Aruá

75 Itonama

24 Añu (Paraujano) 45 Mekém (Sakirabiár) 76 Guarasugwe

25 Mapoyo

46 Urupá

77 Chulupi

47 Ajurú (Wayoró)

56 Denny Moore
Notes
1. I wish to thank the people who contributed information on languages: Francisco Queixalós, Odile Renault-Lescure, Willem Adelaar, Mily Crevels, Sérgio Meira, Gail Gomez, Raquel Guirardello, Yonne Leite, Henri Ramirez, Filomena Sandalo, Bruna Franchetto, Sebastian Drude, Elder Lanes, Spike Gildea, Leo Wetzels, Eithne Carlin, and Hein van der Voort. Errors are my own. The information presented here is that which was available in 2001. The situation has changed since then. For example, much more reseach has been done on the native languages of Bolivia. A more recent accont of the study of native Brasilian languages is given in Moore 2005.
References
Etnias Indígenas de Colombia – website 2001 Grupos Indígenas de Colombia www.indígenascolombia.org/pueblos. htm/#Grupos. List of native groups adapted from Los Pueblos Indígenas de Colombia 1997, by Raúl Arango and Enrique Sánchez. Bogatá: Tercer Mundo Editores. Departamento Nacional de Planeación. 1998.
Aikhenvald, Alexandra Y. and R. M. W. Dixon 1999 Other small families and isolates. In Dixon and Aikhenvald (eds.) 341 – 384.
Albó, Xavier 1995 Bolivia plurilingüe: Una Guía para Planificadores y Educadores, 3 vols. La Paz: UNICEF-CIPCA.
Boven, Karin and Robby Morroy 2000 Indigenous languages of Suriname. LAH 377–384.
Camargo, Eliane, and Karin Boven 2000 Indigenous languages of Suriname. Map accompanying LAH. 2000b Indigenous languages of Guyana. Map accompanying LAH. 2000c Langues Amérindiennes de Guyane Française. Map accompanying LAH.
Centro Colombiano de Estudios de Lenguas Aborígenes (C.C.E.L.A.) 2000 Lenguas Indígenas de la Amazonia Colombiana. Map, adapted by Francisco Queixalós and Odile Renault-Lescure, accompanying LAH.
Centro de Documentação Indígena 1987 Povos Indígenas no Brasil. Map. São Paulo: CEDI.
Díez Astete, Álvaro and David Murillo 1998 Pueblos Indígenas de Tierras Bajas: Características Principales. La Paz: PNUD.

Endangered Languages of Lowland Tropical South America 57
Dixon, R. M. W. and Alexandra Y. Aikhenvald (eds.) 1999 The Amazonian languages. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Forte, Janette 2000 Amerindian languages of Guyana. LAH 317–333.
Franchetto, Bruna 2000 O Conhecimento Científico das Línguas Indígenas da Amazônia no Brasil. LAH 165–182.
García Rivera, Fernando Antonio 2000 Estado de las Lenguas en el Perú. LAH 333–342.
Gnerre, Maurizio 2000 Conocimiento Científico de las Lenguas de la Amazonia del Ecuador. LAH 277–286.
González Ñañez, Omar 2000 Las Lenguas del Amazonas Venezolano. LAH 385–418.
Grenand, Françoise 2000 La Connaissance Scientifique des Langues Amérindiennes en Guyane Française. LAH 307–316.
Instituto Sócio Ambiental. 2001a Línguas Indígenas. www.socioambiental.org/website/povind/ linguas/ index.html. 2001b Lista de Povos Indígenas. www.socioambiental.org/website/povind/ povos/morinfo.html. (1997 revision of information from Rodrigues 1986.)
Juncosa, José E. 2000 Lenguas Indígenas de la Amazonia Ecuatoriana. Map accompanying LAH.
Moore, Denny 2005 Brazil: Language situation. In Brown, Keith (ed.) Encyclopedia of languages and linguistics. Vol. 2: 117–127.
Kaufman, Terrence and Victor Golla 2001 Language groupings in the New World: their reliability and usability in cross-disciplinary studies. In Renfrew (ed.) 47–58.
Lizarralde, Manuel 2001 Biodiversity and loss of Indigenous languages and knowledge in South America. In Maffi, Luisa (ed.) On biocultural diversity: Linking language, knowledge, and the environment. Washington: Smithsonian Institution Press. 265–281.
Montes Rodrigues, María Emília 2000 Informe sobre el Conocimento Científico de las Lenguas Ameríndias Habladas em la Región Amazônica Colombiana. LAH 193–210.
Nichols, Johanna 1990 Linguistic diversity and the first settlement of the New World. Language 66.3: 475–521.

58 Denny Moore
Pozzi-Escot, Ines, Gustavo Solis Fonseca and Fernando García Rivera 2000 Lenguas Indígenas de la Amazonia Peruana. Map accompanying LAH.
Queixalós, Francisco and Odile Renault-Lescure (organizers) 2000 As Línguas Amazônicas Hoje (= LAH). São Paulo: Instituto Sócio Ambiental.
Queixalós, Francisco 2000 Les Langues de Guyane Française. LAH 299–306.
Renfrew, Colin (ed.) 2001 America past, America present: Genes and languages in the Americas and beyond, Cambridge: The McDonald Institute for Archeological Research.
Rodrigues, Aryon D. 1986 Línguas Brasileiras: para o Conhecimento das Línguas Indígenas. São Paulo: Edições Loyola.
Rodrigues, Aryon D. 1993 Endangered languages in Brasil. Paper presented in the “Symposium on Endangered Languages of South America,” Rijksuniversiteit, Leiden.
Rodríguez Bazán, Luis A. 2000 Estado de las Lenguas Indígenas del Oriente, Chaco y Amazonia Bolivianos. LAH 129–149.
Rodríguez Bazán, Luis A. and Herlan Ayreyu Cuellar 2000 Lenguas Indígenas de la Amazonia Boliviana; Región de las Cuencas de los Rios Amazonas y de la Plata (Oriente, Chaco y Amazonia). Map accompanying LAH.
Roosevelt, Anna C. 1994 Amazonian anthropology: Strategy for a new synthesis. In Roosevelt, Anna C. (ed.) Amazonian Indians from prehistory to the present. Tucson: The University of Arizona Press. 1–29.
Ruette, Krisna 2000 Lenguas Indígenas de la Amazonia Venezolana (y otras Regiones del País). Map accompanying LAH.
Seki, Lucy 1999 The Upper Xingu as an incipent linguistic area. In Dixon and Aikhenvald (eds) 417–430. 2000 Gramática do Kamaiurá. Campinas: Editora da UNICAMP.
Simoni, Lucia; Tarazona-Santos, Eduardo; Luiselli, Donata and Davide Pettener 2001 Genetic differentiation of South American Native populations Inferred from classical markers: from explorative analyses to a working hypothesis. In Renfrew (ed.) 125–138.
Solís Fonseca, Gustavo 2000 La Lingüística Amerindia Peruana de la Selva. LAH 343–360.
Ushiña S., Pedro H. Identificación de las Nacionalidades Indígenas del País. LAH 287–298.

Chapter 4 Endangered Languages of Mexico and Central America
Colette Grinevald
1. Introduction
The region to be talked about in this paper is hard to label, although it is clearly identifiable as lying between the United States to the north and Colombia to the south, and comprising the following eight countries: Mexico, Guatemala, Belize, El Salvador, Honduras, Nicaragua, Costa Rica and Panama. This area between North and South America partly overlaps with them both culturally and linguistically. It is subdivided into different specific political, economic and cultural subgroupings that have variously been labelled Middle America, Mesoamerica, Central America, or the Intermediate Area. This presentation will follow a straightforward country by country order, from Mexico in the north to Panama in the south, and underline the startling contrasts that characterize these countries in terms of the density of indigenous populations, the vitality of their languages and the development of programs for the linguistic training of native speakers.
It is a region where major centers of civilization flourished during the 2,500 years before the Spanish Conquest, like those of the of Teotihuacan, of the Toltec and the Aztec in Central Mexico, the Olmec on the Gulf Coast of Mexico, the Monte Alban of Oaxaca, and the Classic Maya of Chiapas in Mexico and the Peten in Guatemala (Longacre 1967).
One of the major characteristics of this area as a whole is that it was the most densely populated area of the continent before the arrival of the European conquerors and colonizers. It is estimated that the indigenous population of the region reached 25 million in 1519. The city of Tenotchtitlan, for instance, had 500,000 people, at a time when Rome had only 100,000 and Paris, the largest city of Europe had only 300,000 (Garza Cuarón and Lastra 1991:107). It is also one of the regions of the world that has suffered one of the greatest sudden losses of indigenous population: less than a century after the initial European contacts, the population had been reduced to one million people. This happened as the result of numerous converging

60 Colette Grinevald
dynamics, such as the physical elimination of ethnic populations, ethnic suicide by the populations themselves (through a combination of low birth rates and high rates of infanticide and adult suicide, of the kind witnessed today with some indigenous groups of the Amazonian region of South America), loss of population from incapacity at adapting to the inhospitable lands to which the indigenous populations were relegated, and deadly impact of diseases brought in from the Old World.
Today the proportion of indigenous population and of speakers of indigenous languages in this region is much higher than that of its neighbors to the north (the United States and Canada) and is only equalled by that of the Andean countries to the south. This region is home to some of the largest Amerindian language communities, with several languages having over a million speakers, such as Nahuatl (Aztec) and Yucatec in Mexico and the Quichean complex (Kiche’-Tzutujil-Kaq’chikel) in Guatemala, and more than two dozen languages with more than a 100,000 speakers. But, as is the case throughout the Americas, all of the indigenous languages of the region, large languages included, are to be considered endangered.1
2. Mexico2
The major actors at Mexican institutions involved in the study of the languages of Mexico all point to the fact that ALL Mexican languages are endangered if one includes the threat of potentially swift language shift in some major Nahuatl speaking communities (see Hill and Hill 1986; for instance). The same Mexican actors are also generally concerned that speakers of the languages to be documented and studied be trained to do linguistics whenever feasible, through the programs that will be mentioned below.
2.1. Overview of the languages of Mexico
The wealth of Mexico in terms of its number of indigenous languages and its diversity of language families is well known. Actual accounts give about 58 to 200 languages, depending on which criteria are used to determine languages. It is estimated that about 113 languages have disappeared in Mexico since the 12th century: this figure includes 48 languages that have remained unclassified and 65 classified languages, 33 of which were Uto-Aztecan and many of those on the Mexican-US border (Garza Cuarón and Lastra 1991: 97).

Endangered Languages of Mexico and Central America 61

As expounded on numerous occasions by Kaufman, there is a great need to keep in mind the state of relatedness of the languages in all discussions of the genetic classification of the languages of this region of the world and of the simple count of languages spoken in the country. Kaufman distinguishes between dialects, language complexes, language groups (or branches or families if there is no superordinate category), language families and stocks or phyla. In this perspective for instance, Kaufman signals that the names Nahua, Otomí, Zapoteco, Mixteco, Mazateco, Chinanteco, Tlapaneco, Popoloca, Pame, Zoque actually refer to language groups, and not to individual languages, as each one contains two or more languages. The range of variation found in calculations of the number of languages of Mexico comes from linguists with different purposes, such as linguists focusing on the classification of languages like Kaufman, or linguists of the Summer Institute of Linguistics (SIL), who focus primarily on estimating the desirability of Bible translation. One can, for instance, contrast Kaufman’s division of Zapoteco into 10 languages with the list of 57 Zapoteco entries given in the SIL Ethnologue.
Another characteristic of Mexico is its very large population of speakers of indigenous languages. According to the 2000 census, there are 1,448,936 speakers of Náhuatl, 452,887 of Zapoteco, and 444,498 of Mixteca.3 Five of the Mayan languages total more than 1,5 million speakers.4

2.2. The endangered languages of Mexico5
Garza Cuarón and Lastra (1991) is one of the most reliable sources of information for the country: it combines the necessary wariness of figures from the official 1990 census and information from many field accounts.6
Table 1. The most endangered languages of Mexico (Garza Cuarón and Lastra 1991: 97)

Stock Uto-Aztecan Otomanguean
Mixe-Zoqueta Mayan

Language Pima-Papago Varohio Ocuiltec (Tlahuica) Ixcatec Northern Pame Oluta Popoluca Lacandon Acatec

Speakers 236 300 93 119 30 121 200 100

62 Colette Grinevald Table 1. (cont.) Stock Yuman-Seri
Algonquian

Language Paipai Kiliwa Cochimi Cucapa Seri Kickapoo

Speakers 24 90 220 178 500 400

The following languages must be considered to be the most endangered because of their few speakers: Oluta: 14 (Zavala 2000), South Zoque of Tuxla: 0–5 and Ayapa mixe zoque 2–10 (Roberto Zavala, p. c.). To those can be added some Mayan languages spoken on the border with Guatemala, some spoken by immigrants from that country. The figures from the 2000 census are 90 for Ixil, 23 for Aguacateco, and a few each for Mocho, Teco and Tuzanteko.
In general, one must keep in mind several obstacles to the task of evaluating which languages need most attention such as great variation in the counting of languages, in the counting of speakers left, as well as in the assessment of which languages of Mexico are the most un(der)-documented.7 What is certain is that the last ten years have seen a surge of interest in the indigenous languages and in fieldwork projects, as described in the next section.

2.3. Present day work on the languages of Mexico
This section will focus on various national programs attending to the study and documentation of the languages of Mexico, including the training of Mexican linguists, and for a few of particular interest here, the training of indigenous native speakers. A number of programs focusing on the study of indigenous languages have existed for a while in Mexico, but this last decade has seen a noticeable surge in linguistic studies that take advantage of the latest developments in the discipline. There is an increasingly active network of national and foreign linguists, national and foreign institutions, international conferences and workshops.

Endangered Languages of Mexico and Central America 63
Linguistic training in Mexico City – The Escuela Nacional de Antropologia e Historia (ENAH) is the oldest institution. It had been offering B.A. and M.A. (licenciatura y maestria) degrees and has just started offering a doctoral degree as well. The degree is in general linguistics, but there is training available for the study of Middle American Languages. – The Seminario de Lenguas Indígenas is a research institute of the University of Mexico (UNAM). – The Instituto de Investigaciones Antropológicas is another research institute of the University of Mexico (UNAM). It has a Ph.D. program in Anthropology and students can obtain training in linguistics by tutoring. – The Colegio de México (COLMEX) has research programs and training of Ph.D. students. – The Universidad Autónoma Metropolitana has a B.A., an M.A. and a Ph.D. in general linguistics – The Universidad Nacional Autónoma de Mexico (UNAM) has also B.A., M.A. and Ph.D. in general linguistics with specialization in Spanish.
Other Mexican university and research centers focusing on Indian languages
– The Universidad de Sonora offers a B.A. and an M.A. in linguistics and specializes in the study of the Indian languages of this northern part of Mexico. They have been running well attended international conference in recent years and have produced collections of proceedings of these conferences (Encuentros de Hermosillo).
– The Universidad de Guadalajara through its Departamento de Lenguas Indígenas specializes in the languages of the northwest of Mexico. It has an MA in general linguistics.
– The Universidad de Yucatán in Mérida offers a B.A. in linguistics with a specialization in Yucateco.
– The Centro de Investigación y Estudios Superiores en Antropología Social (CIESAS) is a research institute and a training center delivering an M.A. degree in linguistics for native speakers in Amerindian languages. Beyond Mexico City it has several branches in different parts of the country. CIESAS-Sureste, based in San Cristobal de Las Casas, is actively attending to the languages of Chiapas and Southern of Mexico.

64 Colette Grinevald
Program for the documentation of Mexican languages – The Proyecto para la Documentación de las lenguas de Meso America (PDLMA), co-directed by Kaufman (University of Pittsburgh), Justeson (University of Albany) and Zavala (CIESAS-Sureste), is a major project for the documentation of Mexican languages. In the last decade it has been attending to a large number of Mexican languages, including all MixeZoquean, some Zapotecan, some Totonacan, some Nahua, one Popoloca, three Mayan, and both Matlatzincan languages.8 The functioning of this program is described in Kaufman (2001).
A new government institute for the languages of Mexico – The Instituto Nacional de Lenguas Indígenas de México (INALI) was created in 2003 as a part of the General Law of Linguistic Rights for the Indigenous populations. It is dedicated to basic and applied research on the languages of Mexico, the standardization of writing systems and the production of teaching and education materials, elaborating maps and catalogs of languages. It is also meant also to organize campaigns for the diffusion of indigenous languages, to organize conferences on the languages, to train and grant certification of translators. In addition it should promote language policies aimed at a greater use and development of indigenous languages. Much hope has been placed in this new institute and it is hoped that it will not be too bureaucratic and will fulfill some of the hopes it raises.9
2.4. Perspectives on Mexico
Mexico is the largest country of the region considered here and the one with the greatest number of languages and diversity of languages. A significant amount of work has already been done on the languages but much remains to be done. No family of languages in Mexico has been as well studied as the Mayan languages spoken in Guatemala, for which the level of linguistic knowledge is probably unparalleled in America. And a number of languages are indeed in need of urgent documentation as their speaker figures are alarming, although the general state of endangerment of all the Indian languages, including the major ones like Nahuatl, is always to be kept in mind. Comprehensive documentation relying on modern linguistic analyses is still needed for a very large number of languages, making Mexico a major center of linguistic activities in the future. If one

Endangered Languages of Mexico and Central America 65
region was to be pointed at for an urgent need of attention to its languages, it would be the region of Baja California.
Most notable is the fact that the last 10 years have seen major developments aimed at advancing and coordinating linguistic studies in the languages of Mexico with which any outside linguist interested in Mexico would do well to become familiar. Regional centers such as the ones in Hermosillo in the North and San Cristobal de las Casas in the south are becoming active centers of linguistic studies relying on field studies of the local languages. A major part of their actitivies, at least in CIESAS-Sureste, is the training of native speakers. The success of such training is key if the new INALI institute is to be able to carry out its planned programs for the promotion of indigenous languages.
3. Guatemala10
As was the case with Mexico, the outline of the present state of language endangerment to be given will be followed by important information on the intense linguistic activities being carried out on the languages, in particular on how the study and development of Mayan languages is being more and more carried out by native Mayan speakers, as discussed in Grinevald 2002.11
The striking feature of Mayan languages is their omnipresence in the country. Mayas form absolute majorities in almost all of the communities where they presently live in Guatemala. The great majority of Mayas speak one of the twenty nine extant Mayan languages, almost always as a first language, and many Mayans are still monolingual in a Mayan language, especially among the older population. In spite of these demographic signs of vitality, however, language shift and loss among Mayas is growing at an alarming rate, and Mayan community leaders are increasingly concerned about the future viability of their languages and community structures.12
3.1. Guatemalan endangered languages
Most Mayan languages are potentially threatened but are not actually disappearing. The signs of potential threat are large populations of bilinguals, the beginning of Spanish monolingualism among children, particularly in urban areas, and the transfer (for some time now) of functions

66 Colette Grinevald
that were once filled in Mayan to Spanish, particularly literacy and public speech. The level of vitality of the different languages varies remarquably, as does the level of vitality of a particular variant.
3.1.1. Fast language shift
All Mayan languages show signs of active shift, including the largest one, K’ichee’, which has close to a million speakers. Speaker populations that range from around 20,000 to well over 100,000 – Akatek, Chuj, Poqomchi’, Ch’orti’, Ixil, Tz’utujil and Q’anjob’al – seem to be viable for the moment but shift could set in very fast. Such a fast shift has been detected with Jakaltek (Popti’), which today is considered one of the most endangered languages in Guatemala, although here, too, the community seems conscious of the danger and is preoccupied with finding ways of stemming the loss.
Although neither Kaqchikel (one of the majority languages with almost half a million speakers) nor Q’anjob’al (a minority language with less than 100,000 speakers) is severely threatened today, Kaqchikel is obviously more so than Q’anjob’al, but this could change in a generation. The striking difference is that in many (most?) Kaqchikel towns, it is increasingly common to hear Spanish in public areas (like the street), but in Q’anjob’al towns one still almost never hears Spanish (except, of course, Barillas, where the urban population is heavily Ladino).
3.1.2. Seriously endangered languages
Languages may be in this category for one of two reasons: either the number of speakers is very low or dropping fast or there is now only one community of speakers. Mopan is gravely endangered, as it is now spoken by relatively few people in Guatemala (and in Belize). Poqomam, although not as small or as immediately endangered, needs listing here too because it has been steadily losing speakers. Meanwhile Uspantek, Sikapakense, Sakapultek, and Awakatek are cases of languages that are endangered by the fact that they are all spoken in only one municipality.
3.1.3. Moribund languages
Itzaj has about 30 fluent speakers today, none of them children, which places it in the moribund category. This is a situation where the community has expressed interest in reviving the almost lost language and has enrolled the help of the linguist specialist of the language (Hofling 1992, England p. c.). It remains now to be seen how many of the sixty or so semi-

Endangered Languages of Mexico and Central America 67
speakers, some of whom are still relatively young, might become fluent speakers. Teko in Guatemala may have younger speakers, including children, but it should still probably be classified as moribund. There also seem to be six speakers of Xinka (a non-Mayan language) left of the three Xinka languages that were still spoken in the 70’s.
3.1.4. Revival possible?
In the particular context of Guatemala, where the strength of Maya identity has been on a sharp rise in the last two decades, buttressed by intense language planning and active promotion of Mayan languages by new Mayan institutions, England (p. c.) reports that some languages seem to be undergoing revival. While older children are Spanish dominant, younger children are becoming Maya dominant, because of a conscious effort on the part of parents to reverse the shift. For example with Poqomam of Palin, the imminent demise of which was predicted some 15 years ago by Guillermina Herrera and which today has more children speaking it than there were then. Something similar may be happening with Ch’orti’, where revival is found in some families. There is no telling how widespread this phenomenon might be today.
3.2. Institutions dealing with the preservation of Mayan languages
Academic and institutional attention to the Mayan languages of Guatemala has few parallels in other American countries today. The presentation of the institutions to be considered here follows a double line of logic: on the one hand it respects a chronological order and on the other it highlights the long term contributions of the two foreign linguists mentioned, Terrence Kaufman and Nora England, for the expected academic readership of this paper. This conscious bias towards highlighting the doings of foreign academics is meant to give an account of an interesting and unfortunately rare example of the constructive impact of outsiders on the development of national and local programs that create, promote and strengthen basic and applied linguistic research programs for native speakers.
– The Proyecto Lingüístico Francisco Marroquin (PLFM) was founded by Terrence Kaufman in 1970 with the purpose of advancing knowledge on the Mayan languages of the country. The operation consisted of matching doctoral students from universities in the United States

68 Colette Grinevald
with teams of Mayan speakers in a mutual teaching program. 14 languages and 26 dialects received attention. About 80 Mayan speakers were taught the basics of descriptive linguistics and dictionary making procedures between 1972 and 1977, and about 40 more were taught descriptive linguistics and Mayan grammar in 1988 and 1989.13 – The Academia de Lenguas Mayas de Guatemala (ALMG) was approved as an autonomous state institution in 1991. In 1987, it had established a “unified” alphabet for Mayan languages. Several of its cofounders were previously members of the PLFM. Today it has branches for all Mayan languages of Guatemala, and it promotes their use and study through activities such as radio programs or translations of grammars originally written in English (England 1998). – Oxlajuuj Keej Maya’ Ajtz’iib’ (OKMA) was founded in 1990 by Nora England, one of the original linguists of the PLFM, with Mayan speakers of K’ichee’, Achi, Kaqchikel, Q’anjob’al and Poqomam. The goals of OKMA are to pursue the intensive study of Mayan linguistics, to attend to the production of grammatical and scholarly materials about Mayan languages and, to that end, to further train teams of native Mayan linguists. Recently it has become involved in documentation and archiving projects for severely endangered languages of Guatemala. This institution is unique in its being totally in the hands of native speakers and in producing high quality linguistic work recognized on the international academic scene. See a review of its work in Barret (2005). An OKMA member is finishing a doctoral program at Austin Texas, and an OKMA team has secured funding from the Hans Rausing Endangered Language Documentation Program (HRELDP) in London.
Guatemalan universities and other programs dealing with Mayan Languages
– The Universidad Rafael Landivar (URL), in Guatemala City, offers bachelor’s degrees in linguistics with a specialization in Mayan linguistics, and professional degrees in bilingual education and in legal interpreting.14 A program called Edumaya has supported hundreds of Mayan students with full scholarships from US-AID.
– The Universidad Mariano Galvez (UMG) has applied linguistics and sociolinguistics programs, in which the great majority of the students are Mayas.
– Many other institutions for education and for writers’ groups deal with Mayan languages and concentrate on linguistic training for

Endangered Languages of Mexico and Central America 69
Mayan speakers. Many of the major writers for the National Program in Bilingual Education (PRO-NEBI, now DIGEBI) established in 1985 have been graduates of the PLFM and the University programs mentioned above.
3.3. An exemplary situation in Latin America
Guatemala has been an intense language planning laboratory that has attracted much attention in the past two decades. The 1996 Peace Accords have responded substantially to demands of the “Mayan Movement” for the recognition and development of the Mayan languages of the country (see Grinevald 2002).
The documentation of Mayan languages in Guatemala today is largely in the hands of native linguists. The linguists of OKMA are, for instance, presently documenting Teko, Sakapulteko and Uspanteko with support from the Hans Rausing Programme. The Mayan languages Kaufman still considered underdocumented are two variants of Q’eqchi’ (Cahabón and Lanquín) and one variant of K’iché (Cunén). Ch’orti in the east of the country also remains in need of attention. The non-Mayan Xinka language is now being attended to as part of a three language documentation project supported by the new Documentation of Endangered Languages program (DEL) of the USA.15
4. Belize
The languages of this small country are an English-based Creole which serves as lingua franca, and several indigenous languages that are also spoken in neighboring countries. The figures on Belizean languages given below were all taken from Ethnologue (Gordon 2005).
Belize Creole English is the first or second language of the vast majority of the population of about 190,000. This creole is historically an extension of Miskitu Coast Creole, which is also spoken in Honduras and Nicaragua. The attitude of its speakers towards it is positive.
The Garifuna language of the Carib-Arawakan family is spoken by a population of 12,000 and is also spoken in Honduras. The Garifunas, who speak creole as a second language, are concerned with the loss of their ethnic language and interested in language revitalization.
Three Mayan languages are spoken by small communities: Yucatec, Mopan and Kekchi. The Yucatec Maya in Belize account for only 5,800 of the

70 Colette Grinevald
700,000 total Yucatec population of the Yucatan peninsula. The Belizean Yucatec community is preoccupied with the loss of its language, as all speakers are now older than 40. Some classes in Yucatec are being started.
The Belizean community of Mopan Maya numbers about 7,000 and is larger than the Guatemalan one of 2,700. No indication of the level of vitality of Mopan in Belize is available, though it is known that the language is seriously endangered in Guatemala.
The community of Kekchi’ in Belize is only 9,000 strong, while that of Guatemala has a population of 340,000. The Kekchi of Belize is a slightly different dialect from the dialects of Guatemalan Kekchi’.
5. El Salvador
Very few languages and speakers of indigenous languages have survived in El Salvador which had severe policies of elimination for those languages in the early part of the 20th century. Three ethnic groups of sizable numbers are still identified but the three languages – K’ekchi (or Q’eqchi), Lenca and Pipil – are all nearly extinct.
The K’ekchi people are Mayan and are in a smaller number in El Salvador than in Belize, with only 12,000.
The Lenca language has remained unclassified, although it is considered by some to be Macro-Chibchan. The Lenca number 36,000 as an ethnic group in El Salvador, but the language is nearly extinct there, as it is in Honduras. The varieties of Lenca in El Salvador and Honduras are considered to be different dialects.
The third and largest ethnic group of El Salvador is the Pipil, with 200,000. Their language belongs to the Nahuat family and is the best known language of the country. This language once thought extinct, has been described in Campbell (1985), who unexpectedly found about twenty speakers thirty years ago, in the course of a survey of dying languages of Central America. Today, Pipil is the object of coordinated language revitalization efforts.16
6. Honduras17
6.1. The languages of Honduras
There are six indigenous languages spoken in Honduras, three of which have speaker populations in neighboring countries and are considered

Endangered Languages of Mexico and Central America 71
to have a reasonable level of vitality (within the confines of the general situation of endangerment of all the indigenous languages in the region already mentioned), and two other languages endogenous to Honduras and considered to be severely endangered. Two ethnic communities are said to have no speakers left. The Lenca people are about 50,000. They are thought to be the original occupants of Honduras and to have constituted its base population. Their language is unclassified, and is considered extinct, although there might be a few speakers left. The variant of Honduras is said to be a different dialect from the one of El Salvador.18
6.1.1. Less endangered languages of Honduras
The Garifuna language, already mentioned in the profiles of Belize and Guatemala, has about 22,000 speakers. It is spoken by a black population that is bilingual in Garifuna and either Miskitu Coast Creole or Spanish. The Garifuna language remains understudied and there is a clear need for some projects that would involve the interested communities of the region.19 The other substantial speaker population is that of the Miskitu, which has about 23,000 speakers in Honduras, and many more in neighboring Nicaragua. There is also a community of Tawahka (Sumu) speakers of several hundreds, with also more speakers on the Nicaraguan side of the border.
6.1.2. Most endangered languages of Honduras
The Paya or Pech language belongs to the Chibchan family of languages and is spoken on the North Central Coast of Honduras by 869 out of a population of 2,000–2,500 people (Ramon Rivas 1993). The Paya community has expressed interest in preserving its language and some work has been carried out to that end.20
Tol (or Tolupan) is also called Jicaque. It is a language isolate that had two dialects, the western branch of which is extinct and the eastern one of which is spoken by around 1,000 (between speakers and semi-speakers) out of a population of 20,000. The speaker community best known is that of the Montaña de la Flor of the Francisco Morazan Department in North Central Honduras. The group is said to be hardly accessible and the field conditions very difficult. There remain 300 to 350 speakers out of a population of 600, including some children, all bilingual in Spanish.

72 Colette Grinevald
6.2. Language planning in Honduras
The indigenous population of Honduras is rather small and the majority are actually mestizados indigenous peasant (indigenous people acculturated to the mestizo-Spanish speaking culture), but they have organized and have presented clear demands for the defense of land titles and for the defense of their indigenous languages. There are representatives of the indigenous population in the Ministry of Education for instance, although they are not always speakers of an indigenous language.
Towards the late 90’s, some language planning took place, and the Bilingual Education program brought in linguists specialists of some of the local indigenous languages (Holt for Paya, Hale for Miskitu and Sumu, and Salamanca for Miskitu). But the programs encountered a number of difficulties, including the resistance of the financing institution, the World Bank, to invest in endangered languages (considered economically not viable), and a serious problem of manpower, not uncommon in development projects. It would seem that after several years of lethargy activity is beginning again.
7. Nicaragua
The fate of the indigenous languages of Nicaragua has been very different on the Pacific and the Atlantic sides of the country. No language has survived on the Pacific side, as in the interior: Monimbo (unclassified), Matagalpa (Misumalpan) and Subtiava have been extinct for some time. Meanwhile, several indigenous languages are still spoken in the eastern half of the country, now known as the Caribbean Coast (and previously the Atlantic Coast), where the lingua franca is in fact an English-based creole called Miskitu Coast Creole (or now Kriol). Creole and indigenous languages started receiving special attention twenty years ago as part of the process of establishing autonomy for the region during the Sandinista’s government. The Autonomy Statute of the Nicaraguan Constitution of 1987 officially recognized all the languages of the region, and the point was specifically made that every language deserved recognition and protection, no matter how small its population and speaker base.
7.1. The indigenous languages of the Caribbean Coast of Nicaragua
Three languages are still spoken on the Caribbean Coast with varying degrees of vitality, with a fourth ethnic group claiming interest in language revitalization effort, in spite of having no speakers left.

Endangered Languages of Mexico and Central America 73
Miskitu is the largest indigenous language of the region. It belongs to the Misumalpan family, the name of which is a blend of the languages of that family: MI for Miskitu, SUM for Sumu, ALPA for the extinct Matagalpa. The figures of the ethnic group are uncertain, but range between 75,000 and 120,000. To a great extent, the Miskitu language serves as a marker of identity for people of mixed background, many of whom were not declaring themselves Miskitu before the Sandinista Revolution, preferring to be identified as Creoles (i. e., of black descent). The language is also the second language of many Sumu people. It is secure in most Miskitu communities, where there is a high proportion of speakers and the language is taught to the children. The Miskitu language is set apart from most of the indigenous languages of this part of the world because of its status as a written language, as missionaries of the Moravian church developed materials for it in the mid-nineteen century and used it as a lingua franca in the region. The language is relatively well documented and a high proportion of its speakers are literate in it. It consists of several mutually-intelligible dialects.
Up until the Sandinista Revolution of the 1980’s, one talked of the Sumu language as another Misumalpan language with three distinct dialects and with an ethnic population of about 6,000. And as the Sumus were dominated by the Miskitus, in whose language they were bilingual, many did not identify themselves as Sumus, and even less as Sumu speakers. Both Sumu and Miskitu are also spoken in Honduras to the north.
Rama is the only Nicaraguan language to be spoken only in Nicaragua. It belongs to the large Chibchan family of languages that ranges from Honduras to Costa Rica, Panama and the northern part of Colombia. Rama is the smallest of the indigenous languages of Nicaragua and is in fact a moribund language with no more than a few dozen speakers, the majority of whom are isolated jungle dwellers. A major language documentation project and language and cultural revitalization, to which the community is still committed, took place in the 1990’s during Sandinista times.
There is an immigrant Garifuna community in Nicaragua but none speak the language, although the Garifunas participated in the discussion of the Autonomy project and claimed interest in language and culture revitalization efforts.
7.2. Linguistic rights and language development in Nicaragua
Today, programs of bilingual and multicutural education have been established for all the ethnic communities of the Atlantic Coast and operate

74 Colette Grinevald
with more or less success, given the limited support they have received in post-Sandinista times.
7.2.1. A team of professional linguists
A team of linguists self-identified as “Linguists for Nicaragua” has been working for over twenty years now on the various languages of Nicaragua for which communities have requested support. The work was carried out through the Center for Research and Documentation of the Atlantic Coast (CIDCA), now affiliated with the University of Central America (UCA-Managua).21 The languages, linguists and work involved have included: for Miskitu, Danilo Salamanca, who worked on a grammar and a dictionary and who is promoting literary production; for “Sumu” Ken Hale, who demonstrated that Mayangna (or Northern Sumu, worked on by Susan Norwood first and now Helena Benedicto), and Ulwa (or Southern Sumu, worked on by Hale and later by Tom Green and Andrew Koontz-Garboden) were different languages. Those languages needed basic linguistic descriptions and the projects emphasized the development of literacy and the training of community linguists.22
On the other hand, the “Rama Language Project” was a combination of salvage linguistics and language revitalization of a moribund and profoundly devalued language. A team of linguists (Grinevald Craig, Tibbitts, Assadi), helped by volunteer students from the University of Oregon, worked through CIDCA with the Rama community for several years (Craig 1992, Grinevald 2003). Today, a second phase of the project concentrates on archiving documentation materials and supporting the language revitalization program, including support for the land claims of Ramas whose territory is being invaded.23
7.2.2. Institutions dealing with language revitalization
The University of the Autonomous Regions of Caribbean Coast of Nicaragua (URACCAN), a recently opened regional university, is committed to the development of programs for the maintenance and revitalization of the languages and cultures of the Caribbean Coast of Nicaragua through an Institute for researching and promoting the languages and cultures of the coast region (IPILC), while WANI, the magazine of CIDCA-UCA continues to be the main source of information for the Caribbean Coast.
Although the country still sorely lacks resources, personnel and know how for this line of work, IPILC at URACCAN nevertheless constitutes the type of local institution through which such work should be chan-

Endangered Languages of Mexico and Central America 75
neled. It is clear that by now all the indigenous populations of the region are mobilized to defend their linguistic rights and look to it for support and training.

8. Costa Rica24

8.1. Languages of Costa Rica

Among the native languages of Costa Rica, four are still vital (again within the limits of the general endangerment and precariousness of all the languages of the region), two are considered moribund, and two are definitely extinct. All the languages still spoken today belong to the same Chibchan family of languages.
Table 2. Languages of Costa Rica (Rojas Chaves 1997)

Language

Population Speakers

Status

Bribri Cabecar Guaymi (or Moveres) Guatuso (or Malecus) Boruca (or Bruncas) Terraba (Terribe in Panama) Huetar

12,172 9,308 5,360
1,074
5,012
1,253
816

Chorotega

795

75% speakers

vital

95% speakers

vital

95% speakers

vital

70% speakers

vital

10 speakers (Rojas FW) 1 or 2 speakers, 5 semispeakers (Constenla p. c.) none
none

moribund and 30 semi-speakers moribund in Costa Rica extinct end of 18th century extinct end of 18th century (lasted in Nicaragua into 19th century)

8.2. Institutions dealing with Costa Rican languages
By Executive Decree a “Subsystem of Indigenous Education for the Preservation and Revitalization of Indigenous Languages” was created in 1993. The reform of the Constitution in 1999 included an article stating that “the State will watch over the maintenance and development of the national indigenous languages”.

76 Colette Grinevald
The study of the languages of Costa Rica is linked to the name of Adolfo Constenla Umaña, of the University of Costa Rica, founder and coordinator (1985–1996) of a Program for Linguistic Research on the Languages of Costa Rica and Neighbouring Areas (PIL) and editor of the linguistic journal Estudios de Lingüística Chibcha.

9. Panama

9.1. Languages of Panama
All the languages of Panama demonstrate a greater vitality than the languages of neighbouring countries. The major danger to these languages is that of language shift induced by a growing urbanization of some of the populations.

Table 3. Languages of Panama (Ethnologue)

Family Chibchan

Language
Guaymi Kuna

Population
128,000 50-70,000

Other contries (also in Costa Rica)

Chaco

Teribe
Buglere
Emberá Waumeo

3,000
2,500
7-8,000 3,000

(also in Costa Rica as Terraba)
(also in Colombia) (also in Colombia)

9.2. Documentation of Kuna by Kunas at AILLA
Panama is the site of an interesting case of extensive documentation being produced directly by speakers of the population concerned. After decades of research on the oral traditions of the Kunas by anthropological linguist Joel Sherzer, a situation has developed whereby Kuna speakers themselves are now actively documenting their traditions and archiving their recordings at the Archives of Indigenous Languages of Latin America (AILLA) in Austin Texas (founded by Sherzer himself). This is an interesting exam-

Endangered Languages of Mexico and Central America 77
ple of the contribution of new technologies and academic work being made available to a speaker population that demands it and uses it.
10. Conclusion
This report has emphasized the dynamics of the attention being given to indigenous languages of this central region of the American continents. The situations vary greatly from country to country, from very large and heavily populated countries like Mexico with major programs to very small and newly independent countries like Belize with little infrastructure for the study of its languages. It is a region with very large indigenous languages that have more than a million speakers, a phenomenon unknown in the countries to the north, but at the same time with numerous moribund languages and undocumented languages in need of urgent attention.
Mexico and Guatemala have major indigenous populations and large numbers of languages, some of which may have large speaker populations but are nevertheless endangered because they are at the mercy of powerful and potentially swift shifts to Spanish. The main characteristic of those two countries is the institutionalization of the systematic study of the local languages and the recent development of linguistic training programs for native speakers. Particularly striking are the ambitious language planning activities involving the Mayan languages of present-day Guatemala, including extensive bilingual education programs and language standardization and development programs.
Of the smaller and less populated countries to the south, one should remember the following aspects of their indigenous languages. Three languages have a large population base and a solid community of speakers. Miskitu is spoken across two countries (Honduras and Nicaragua) and benefits from a literate past. Garifuna is also spoken across two countries (Belize and Honduras) and may be in more dire need of linguistic attention. The large Guaymi-Movere and Kuna groups of Panama also constitute vital languages. Four relatively small Chibchan groups of Costa Rica nevertheless have a strikingly high proportion of speakers, which contrasts with the much more threathened languages of Honduras and the practically extinct languages of El Salvador. Meanwhile, the Sandinista Revolution, particularly through its project of Autonomy for the Atlantic/Caribbean Coast, attracted much attention to the indigenous languages of Nicaragua, big and small, and in the last decade of the 20th century turned the country into a major linguistic field laboratory that combined linguistic and applied lin-

78 Colette Grinevald

guistic research with language revitalization community programs. Major linguistic research and development work was also carried out in the emerging Nicaraguan Sign Language.
One of the main goals of this presentation was to highlight regional institutions of these countries and to underline the importance of acknowledging their existence. It emphasized in particular the important efforts being developed in several of these countries to provide their citizens with proper linguistic training in order for Amerindian linguistics to develop in situ in a self-sustainable way, the optimum scenario being of course the training of speakers of indigenous languages wherever and whenever possible. If properly thought through, the approach to the study of the indigenous languages of this region of the world ought to have a significant impact on how we conceive the relation of field linguists to the field, to linguistic communities, as well as to local and regional institutions. It means systematically integrating local concerns in the future planning of language-related academic efforts, which include standard linguistic research, newly developing language documentation and language maintenance projects, as well as situations of salvage linguistics for the moribund languages.

Mexico
1 Pima-Panago 236 (speakers) 2 Varohio 300 3 Ocuiltec Tlahuica 93 4 Ixcatec 119 5 Northern Pame 30 6 Olutla Popoluca 121 7 Lacandon 200 8 Akatek 100 9 Paipai 24 10 Kiliwa 90 11 Cochimi 220 12 Cocopa 178 13 Seri 500 14 Kickapo Kikapu 400
Guatemala 15 Mopan few 16 Itza 30 17 Teko ¿? 18 Xinka ¿?

El Salvador 19 Pipil 200.000
Honduras 20 Paya Pech 869 21 Tol Jicaque 1.000
Nicaragua 22 Sumu Mayangna, Ulwa¿? 23 Rama 25
Costa Rica 24 Teribe 1 or 2 25 Boruca 10

Endangered Languages of Mexico and Central America 79 Map 3. Mexico and Central America

12 11 9
10

13 13

1 2

UNITED STATES OF AMERICA

14
5 MEXICO

Gulf of Mexico

CUBA

3

Pacific

Ocean

6 4

7 8

16 15

16 15 BELIZE

Caribbean Sea

17 18

20 21

HONDURAS

GUATEMALA 19

22

EL SALVADOR

NICARAGUA

23

COSTA RICA
24 25 PANAMA

80 Colette Grinevald

Notes
1. The fact that the community of linguists of these Amerindian languages is acutely aware of this state of affairs accounts for the tone of alarmism and the posture of activism that runs through most of the writings about the state of Amerindian languages today.
2. The material to be presented in this section relies on various publications and on personal communication with Terrence S Kaufman and Roberto Zavala. Reliable and detailed information on the state of endangerment of the languages of Mexico may be found in several publications, such as Bartholomew, Lastra and Manrique 1994, 1995 (henceforth B, L and M 1994, 1995), Campbell 2000, Garza Cuarón and Lastra 1991 (henceforth GC and L), Suarez 1983.
3. Otomí 291,722; Totonaca 240,034; Mazateco 214,477 4. They are Maya Yucateco with 799,696, Tzotzil with 297,561, Tzeltal with
284,826, Chol with 161,766 and Huasteco with 120,739. 5. For detailed information about the endangerment situation of specific families,
the reader is referred to reports listed below: – B, L and M 1994 Vol. I: Yutoazteca (Dakin), Totonacan (MacKay), Tabasco
(Perez-Gonzalez), Mixe-Zoquean (Wichmann), Maya (Hopkins and Josserand), Otopamean (Bartholomew). – B, L and M 1995 Vol. II: Mixtecano y Zapoteco (Smith-Stark), Chinanteco (Merrifield), Popolocan (Veerman-Leichsenring), Tlapaneco (Carrasco Zuñiga) and Huave (Hollenbach). 6. The situation is, of course, very complex, a good example of it being the detailed case the Mixtec and Zapotec families of languages by Smith-Stark (1995). 7. The list of languages below, also provided by Kaufman, includes “the languages which lack one of the three components of an adequate documentation (G = grammar, T = texts, L = dictionary). In each of the groups listed below there are some communities where children are learning the language, but in all groups, there are languages or large important dialect areas where children are no longer learning the language”. Kaufman does “not consider most SIL dictionaries to be adequate because of [a] incomplete specification of phonological properties, [b] incomplete specification of grammatical properties of morphemes and stems. Mostly they are also too short.”

Language
Chinanteco [6+ languages] Zapoteco [10+ languages] Trique [3 languages] Mixteco [6+ languages] Amuzgo [2 languages] Cuicateco Sierra de Puebla Nahuat Tarasco

Lacks
t, g, l t, g, lt t, g, l t, g, l t, g, l t, g t, g, l t, g?, l

Endangered Languages of Mexico and Central America 81

Language Tojolabal Chontal, Yokot’an [Mayan]

Lacks t, g t, g, l?

8. This list reflects the knowledge accumulated by Kaufman over thirty years of fieldwork in the region and corresponds to the work to be done to meet his standards of documentation, not that there does not exist more documentation than he acknowledges here. The list does not reflect either the issue of how available accumulated documentation is at this point, as much more than is available to the newcomer to Mexican linguistics remains in the form of personal archives of linguists.
9. There are, however, still some MixeZoquean, many Zapotecan, many Nahua, some Totonacan, and several Popolocan languages for which no work has been scheduled so far.
10. There have been, for instance, televized political discussions in Purépecha with subtitles in Spanish, sponsored by INALI. The Institute’s main challenge is going to be the lack of appropriately trained speakers, hence the importance of the training programs mentioned earlier.
11. The principal source of information for this report on the endangered languages of Guatemala is from personal communication with Nora England (see England 1992, 1996, 1998), and personal communication with OKMA members, Eladio Mateo Toledo (B’alam) in particular. Additional specific information on language endangerment and under-documentation was also provided by Terence Kaufman and Roberto Zavala (p.c. 2002).
12. Although the attention will be focused on the large Mayan family of languages which predominates in Guatemala, it is worth noting that another indigenous language of another family of languages is spoken on the Caribbean Coast of the country. The Garifuna, whose language is of the Carib-Arawak family of languages number about 16,000 in Guatemala. Other Garifuna communities are found in Belize and Honduras.
13. As mentioned earlier, there are more than 1,5 million speakers of Mayan languages in neighboring Mexico, with both large and very small languages. The most endangered language communities there are border communities.
14. The following North American linguists became Mayan specialists in the course of three two-year phases of funding:

Mayan specialists

1972 and 73 (phase I) 1974 and 75 (phase II) 1976 and 77 (phase III)

Nora England and Norman on Mam, K’ichee’, Kaqchikel.
Tom Larsen on Awakatek, Steve Stewart on Q’eqchi’, Karen Dakin on Q’anjob’al and Akatek.
Margaret Datz on Popti’, Glenn Ayres on Ixil, Linda Munson on Mam, Robin Quizar on Ch’orti’, Tom Larsen on K’ichee’.

82 Colette Grinevald

The activities of the PLFM were curtailed by the ongoing state of insecurity that reigned in the country and peaked in the early 1980’s (the years of civil war euphemistically talked about as “la violencia”). When it was possible to resume activities, England offered Mayan linguistics courses for native speakers through the PLFM. The languages involved were the following:

Mayan linguistic courses

1988 1989

Mam, K’ichee’, Kaqchikel, Q’eqchi’, Wastek, Tz’utujiil, Q’anjob’al, Poqomam, Ch’orti’ (16 Mayan students)
Mam, K’ichee’, Kaqchikel, Q’eqchi’, Poqomam, Chuj, Achi, Ixil, Tz’utujiil, Popti’. (25 Mayan students)

The graduates of these courses were never made members of the PLFM, but many are still active and several are in OKMA (see 3.3.). 15. The programs were created and developed under the direction of Guillermina Herrera, Dean of Humanities, a graduate of the University of Iowa, where she studied under Nora England. 16. A new DEL program was started in 2005 by a consortium of the National Science Foundation, the National Endowment for the Humanities and the Smithsonian Institute. The DEL project includes the following three languages and linguists: Pipil of El Salvador (Lyle Campbell), Mocho of Mexico (Laura Martin) and Xinca of Guatemala (Roberto Zavala). 17. The revitalization project includes multimedia support for the teaching of the language (Lemmus 2003) and the creation of computer assisted language learning materials (Ward 2002). 18. The information for Honduras was obtained through Danilo Salamanca, specialist of Miskitu of Nicaragua and Honduras, who located the sources used. 19. The inventories of ethnic groups of Honduras often include Chortis, for which there is no figure available, and no speakers left. 20. Some linguistic study of the language has been carried out by P. Monro at UCLA with Garifuna-speaking residents of Los Angeles, California. 21. Dennis Holt, who did fieldwork on the language twenty years ago (Holt 1986) was called back to the country to be consultant for the Ministry of Education in the early 2000 and a Honduran university professor is said to have been working with the community, too. 22. In addition, a major research program of Linguists for Nicaragua has focused on Nicaraguan Sign Language. It has been directed by Judy Kegl. Although the challenge there is to attend to the development and standardization of a language rather than to the opposite work of documenting a moribund indigenous language, it is worth mentioning for being work on another precarious type of language. 23. The first phase (1985–93) was supported by NSF, NEH, and the Wenner Gren Foundation for Anthropological research. The second phase (2004–2006) is being financed by the HRELDP of SOAS, London.

Endangered Languages of Mexico and Central America 83
24. The sources of information on the actual situation of the indigenous languages of Costa Rica come from Rojas Chaves (1997) and personal communication with Adolfo Constenla, professor of linguistics at the Universidad de Costa Rica, major figure of Chibchan Studies (Constenla 1989, 1991).
References
Barret, Rusty 2005 Review of “Five Oxlajuuj Keej Mayab’ Ajtz’iib’ (OKMA) grammars. International journal of American linguistics (IJAL) 71,2: 215–220.
Bartholomew, Doris and Yolanda Lastra 1994 Panorama de los estudios de las lenguas indígenas de Mexico. Tome 1. Colección Biblioteca Abya-Yala 16. Quito: Ediciones Abya-Yala. 1995 Panorama de los estudios de la lenguas indígenas de Mexico. Tomo 2. Colección Biblioteca Abya-Yala. Quito: Ediciones Abya-Yala.
Benedicto, Elena 2004 Linguistics rights in the Nicaraguan Atlantic Coast: Actions on the ground within the legislative framework of the Estatuto de Autonomia. In Argenter, J. and R. McKenna Brown (eds.) Endangered languages and linguistics rights: on the margins of nations. Proceedings of the Eigth FEL Conference. Barcelona, 1–3 October 2004. Bath: The FEL. 73–76.
Campbell, Lyle 1979 Middle American languages. In Campbell L. and M. Mithun (eds.) The languages of Native America historical and comparative assessment. Austin: University of Texas Press. 902–1000. 1985 The Pipil language of El Salvador. Berlin: Mouton. 2000 American Indian languages. The historical linguistics of Native America. Oxford studies in anthropological linguistics, 4. Oxford University Press.
Campbell, Lyle; Kaufman, Terence and Thomas Smith-Stark 1986 Meso-America as a linguistic area. Language 62,3: 530–570.
Constenla, Adolfo Umaña 1989 La subagrupación de las lenguas chibchas: Algunos nuevos indicios comparativos y lexicoestadísticos. Estudios de lingüística Chibcha 8: 17 – 72. 1991 Las lenguas del Area Intermedia. Introducción a su estudio areal. Editorial de ka Universidad de Costa Rica, San José.
Craig, Colette 1992 A constitutional response to language endangerment: The case of Nicaragua. Language 68,1: 11–16.

84 Colette Grinevald
England, Nora 1992 Autonomía de los idiomas mayas: historia e identidad. Guatemala Cholsamaj. 1996 Introducción a la lingüística maya. Antigua/Guatemala PLFM-Cholsamaj. 1998 Mayan efforts towards language preservation. In Grenoble, L. and L. Whaley (eds.) 99–116.
Garza Cuarón, Beatriz and Yolanda Lastra 1991 Endangered languages of Mexico. In Robins, R. H. and E. M. Uhlenbeck (eds.) Endangered languages. Eds. Oxford/New York: BERG. 93 – 134.
Gordon, Raymond G, Jr. (ed.) 2005 Ethnologue: Languages of the world. Fifteenth edition. Dallas, Tex.: SIL International. Online version: http://www.ethnologue.com
Grenoble, Leonore and Lindsay, Whaley (eds.) 1998 Endangered languages: Current issues and future prospects. Cambridge University Press.
Grinevald, Colette 1998 Language endangerment in South America: a programmatic approach. In Grenoble, L. and L. Whaley (eds.) 124–160. 2002 Linguistique et langues mayas du Guatemala. In Landaburu, J. and F. Queixalos (eds.) Méso-Amérique, Caraibes, Amazonie Vol 1. Faits de Langues no 20. Paris: Ophrys. 17–25. 2003 Educación Intercultural y Multilingüe: El caso de los Ramas. In WANI, 34: 20–38. Managua.
Hale, Kenneth; Craig, Colette; England, Nora; Masayesva-Jeanne, LaVerne; Krauss, Michael; Watahomigie, Lucille and Akira Yamamoyo
1992 Language endangerment. Language 69,1: 35–42. Herranz, Atanasio
1996 Estado Sociedad y Lenguaje – La política lingüística de Honduras. Editorial Guaymuras, Tegucigalpa.
Hill, Jane H. and Kenneth C. Hill 1986 Speaking Mexicano: Dynamics or syncretic language change in Central America. Tucson: University of Arizona Press.
Hofling, Andrew 1982 Itza Maya morphosyntax from a discourse perspective. PhD. Washington University.
Holt, Dennis G. 1986 The development of the Paya sound system. Ph.D Dissertation. UCLA.
Kaufman, Terence 1974 Meso-American Indian languages. Languages of the world. Encyclopaedia Britannica, 15th Edition. 22: 767–774.

Endangered Languages of Mexico and Central America 85
Kaufman, Terence 1990 Language history in South America: What we know. In Payne, D. L. (ed.) Amazonian linguistics: Studies in Lowland South American languages. Austin: University of Texas Press. 13–74. 2001 Two highly effective models for large-scale documentation of endangered languages. In Lectures on endangered languages: 2 – from Kyoto conference 2000 – Endangered languages of the Pacific Rim. ELPR C002. 269–284.
Lemus, Jorge 2003 Revitalizing indigenous languages: The case of Pipil in El Salvador. Expert meeting – Endangered languages – Unesco Paris 2003
Rivas, Ramón 1993 Pueblos Indígenas y Garifuna de Honduras. Editorial Guayamuras, Tegucigalpa.
Rojas Chaves, Carmen 1997 Revitalización lingüística de las lenguas indígenas de Costa Rica. In Estudios de Lingüística Chibcha 16–7, 97–246.
Smith-Stark, Thomas C. 1995 El estado actual de los estudios de las lenguas Mixtecanas y Zapotecanas. In Bartholomew, D. and Y. Lastra (eds.) Panorama de los estudios de las lenguas indígenas de México, tomo I, II. Colección Biblioteca Abya-Yala, 16, 17. Quito: Ediciones Abya-Yala. 5–186.
Suarez, Jorge 1983 The Mesoamerican Indian languages. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Zavala, Roberto 2000 A grammar of Oluta Popoluca. Ph.D Dissertation. University of Oregon.
Ward, Monica 2002 Using new technologies to produce language material for minority and endangered languages. Paper presented at the World Congress on language policies. Barcelona 16–20 April 2002.

86 Colette Grinevald
Websites
AILLA www.ailla.utexas.org/site/welcome.html The Archives of the Indigenous Languages of Latin America.
CIESAS http://www.ciesas.edu.mx Centro de Investigaciones y Estudios Superiores en Antropología Social.
ENAH www.inah.gob.mx/docencia/enah/inicio/ Escuela Nacional de Antropología e Historia.
HRELP www.hrelp.org Hans Rausing Endangered Languages Program.
OKMA www.okma.org Oxlajuuj Keej Maya’ Ajtz’iib’.
URACCAN-IPILC www.uraccan.edu.ni/spanish/institutos/Spn-ipilc.php Institute for Linguistic Research and Cultural Recovery.

Chapter 5 Endangered Languages in USA and Canada1
Akira Yamamoto
1. Introduction
Various linguists have estimated that there were 300 to 600 indigenous languages in North America at the time of the first European arrival. Mithun (1999: 2) also observes:
Some of the languages are still spoken skillfully by people of all ages, such as Navajo with well over 100,000 speakers. The overall situation is critical, however. Almost all of the languages still in use are endangered: fewer children are learning them every year, as in the case of Navajo, or children are no longer learning them at all. Well over a third of the languages spoken at contact have already disappeared. Another quarter are now remembered by only a small number of elderly speakers. Nearly all are likely to be gone by the end of the twenty-first century.
Goddard (1996: 1–16; with an excellent updated map), surveying major works in linguistic studies of North America, identifies 34 language families and 28 language isolates:
Language Families (number of languages): 1. Algic (45 languages), 2. Alsean (2), 3. Atakapan (2), 4. Caddoan (6), 5. Chimakuan (2), 6. Chinookan (3), 7. Chumashan (6), 8. Cochimí-Yuman (15), 9. Comecrudan (3), 10. Coosan (2), 11. Eskimo-Aleut (13), 12. Iroquoian (11), 13. Keresan (2), 14. Kiowa-Tanoan (7), 15. Maiduan (3), 16. Muskogean (7), 17. Nadene (47), 18. Otomanguean (1), 19. Palaihnihan (2), 20. Plateau Penution (4), 21. Pomoan (7), 22. Salinan (2), 23. Salishan (23), 24. Shastan (4), 25. Siouan-Catawban (17), 26. Takelman (4), 27. Timucuan (2), 28. Tsimshianic (2), 29. Utian (15), 30. Uto-Aztecan (26), 31. Wakashan (6), 32. Wintuan (2), 33. Yokutsan (6), 34. Yukian (2), and 35–63. Language Isolates (Adai, Aranama, Beothuk, Calusa, Cayuse, Chimariko, Chitimacha, Coahuilteco, Cotoname, Esselen, Guaicura, Haida, Karankawa, Karok, Kootenani, Maratino, Natchez, Naolan, Quinigua, Seri, Siuslaw, Solano, Tonkawa, Tunica, Washoe, Yana, Yuchi, Zuni).
Of these 329 languages, 46 have significant number of children as their speakers, 91 are spoken by adults but no or very few children, 72 by only a few of the oldest people and 120 are extinct (Goddard 1996: 3 citing Krauss 1991).

88 Akira Yamamoto
Mithun (1999) expertly discusses indigenous languages of North America. Especially useful for our purpose is Chapter 7 (326–616). Languages are presented by family with a historical overview, and each language is discussed with a brief description of language situation (location, number of speakers) and major published work. At the end of her discussion of a family, Mithun shows major structural characteristics of the family.
Although the information contained in the survey data is incomplete, it gives us a general picture of the language situations in the US and Canada, and we will be able to raise important questions about the nature of endangerment. In the following, we show different stages of language shift situations (see note 1, and for the full survey data, the website of the Indigenous Language Institute at <www.indigenous-language.org>).2
2. Canada
In Canada, there were some 60 languages prior to the sixteenth century when Europeans arrived there (Kinkade 1992: 158), and currently 36 languages are remembered or spoken. There are eight language families and four language isolates (also Goddard 1996: 1–16). Kinkade (1992: 158– 167) categorizes the original languages of Canada into five groups:
1) Already Extinct (Extinct);
2) Near Extinction (NExtinct) are those languages that have a very few elderly persons who either remember or speak their ancestral languages, and “probably beyond the possibility of revival” (p. 161);
3) Endangered (Endangered) are languages which “are still spoken by enough people to make survival an outside possibility, given sufficient community interest and concerted educational programmes” (p. 162);
4) Viable with small population base (Viable) are those languages that have more than 1,000 speakers. Some of these language communities live in relatively isolated regions with fewer pressures of language shift, and others are well-organized communities with strong self-awareness. Here the ancestral language “is one of the important marks of identity” (162-163); and
5) Viable (TrulyViable) are those languages which have a large base of speakers of all ages. Kinkade identifies four such languages in Canada (Cree, Ojibwa, Dakota, and Inuktitut) (p. 163).
Kinkade (1992: 163) comments that 32 languages of Near Extinct and Endangered groups are in urgent need for more thorough documentation. He

Endangered Languages in USA and Canada 89
further states that “most have received (and continue to receive) study, often by one or two, sometimes by some half a dozen, linguists, but not in ways that will lead to language preservation” (emphasis added). I have summarized Kinkade’s survey in Appendix I (Summary of Kinkade’s survey of Indigenous Languages of Canada).
There are several other excellent reports on indigenous languages in Canada: “Sociolinguistic Survey of Indigenous Languages in Saskatchewan” by the Saskatchwan Indigenous Languages Committee (1991). The Committee found that the indigenous languages in nine communities were facing an extremely critical situation; two in critical condition, four in serious condition, two in fair but deteriorating condition, and three in good health but with a few symptoms of ill-health (also New Economy Development Group 1993: 10).
Heather Blair (1997) completed her report, “Indian Languages Policy and Planning in Saskatchewan,” for the Saskatchewan Department of Education, Indian and Métis Education Unit. Before presenting our survey result, a brief description of one of Blair’s sample communities will be given below.3
Case study: La Ronge Band Cree of Stanley Mission (Blair 1997: 25–38)
This is a Cree community of the La Ronge Band of about 1,600 people, initially established in 1851 by the Anglican church, becoming a central meeting and gradually a settlement place. The Anglican missionaries used the Cree language adopting the use of a syllabic orthography of other Cree missions. The establishment of a school and introduction of the printing press by John A. MacKay (Cree-speaking minister) were instrumental in the spread of Cree pride and literacy. When, however, a public school opened in 1952, the language of the school was English, no longer Cree, because educators believed indigenous languages were a hindrance to English language development and the development of children. In 1976, the band controlled the school and established a bilingual education policy. At this time, it was noted that all children came to school speaking Cree reflecting the Cree as the dominant language of the community. The Cree dominance was also noted in the 1988 sociolinguistic study by the Saskatchewan Indigenous Languages Committee, but the Committee expressed its concern over the increasing number of children who speak English more often than Cree to their friends and others. In her 1996 study, however, Blair notes that the nature of language use in Stanley Mission

90 Akira Yamamoto

has changed dramatically to the extent that the English language has become the dominant language of school age children. Teachers reported that only 10 to 15% were Cree dominant speakers.

Table 1. Stages of language decline, Canada Numbers preceding language names refer to the maps

Language (Family)

Speakers/ Speaker Language

Population

% programs

Documentation

Critically endangered (5):

1. Delaware/ 10/1,500 Munsee (Algic)

2. Onondaga (Iroquoian)

34/18,173

3. Saanich

20/a few

(Coast Salishan) 1,000

4. Sekani (Athabascan)

30~40/600

5. Samish

10/a few

(Coast Salishan) 1,000

0.67 0.19 0.067 5~6.7 3.3

exst
grade school, adult classes exist
school program none

morphology, dictionary
aspects of grammar (monograph)
grammatical sketch, word list
draft dictionary, sketches
sketch, grammars of other dialects

Severely endangered (2):

6. Cayuga (Iroquoian)
7. Cayuga (Iroquoian) 8. Oneida (Iroquoian)

130 ~ 150/ 4.3~5 3,000

100/17,000 0.59

190/1,500 ~ 2,000
(Ontario) 50/3,000

9.5~ 12.67
1.7

school, community (all ages) elementary & middle school exist
exist

teaching grammar, various papers
teaching grammar, various papers morphology, various papers morphology, various papers

Definitively endangered (1):

9. Babine/ Witsuwit’en (Athabascan)

500/2,200

22.72

school programs

phonology, grammar sketch

Endangered (1):

10. Mi’kmaq (Algic)

3,000/25,000 12

band-school dictionary, teach-

program

ing grammar

Endangered Languages in USA and Canada 91

Table 1. cont.

Language (Family)

Speakers/ Speaker Language

Population

% programs

Documentation

Stable (5): 11. Inuktitut (Eskimo-Aleut)
12. Slavey (Athabascan) 13. Dogrib (Athabascan) 14. Naskapi (Algic) 15. Ojibwe (Algic)

Arctic Que- 100 bec, NWT 6,000/6.000 NW Territories 17,000/?
4,500/5,000 90

2,700/3,000 90

650/650

100

most/ 19,510

100?

college classes

grammars, various articles

exist

grammar

literacy activ- grammars, ities at schools dictonary

exist

grammar,

dictionary

exist

grammar, texts, dictionaries

3. USA
Leanne Hinton and Yolanda Montijo (1994: 25) reported the result of their sociolinguistic survey of California Indian languages (Appendix II). They state:
The number of speakers of California languages might seem depressingly low, and it is sad to note that the speakers of these languages are almost all elders … not a single California language is being learned by children as the primary language of the household. But Native Californians are waging a battle to keep their languages alive.
Their survey is excellent for several reasons. They provide three figures for the number of speakers: 1) the people’s best estimate of the number of fluent speakers; 2) an estimate of the number of individuals of different degree of fluency, including those who are considered semi-speakers and second language speakers; and 3) the self-reported number of speakers in the 1990 US census. They also include information on community-based language activities such as singing, language programs, and materials de-

92 Akira Yamamoto
velopment. In California, there are 107 federally recognized tribes and close to 50 languages. The picture of language situations in most of the California communities are indeed grim, and, unfortunately, these situations are not unique to California.
In general, the American Indian and Alaska Natives numbered 1,959,234 in 1990, that is 0.08% of the total population of the United States, and that was about a 40% increase since 1980. The size of the Native American population is increasing but the number of speakers of these indigenous languages is decreasing. This is also true of Canada.

Table 2. Stages of language decline, USA Numbers in the first column refer to the maps

Language (Family)
Exinct (10):
16. Wiyot (Algic) 17. Wyandotte (Iroquoian) 18. Chimariko (Lg Isolate) 19. Salinan (Salinan)
20. Kechayi (Yokuts) 21. Costanoan lgs (Utian) 22. Yuki (Yukian) 23. Nooksack (Salishan) 24. Ioway-Otoe/ Missouria (Siouan) 25. Miluk/Kusan (Penutian)

Speakers/ Speaker Community

Population

% programs

0/800

0

0/3,200

0

0/0

0

0/100s

0

none none none none

1?/with other 0? Yokuts

0/0

0

0/80?

0

0/1,600

0

a few semi/ 0? 3,650

1 semi/2,200 0?

none
none
none
?
high school classes none

Documentation
grammar, texts, dictionary grammar, texts
various publications published & unpublished documents some sketches
grammar
vocabulary list, some sketches phonemics
grammar, lexicon, various publications grammatical sketch, pedagogical material

Endangered Languages in USA and Canada 93

Table 2. cont.

Language (Family)
Almost extinct (3):
26. Haida (Lg Isolate) 27. Lenape (Algic)

Speakers/ Population
a few/3,000
2 (+9 semi)/ 13,500

28. Pit River (Palaihnihan)

10 semi/ 1,000

Critically endangered (27):

29. Loyal Shawnee 14/8,000 (Algic)

30. Potawatomi (Algic)

50/25,000

31. Osage (Siouan)

5 ~ 10/ 15,000

32. Chiwere (Siouan)
33. Tuscarora (Iroquoian)
34. Arikara (Caddoan)

5?/several hundred
4 ~ 5/ 1,200
20/3,000?

35. Caddo (Caddoan)
36. Pawnee (Caddoan)
37. Yuchi (Lg Isolate)
38. Central Pomo (Pomoan)
39. Karuk (Lg Isolate)

25/3,371
20/2,500
10 ~ 12/ 1,500 2 ~ 5/ 4,766 10/4,800

Speaker Community % programs

0.01? none

0?

exist

1?

exist &

school

classes

0.17 exist

0.2
0.03 ~ 0.06

daycare, preschool, community
exist

0.5 ~ 1.0?
0.4

exist? exist

0.67 elementary school, college

0.74 sporadic meetings

0.8

none

0.66 ~ 0.8
0.1?

exist none

0.2

exist,

very active

Documentation
sketches of grammar, dictionary academic and pedagogical materials sketches
lexicon, sketches grammar, dictionary, various publications grammar, dictionary, teaching materials sketches and various publications grammar, texts, various sketches texts, some sketches, teaching grammar some sketches
texts
various sketches, grammar articles
grammar, dictionary

94 Akira Yamamoto

Table 2. cont.

Language (Family)

Speakers/ Population

40. Waksachi (Yokuts)

1?/750?

41. Wintu (Wintuan)

5 ~ 6/ 2,244

42. Klamath/Modoc 1 ~ 2/

(Penutian)

2,000

43. Monachi (Uto-Aztecan)

2 ~ 5/ 1,155

44. Klallam (Coast Salishan)

10/several 1,000s

45. Holkomelem (Salishan)

25/5,267

46. Yavbé (Yuman)

4 ~ 5/ 130

47. Chinimne (Yokuts)

6/300

48. Chukchansi (Yokuts)

6/100

49. Miwok (Utian)

40/3,381

50. Mandan (Siouan)

10 ~ 20/ 400

51. Luiseño (Uto-Aztecan)

15/500

52. Montana Salish 70/5,000 (Salishan)

53. Snchit su’umshstsn (Salishan)

10 ~ 20/ 1,213

55. Louisiana French Creole

3,000/ 4 million

Severely endangered (8):

56. Assiniboine (Siouan)

250/5,000?

Speaker Community % programs

0.1

none

Documentation some wordlists?

0.2

none

some

0.05 ~ 0.1
0.4

exist & masterapprentice
none

grammar, texts some

0.3

exist

in progress

0.5

exist,

ethnography,

very active phonology

3~

exist

3.8

grammar, dictionary

2

none

sketch, lexicon

6
1.1
2.5 ~ 5.0 3
1.4
0.8 ~ 1.6
0.008

preschool program none
none

grammar, sketches
sketch, texts, dictionary
in progress

exist
school programs exist & high school classes none

grammar, dictionary, articles grammar, dictionaries abundant
vocabulary list

5.0? limited

none

instruction

Endangered Languages in USA and Canada 95

Table 2. cont.

Language (Family)

Speakers/ Speaker Community Documentation

Population

% programs

57. Hok (Winneba go) (Siouan)

230/6,000 3.8

exist,

extensive

very active

58. Yanktonai (Siouan)

250/5,000 5

limited

none

instruction

59. Oneida (Iroquoian)

30/700?

4.3

exist &

morphology,

school classes other articles

60. Seneca (Iroquoian)

150/6,241 2.4

bilingual programs

morphology, dictionary, articles

61. Sahaptin (Sahaptian/ Penutian)

500?/12,000 4.2

exist & college classes

sketches, texts

62. Mississippi Gulf 50/5,000

1

Coast French

none

none

63. Isleño (Romance)

50 (+ 450 2.5 semi)/2,000

social gatherings

good

Definitively endangered (4):

64. Absentee

250/2,500 10

Shawnee (Algic)

exist

good

65. Eastern Band 1,000/9,800 10.2 Cherokee (Iroq)

school programs

good

66. Nez Perce (Sahaptian/ Penutian)

100 ~ 300/ 2,700

3.7 ~ 11.1

exist,

good

very active

67. Alabama (Muskogean)

100/800

12.5 exist

sketches, dictionary

Endangered (13):

68. Mohawk (Iroquoian)

3,000/6,000 22.5 (NY State)

exist,

great

very active

69. Maliseet-Passa- 1,000/2,500 ~ 33.3 ~ exist

maquoddy (Algic) 3,000

40.0

morphology, dictionary, articles

70. Lakota

6,000/

30

exist

?

(Siouan)

20,000

71. Kawaiisu (Uto-Aztecan)

20/35

57.1 none

grammar, texts, vocabulary

96 Akira Yamamoto

Table 2. cont.

Language (Family)
72. Iñupiatun (Eskimo-Aleut)
73. Choctaw (Muskogean)
74. Hwalbáy (Yuman)
75. Zuni (Lg Isolate)
76. Laguna (Keresan)

Speakers/ Population 3,000/5,500
4,000/6,000
1,000/1872
6,413/9,000
2060/6865

77. Acoma (Keresan)
78. Cochiti (Keresan)

1930/3860 525/1050

79. Santa Ana (Keresan)

384/640

80. Zia (Keresan)

504/720

Stable (3):

81. Havasupai (Yuman)

530/565

82. San Felipe (Keresan)

1985/2205

83. Santo Domingo 2965/3120 (Keresan)

Speaker Community % programs
54.5 school programs
66.7 exist

53.4 school program

71.2 school programs

30

exist &

school

classes

50

school

program

50

exist &

school

classes

60

exist

Documentation
articles
sketches, dictionary good
excellent documentation some sketches, texts
sketches, texts
some sketches, teaching materials some sketches

70

preservation none

projects

93.8 active school sketches,

program

vocabulary

90

exist

some sketches

95

exist

grammar, texts, various sketches

Endangered Languages in USA and Canada 97

72
54 11

Pacifiic

13
4 9 12
26

35
45 23 44

61 66

52 56 58 34 50

53

70

14

15

10

8

1

69

2

57 59

67 30 33 5960 68

Ocean

30 Map 2
65

American-ArcticPaleosiberian Na-Dene Macro-Algonquian Macro-Siouan Hokan Penutian Aztec-Tanoan

0

350

700 Miles

0

350 700 Kilometers

Map 3

Map 4 67

73 63 62 55

Map 4: North America

98 Akira Yamamoto

Chilula Wiyot
Whilkut Chimariko
Mattole Sinkyone
Lassik Wailaki Cahto

Tolowa
39 Shasta
Yurok Karuk

Modoc
42

25

16 Hupa 18
Nongat

41
Wintu

Achumawi
28

Atsugewi

Yana

Nomlaki Yuki

Northeast Maidu

38

Konkow

Northers Paiute

Lake Miwok

Pomo languages

Patwin

Washo

49
Wappo

Nisenan

Coast Miwok
43

Miwok

(Northern

20

languages

Paiute)

Costanoan (Ohlone)
21 languages

Owens Valley Paiute

Esselen

40 Yokuts

Mono

(Choynumni,

Chukchansi, Dumna,

Gashowu, Tachi,

Wukchumne, 47

19

Yowlumni)
48

California Shoshoni (Panamint)

Salinan

Tubatulabai
71

Chumash languages

Kawaiisu Kitanemuk

Chemehuevi

Tataviam Gabrielino (Tongva)

Serrano

Mojave

Juaneño (Ajachmem)
Cupeño

51
Luiseño

Cahuilla

Cocopa

Diegueño (Kumeyaay,
Ipar) Tipai

Quechan (Yuma)

Map 5. California

Endangered Languages in USA and Canada 99 Map 6. Arizona and New Mexico

Hualapai

81
Havasupai 74

Mokave and Chemehuevi

46 Phoenix

Tohono O'Odham
Nation

Ute Mountain Ute

Southern Ute

Hopi Tribe
75
White Mountain Apache San Carlos Apache

Jicarilla Apache

80 76
77 76

78

83

79

82

Albuquerque

Mescalero Apache

100 Akira Yamamoto Map 7. Oklahoma

Kaw Ponca
Tonkawa

Osage

Peoria Ottawa Quapaw

Eastern Shawnee
Modoc Miami

17 Wyandotte
Seneca-Cayuga

29

Enid

32

24
Otoe-Missouria

Pawnee
36

27
Thlopthlocco Creek Tulsa

Iowa

Sac and Fox

Cheyenne-Arapaho El Reno

Kickapoo

35
Caddo

Kiowa

Wichita

Oklahoma City

Absentee

Shawnee

30

64

Citizan Band

Potawatomi

Delaware

Plains Apache

Ft. Sill Apache

Chickasaw Ada

37
Creek

Cherokee Muskogee
Keetoowah Alabama- Cherokee Quassarte Creeks

Kialegee Creek Seminole

Lawton Comanche

Choctaw

Endangered Languages in USA and Canada 101
4. Languages in different stages of endangerment: some examples
4.1. General observation
When we examine the survey data, what is immediately suggested is that the number of speakers may be an immediate index for its endangered situation. However, it alone is not an accurate indicator of the language situation of the given population. For example, in the Supai community in the Grand Canyon (Map 6, #81), there are over 530 speakers of Havasupai of all ages. The number 530 seems very small, but the total population of this group is 565. Thus, 93.8% of the population speaks Havasupai as their first language. Most of the Supai children acquire Havasupai as their first language, and later they learn English as their second language. Is this an endangered language community? In Prescott, in the central part of Arizona (Map 6, #46), we find a close relative of Havasupai-speaking people, the Prescott Yavapai. There, the language Yavbé is spoken by five people of advanced ages; the total population is 130 and no children are acquiring the language. One of the speakers and the language teacher passed away in January 2000. That is, about 3.8% of the population speaks the language. In Peach Springs (Map 6, #74), there is another closely related language, Hwalbáy. There, about 1,000 out of the total population of 1,872 Hualapai people speak the language, i. e. about 66.7%. Some children still acquire the language as their first language. It seems clear that Yavbé is the most endangered among the three. But which one is more endangered, Hwalbáy or Havasupai?4
4.2. Upland Yuman groups: a sketch
Havasupai, Hualapai, and Yavapai are closely related languages of the Upland Yuman family and they are referred to as the Uplan Yuman languages.
4.2.1. Havasupai
Although the descendants of the 13 bands of the Upland Yuman-speaking Pai (‘People’), the Havasupai were separated from the other Pai bands, and in 1880 they received a reservation of 518 acres at the bottom of Havasu Canyon, adding to their reservation in 1975 another 185,000

102 Akira Yamamoto
acres. Traditionally they engaged in hunting and gathering, but now in their present-day village of Supai, they have abundant water to irrigate their gardens. Since the 1960s, government agencies, a contract school (K – 6), and tourism began to bring cash income to the people ($2,800.00/per capita income in 1994). Martin (1994: 233) observes the following:
Transformed from a loosely related collection of families and winter camp groups, the population is growing into a small (565 people) corporate, politically aggressive community, with a resurgent and creative religious and cultural life.
Their major contact with the outside world is the tourists. There are some non-Havasupai teachers at the school; their life as a teacher there is about one year. The school is controlled by the Havasupai School Board members and staffed by the local members and certified teachers from outside. Television has not taken over their entertainment, and they engage in intergenerational interactions. They continue to practice bilingual/bicultural education programs.
4.2.2. Hualapai
The Hualapai currently occupy 991,680 acres of range and forest lands in the northwestern section of Arizona. Like Havasupai people, they engaged in hunting and gathering. They now live in and around their tribal capital of Peach Springs, which lies along the mainline of the Santa Fe Railroad and along Highway 66. There is a public school (K – 8) and a high school (9 – 12), a health clinic, a post office, a general store, and various tribal offices. Since the 1970s, a number of modern houses were built with the help of the federal government (HUD), changing the traditional extended families to nuclear families. In addition, the spread of radio and television is extensive and these have taken over as entertainment, resulting in disruption of traditional cultural and linguistic transmission within and across generations. Watahomigie (1994: 247) observes:
The Hualapai language and culture are very much a part of the older Hualapai people’s everyday life. Among the young the traditional lifestyle has lost its primary role but the young still consider the knowledge of the traditional lifestyle to be crucial for their identity as Hualapai. The school has played an important role in the maintenance of the language and culture among the young ….
The school is becoming the place for transmitting linguistic knowledge to the younger generations.

Endangered Languages in USA and Canada 103
4.2.3. Yavapai
The Yavapai have three reservations in central Arizona constituting three separate governments: the Fort McDowell Mohave-Apache Indian Community (640 people), the Yavapai-Prescott Tribe (130), and the Camp Verde Yavapai-Apache Indian Community (650). Like the Havasupai and the Hualapai, the Yavapai were also hunters and gatherers with small-scale farming. The 24,967 acre Fort McDowell is only 26 miles away from metropolitan Phoenix, and every possible modern convenience is immediately accessible. In 1984, the tribe opened a gaming center and it provides funding for a wide range of activities, including language and culture programs. Camp Verde is a 1,092 acre reservation and it has begun their gaming center operation. They developed, in agreement with the National Park Service, a visitor center associated with Montezuma Castle National Monument and a cultural center. These attract a large number of tourists. Cultural preservation activities are carried out at the cultural center, and some language activities take place in an informal basis.
The Yavapai-Prescott Tribe is in the middle of the city of Prescott, and more than three generations of the Yavapai have been educated in the public school systems. The tribe leases land for a shopping center and a resort hotel, and it operates a gaming center. The tribe is actively engaged in cultural preservation but the language-related activities are not their priority.
4.2.4. Degree of endangeredness
Thus, among the Upland Yuman groups of Havasupai, Hualapai, and Yavapai, the Havasupai is the most physically isolated in the depth of the Grand Canyon only accessible on foot, by horse, or in an emergency case by helicopter. The major industry there, however, is tourism, and they face constant exposure to non-Havasupai elements.
The Hualapai live along US Highway 66. Flagstaff is 120 miles to the east and Kingman is 50 miles to the west, making modern conveniences easily accessible to the people. Primarily because of the role of the school, there is a strong awareness of the traditional language and culture.
The Yavapai communities all have their gaming centers and continue to focus their efforts on economic development. Unlike the Havasupai and the Hualapai, the Camp Verde and Prescott children attend public schools outside their own communities. Fort McDowell community began their language program in 1998 with support from their school and the tribe.

104 Akira Yamamoto

The following table shows the% of speakers within the population; the children acquiring the language; the communities’ attitudes towards their language; level of documentation.

Language Speakers Children Domains Attitudes Docu- Comments

%

mentation

Havasupai 93.8 majority all

Hualapai 53.4 half

most

Yavapai

3.8 none none

supportive good

very

good

supportive

supportive good

limited contacts
frequent contacts
high contacts

4.2.5. Characteristics of Upland Yuman languages: Hualapai (Watahomigie et al. 2001)
Possession expressions
Nouns are classified in four ways: kinship terms, domesticated animals, properties, and things associated with what one does. This classification is shown by the ways possession relationships are expressed.

1. Hak∂gwi:ve nya∂álach ∂adaha:dkwi.

Hak∂gwi:v-e nya ∂al-a-ch

∂adaha:d-k-wi

Peach Springs- 1 father-Def-Subj 3.work-SameSubject (SS)-

around

Aux/do

‘My father is working in Peach Springs.’

2. Ma m∂álach waksí ma mnyihá∂a he:dkwi.

ma m-∂al-a-ch

waksi ma m-nyi-ha∂-a

he:d-k-wi

you 2-father-Def-Subj cow you 2/3-the.one.that- 3/3.rope-SS-

pet-Def

Aux/do

‘Your father is roping your cow.’

3. Anbil nya wi:hch hankyu. anbil nya wi:-h-ch

han-k-yu

car 1 1/3.own-that-Subj 3.be good-SS-Aux/be

‘The car I own is good.’

Endangered Languages in USA and Canada 105

4. Gwe nya hwálohch hánkyu. gwe nya hwal-o-h-ch

han-k-yu

thing 1 1/3.cultivate-Loc/place- 3.be good-SS-

Dem/that-Subj

Aux/be

‘My garden (= the place that I cultivate) is good.’

Auxiliary verbs and verb categories
In Hualapai, four major auxiliary verbs are derived from the independent full verbs: wi ‘to do’, yu ‘to be’, i ‘to say,’ and yi ‘to feel.’ Accordingly, verbs are classified into verbs of vocalization (marked with –i), verbs of emotions (-yi), intransitive verbs (–yu), and transitive verbs (-wi).

5. Nyihách Hwalbáy gwa:wki.

nyi-ha-ch

hwalbay gwa:w-k-i

Specific-that.one-Subj Hualapai 3/3.speak-SS-Aux/say

‘That one is speaking Hualapai.’

6. Hwalbáy gwa:w gwala yi:kyi.

Hwalbay gwa:w

gwal-a yi:-k-yi

Hualapai 3.speak.Def want-Def 3.feel-SS-Aux/feel

‘She wants to speak Hualapai.’

7. Nya ∂álach viyámkyu.

nya ∂al-a-ch

viyam-k-yu

my father-Def-Subj 3.run-SS-Aux/be

‘My father is running.’

8. Nya nuwa:hach gweviyám gwa:mkwi. nya nuwa:h-a-ch gweviyam gwa:m-k-wi

my friend-Def-Subj car

3/3.drive-SS-Aux/do

‘My friend is driving a car.’

Switch reference
When there are two or more predicates in a sentence, the sameness or difference of the subjects of predicates must be indicated: -k ‘SameSubject’ (the subjects of the predicates are the same) or -m ‘DifferentSubject’ (the subjects are different):

106 Akira Yamamoto

9. Hma:nych yima:jk handávjm a’diyé’yu.

hma:ny-ch yima:-j-k

han-dav-j-m

a’-diye’-yu

child.Pl-Subj 3.dance-Pl-SS 3.be.good-very-Pl- 1-be.happyDifferentSubject (DS) Aux/be

‘Children dancing well makes me happy.’ (Literally, “Children dance, and they are very good, and I am happy.”)

4.3. Yuchi (Euchee): a sketch

The Euchee people lived in what are now the states of Georgia and Alabama, and northward into eastern Tennessee, but they were removed with the Creek (Mvskoke) to Indian Territory (Oklahoma) in 1832. Although they had an opportunity to separate themselves legally from the Mvskoke Creeks in 1938, they did not do so. Under the leadership of their traditional chief, they maintained strong linguistic, cultural, and ceremonial traditions until the 1950s. They maintain the ceremonial tradition with their three ceremonial grounds, but the speakers of the language diminished to a mere dozen in recent years. Since the late 1980s, however, there have been efforts to revive and revitalize the language (Moore 1994: 716; Linn 1997: 189).

Language Speakers Children Domains Attitudes Docu- Comments

%

mentation

Euchee 0.8

none none supportive good

high contacts

4.3.1. Characteristics of Yuchi (Euchee) (Linn 2001)
Euchee is a language isolate. The earliest European explorers noted that Euchee held no affinity with any of its neighboring languages, namely the Creek dialects (Muskogean), Shawnee (Algonquian), and Cherokee (Iroquoian). One of the interesting characteristics of the language is their unique way of classifying nouns.
Noun classification
There are three inanimate classes and five animate classes. The inanimate classes correspond to the inherent positions: sitting -çi, standing -fa, and lying -‘e.

Endangered Languages in USA and Canada 107

10.a. te-çi

ßoßo

mulberry-Cl rotten ‘That mulberry is rotten.’

10.b. k’ó¸j˛ine-ti se-nó store-inside she(E)-be ‘She’s inside the store.’

10.c. s’äa-yo-gwa-’e

nä-di-’ne

field-Dir-you-talk-Cl not-I-see

‘I can’t see the field you’re talking about.’

The five animate classes are: 1) non-Euchee living things; 2) Euchee male; 3) Euchee female; 4) related Euchee female of ascending generation; and 5) Euchee male or female of spousal status or ascending generation.

11.a. dzene yomp’ä yotho-’ę´ -wenó

dog tai

short-Verbalizer-Cl

‘the short-tailed dog’

11.b. Henry he-thoß’ine-henó Henry his-hat-Cl ‘Henry’s hat’ (men’s speech)

11.c. Henry s’e-thoß’ine-s’nó Henry his-hat-Cl ‘Henry’s hat’ (women’s speech)

11.d. Jo se-gowäne-senó Jo her-blanket-Cl ‘Jo’s blanket’

11.e. di-laha

Lou-’enó

my-grandmother Lou-Cl

‘my grandmother Lou’

11.f. Bill-’onó age ’o-nó Bill-Cl here he-is ‘Bill (my husband) is here.’

108 Akira Yamamoto

Linn (1997: 190) also states that the Euchee “noun class system requires concord with other parts of the sentence. The third-person pronominal prefix to the verb must agree with the class marker suffix on the noun.”

12.a. Henry-s’enó,

s’e-di-n’eję´

Henry-Cl/Euchee 3-2-saw

‘I saw Henry (Euchee man, a woman speaking).’

12.b. Mary-wenó,

we-di-n’eję´

Mary-Cl/non-Euchee 3-1-saw

‘I saw Mary (Non-Euchee, a woman speaking).’

5. Discussion: Language communities and linguists
For the fieldworkers, the research situations have drastically changed during the past several decades. Grinevald (1998: 156) succinctly summarizes the concept of fieldwork frameworks that Cameron et al. (1983) examined. In the tradition of the American linguistics, the period up to the early 1960s may be characterized as working “on the language and for the sake of science,” the late 1960s and 1970s as work “on the language and for the people,” and the 1980s and 1990s as developing the framework of “work on the language, for its speakers and with its speakers.” It has also been our goal to ultimately “promote work on the language by the speakers.” This shift in our fieldwork frameworks induces and also reflects the changes in the language communities in which we do our work.
At the language community level, “people have begun to speak out about the urgent situation of their ancestral languages. In many indigenous communities there was awareness that only a handful of individuals still remembered or spoke the language, yet few realized the long-term significance of this” (Yamamoto 1999: 12). Now, they have begun to reexamine the language situation in their own communities. Even in communities where there are a relatively large number of speakers, they have discovered that the language is no longer transmitted to children in their own homes.
Many communities began to look inwardly and to formulate strategies for reversing the language shift from the ancestral language to the dominant language. Strategies include community language programs and school programs. They may take the form of the total immersion program,

Endangered Languages in USA and Canada 109
master-apprentice program, soft immersion program, ancestral language as a second language program, and short-term language camp.
In this context, community people began to appreciate the significant contribution of academic professionals in having documented their languages and making materials available to them. Academic professionals, however, were made aware that, although documented language data are appreciated as valuable by the communities, many of the documented materials are extremely difficult, if not impossible, for nonprofessionals to use for the language revitalization purpose.
5.1. Characteristics of successful programs: Types of collaboration
When Rough Rock Community School (Dick and McCarty 1996), Rock Point Community School (Holm and Holm, 1995), and Hualapai Bilingual/Bicultural Program (Watahomigie and McCarty 1994) demonstrated their successful Native language programs, both the native communities and professional academicians hailed the programs as responsive to community needs, academically sound, and pedagogically effective and innovative. They have become known as the Arizona Models. They all have in common the following:
a. The members of the larger linguistic culture, although contains contradictory beliefs, has at least tentatively showed their support of small-language communities. b. With different degrees of difficulties and persuasion, each of these communities have convinced the members of their communities that their languages are crucial for their children’s future. c. Although they have not been able to establish educational programs for members of all ages, they have succeeded in establishing strong bilingual/bicultural programs. d. In the process of creating bilingual/bicultural programs, they have effectively recruited parents and elders of their communities into the educational processes. e. While they practice the bilingual/bicultural programs, they have also engaged in aggressive teacher training activities for the members of their own communities. f. Each of the programs has produced in a variety of manners both oral and written materials for children. g. They were not afraid of involving outside professionals. They have recruited them and worked with them. h. These model programs’ goal is to create and strengthen the environment where the ancestral languages are the language of communication, thinking, creation, and belief.

110 Akira Yamamoto
Stimulated by these and other programs, academic professionals also initiated a variety of ways to provide their services to the language communities. We have seen different ways to do this, and I will present a few examples. One is “doing linguistics” at a distance and the other “doing linguistics” on the spot (see Linn et al. 1998 for a related discussion).
5.2. Linguists and Other Academic Professionals: from academic settings to communities
5.2.1. Linguistics-at-a-distance approach
In this approach, it is the speakers, teachers, and community people who come to an academic setting away from their communities. Since the summer of 1978, the American Indian Language Development Institute (AILDI) has been active in training teachers of Native American languages (McCarty et al. 2001). For several years now, AILDI has been held at the University of Arizona. It has attracted teachers of Native American languages throughout Arizona, California, Alaska, Maine, Canada, and during the summer of 1996 from Brazil and Venezuela as well. The University of Arizona saw the important role of AILDI to the State of Arizona and the rest of the country, and in 1996 it committed permanent funding for the institute. AILDI continues to train Native American language teachers, ESL teachers, multicultural teachers, curriculum developers, materials developers, as well as linguists.
5.2.2. Linguistics-on-the-spot approach
In this approach, it is the linguists who go to the communities – the academic setting is moved to the community site.
a. Linguists-in-residence
These activities that I have mentioned above are the teacher training institutes where community people come to the institute location to work on their languages. The following two examples demonstrate a potential bridge between academic institutions and language communities.
The Euchee project in which Mary Linn has been involved initially had dual goals: one was to conduct her dissertation research project (documentation of an endangered language) and at the same time to create a cooperative project with the Euchee community (language revitalization and preservation project). Working with the Euchee people, Linn had to

Endangered Languages in USA and Canada 111
take into consideration the following: first, Euchee people are not a federally recognized tribe and live under the jurisdiction of the Creek Nation, the situation of which has threatened the Euchee ethnolinguistic vitality; second, they recently became intensely aware of their language endangerment, and are successful in mobilizing the older speakers to re-establish the environment for using the language; third, they began to seek outside professional assistance in recording their language and in describing the language; fourth, Euchee has been studied to some extent by professional linguists but the description is by no means satisfactory in terms of the details and the range of information; fifth, Euchee is a language isolate and it has to be examined without any other closely related languages for reference or comparison; and sixth, the Euchee speakers and Linn must feel comfortable working together. Linn was careful and patient in locating herself in the community. She became adopted by one family, and through them, she established an excellent working relationship with the elders and language revitalization project members of the community. This work was and continues to be important not only for the intellectual community but also more immediately for the language community she works with. Traditionally, the academic people have “studied” varieties of peoples without returning useful materials to those very peoples they have studied. This was also true with academic people’s work in the Native American communities. Only recently, academic societies such as the Linguistic Society of America and the Society for the Study of the Indigenous Languages of the Americas have begun to promote vigorously their responsibilities to the language communities, and Linn is among yet a small number of young scholars who are engaged in the new collaborative approach to linguistic research in Native American communities.
b. Linguists-on-call
The second case is an example of linguists-on-call, and this is the work by another University of Kansas graduate student, Marcellino Berardo. During the spring of 1996 when he completed his oral comprehensive examination, Berardo had already begun his work with the Loyal Shawnee people in and around White Oak, Oklahoma. The Loyal Shawnee was not a federally recognized tribe and had been a part of the Cherokee Nation. As a part of their cultural revitalization efforts, Loyal Shawnee people began to engage in the language documentation project and they wanted to recruit academic linguists to help them. They had a series of meetings with Berardo and other University of Kansas linguists to “feel” each other out and to establish common goals for the project. Loyal Shawnee people and

112 Akira Yamamoto
the University of Kansas linguistic team agreed that Berardo would work with them to document the language and to prepare language teaching materials. It was also agreed that Berardo would utilize the language data in the writing of his Ph.D. dissertation (Berardo 2000).
Berardo conducted several months of intensive fieldwork with a few speakers left in the Loyal Shawnee community. In the process, the Loyal Shawnee Language Committee of which Berardo became a member prepared language lessons with audiotapes. Berardo was instrumental in designing the class: the format, content, techniques, and materials. On many weekends during 1997–98, Berardo drove several hundred miles to be at the language classes and made sure that the classes were well organized and interesting so they would continue to thrive.
One of the most important effects of the collaborative projects is that it provides the members of the language community the means to evaluate how the academic professionals work, and to form a new perception of academic linguists. The linguists in collaborative projects are no longer looked at as people who would tell Native Americans what their language is like, how they should be documented and analyzed, how they should write, and how they should teach their languages. They welcome the linguists as co-workers and team members of the language maintenance and revitalization projects.
5.2.3. Issues in the linguists-on-call approach
Time: In the case of teacher training workshops, time is relatively flexible and we can adjust our workshop time, more or less. But, in case of a programspecific request, we must be ready to adjust our schedule to theirs.
Travel: Usually each trip may be several hundred miles, a full day trip, or sometimes a longer time spent for travelling. Thus, this reduces the time to work with other team members.
Expenses: We try to go to the site with other team members (who are oftentimes students). For reasons of avoiding reinforcing the myth that linguists are making money off Indians, we may accept only words of “thanks.” Thus, we need to obtain funding in other ways than from the people we work with.

Endangered Languages in USA and Canada 113
Continuity: The work tends to be sporadic and non-continuous. Often the participating members change and this often means to begin a new cycle of team training. Thus, long range planning is essential so that we do not repeat the same process over and again.
5.2.4. Issues in the linguists-in-residence approach
Funding: The length of stay in the language community ranges from a week at a time to several months. This requires securing funding from such sources as Native American Languages Act funding through the Administration for Native Americans, National Science Foundation, National Endowment for the Humanities, Endangered Language Fund, Ford Foundation, etc.
Family Approach: Louanna Furbee and her students (Davidson 1999) found it most effective to become a part of a family, sort of an apprentice to a group of language experts in the community. This, however, implies that we may be involved in the “family” chores and responsibilities: driving them to stores and to clinics; doing cooking and laundry with them; or working in the vegetable garden. On the other hand, becoming a part of the family may mean doing basket weaving, bead work, and singing and dancing in the language – learning the real living language.
Community politics: It seems that the smaller the community, the more intense the political conflicts become. Whose way of speaking is “correct,” whose way of talking is more authentic, who should be the teacher, who should work with whom, and the list goes on. Here, too, the formation of the language team is crucial; otherwise we may have to depend on ceremonial leaders and a primary family with whom we associate for our survival – if they are willing to defend the kind of work we do.
5.2.5. Steps for planning a cooperative project
A cooperative project entails steps that we need to follow (Yamamoto 1998b):
1. Meeting of the community people and outside researchers to “feel each other out” and begin to form a working team.

114 Akira Yamamoto
2. Identification of problems and/or issues. 3. Long-range planning and commitment both by the community group
and outside researchers. 4. Short-term planning, establishing immediate goal and objectives. 5. Data collection procedures and methods. 6. Actual data collection. 7. Analysis of the data. (Repeat steps 4–7.) 8. Description/presentation (e. g. a grammar, a dictionary, a language cur-
riculum, stories, texts, etc.): methods and means. 9. Storing the documents (where, by whom, how). (Repeat the whole pro-
cess for a continued or new project.)
In this process, the linguist gains knowledge of the language and culture from the local community team members, and the community members gain linguistic and research knowledge and skills from the linguist. Training in this context is always reciprocal. Empowering the community must be a part of the goal of the team so that ultimately the community will be able to continue research on community issues and find solutions on their own. In this sense, the linguist is helping the team members to become researchers themselves, but it has a meaning very different from the “onesided helping.” Cooperative projects begin with the people and end with the people.
Notes
1. I am grateful to Norma S. Larzalere, Mary S. Linn, and Kimiko Yaska who carefully and critically read an earlier version of this chapter and provided insightful comments and valuable suggestions. Very special thanks are due to those who participated in the Endangered Language Survey Project.
2. We began our preparation for a survey of endangered languages at the 1995 meeting of the Committee on Endangered Languages and Their Preservation in New Orleans, Louisiana. This survey was to be done with the members of the Linguistic Society of America (LSA) who had worked or were working with endangered languages. Consulting other linguistic societies and organizations (e. g., German Linguistic group, International Clearing House for Endangered Languages, Society for the Study of the Indigenous Languages of the Americas (SSILA)), the Endangered Languages Survey Questionnaire was prepared. The LSA Bulletin and the SSILA Newsletter circulated the questionnaire in their late summer issues. At their 1996 meeting in San Diego, California, the Committee decided to continue the survey and the information is now placed

Endangered Languages in USA and Canada 115
on the web site of the Indigenous Language Institute (ILI) at <www.indigenous-language.org>. 3. My task here is to utilize the survey data and present a critical discussion of the situation of the indigenous languages in the USA and Canada although Canadian data is limited. Because of the limited nature of the data, my discussion is necessarily incomplete. It is obvious that for any linguistic work, whether it be for a sociolinguistic project or for language planning, we need to have at least some idea of numbers of speakers, size of the total population, their communities, and degrees of bi- or multi-lingualism. But, as the authors of chapters in this book acknowledge, it is very difficult to obtain an accurate figure or even an educated guess of these facts. Some of the reasons for this difficulty are simple and others complex. For example, in many communities, the population is shifting constantly – many leave the indigenous communities for education, for marriage, or for economic opportunities. Some may come back to their communities but many may not unless there is a special reason for them to return (e. g. for better economic situations thanks to the establishment of gaming industries). 4. See, for a detailed discussion on the crucial factors that impact language vitality, “Language Vitality and Endangerment” (<www.unesco.org>, then Culture -> Intangible Cultural Heritage -> Endangered Languages -> Language Vitality and Endangerment), the 2003 document of the Intangible Cultural Heritage Unit, UNESCO.
References
Berardo, Marcellino 2000 Animacy hierarchy and Shawnee verb inflections. Doctoral dissertation. Lawrence, Kansas: Department of Linguistics, University of Kansas.
Blair, Heather 1991 Sociolinguistic survey of Indigenous languages in Saskatchewan: On the critical list. Saskatoon, Saskatchewan: Saskatchewan Indigenous Languages Committee. 1997 Indian languages policy and planning in Saskatchewan: Research report. Saskatchewan department of education. Saskatchewan Indigenous Languages Committee.
Cameron, Deborah; Frazer, Elizabeth; Harvey, Penelope; Rampton, Ben and Kay Richardson
1993 Ethics, advocacy and empowerment: issues of method in researching language. Language and communication 13: 81–94.
Canadian Studies New Economy Development Group 1993 Evaluation of the Canada – NWT: Cooperation agreement for French and Aboriginal languages in the NWT (Part I pp. 155, Part II pp. 220,

116 Akira Yamamoto
Appendices (11 appendices), Technical Paper: A literature review, maintenance and revitalization of aboriginal languages pp. 89). Final Report for the Government of the Northwest Territories prepared by New Economy Development Group, Ottawa, Ontario. December 1993. Contact person: Elizabeth (Sabet) Biscaye, Assistant Deputy Minister, Department of the Executive, Official Languages Unit, Government of the Northwest Territories, P.O. Box 1320, Yellowknife, N.W.T., Canada NT X1A 2L9. Davidson, Jill D. 1999 Reflections on fieldwork in two Native American communities. Practicing anthropology 21: 28–33. Davis, Mary B. (ed.) 1994 Native America in the twentieth century: An encyclopedia. New York: Garland Publishing. Dick, Galena Sells and Teresa L. McCarty 1996 Reclaiming Navajo: Language renewal in an American Indian community school. In Hornberger, Nancy H. (ed.) Indigenous literacies in the Americas. Berlin: Mouton de Gruyter. 69–94. Dorian, Nancy 1998 Western language ideologies and small-language prospects. In Grenoble and Whaley (eds.) 5–21. Furbee, N. Louanna; Stanley, Lori and Tony Arkeketa 1998 The Roles of two kinds of expert in language renewal. In Ostler (ed.) 75 – 79. Goddard, Ives (ed.) 1996 Handbook of North American Indians, Volume 17: Languages. Washington DC: Smithsonian Institution. Grammatical sektches include Central Alaskan Yupic (Miyaoka), Hupa (Golla), Cree (Wolfart), Lakhota (Rood & Taylor), Zuni (Newman), Eastern Pomo (McLendon), Seneca (Chafe), Wichita (Rood), Thompson (Thompson, Thompson & Egesdal), Coahuilteco (Troike), Sahaptin (Rigsby & Rude), Shoshone (Miller). This contains an excellent updated map (Native languages and language families of North America, compiled by Ives Goddard). Grenoble, Lenore A. and Lindsay J. Whaley 1998 Toward a typology of language endangerment. In Grenoble and Whaley (eds.) 22–54. Grenoble, Lenore A. and Lindsay J. Whaley (eds.) 1998 Endangered languages: Language loss and community response. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. Grinevald, Colette 1998 Language endangerment in South America: a programmatic approach. In Grenoble and Whaley (eds.) 124–159.

Endangered Languages in USA and Canada 117
Hale, Kenneth; Krauss, Michael; Masayesva-Jeanne, LaVerne; Watahomigie, Lucille J.; Yamamoto, Akira Y.; Craig, Colette G. and Nora England
1992 Endangered languages. Language 68(1): 1–42. Hinton, Leanne
1994 Flutes of fire: Essays on California Indian languages. Berkeley, California: Heyday Books.
Hinton, Leanne and Yolanda Montijo 1994 Living California Indian languages. In Hinton 21–33.
Holm, Agnes and Wayne Holm 1995 Navajo language education: Retrospect and prospects.” Bilingual research journal 19,1: 141–167.
Kinkade, M. Dale 1992 The decline of Native languages in Canada. In Robins, Robert H. and Eugenius M. Uhlenbeck (eds.) Endangered languages Oxford: Berg. 157 – 176.
Krauss, Michael 1998. The condition of Native North American languages: the need for realistic assessment and action. International journal of the sociology of language 132: 9–21.
Linn, Mary S. 1997 Yuchi and Non-Yuchi: A living classification. The Florida anthropologist 50,4: 189–196. 2001 A grammar of Euchee. Doctoral dissertation. Lawrence, Kansas: Department of Linguistics, University of Kansas.
Linn, Mary; Berardo, Marcellino and Akira Y. Yamamoto 1998 Creating language team in Oklahoma Native American communities: a process of team-formation. International journal of sociology of language 132: 59–78.
Mariella, Patricia and Violet Mitchell-Enos 1994 Yavapai. In Davis (ed.) 710–712.
Martin, John F. 1994 Havasupai. In Davis (ed.) 213–233.
Matsumura, Kazuto (ed.) 1998 Studies in endangered languages (Papers from the international symposium on endangered languages, University of Tokyo, November 18–20, 1995). Tokyo: Hituzi Syobo.
McCarty, Teresa L., Akira Y. Yamamoto, Lucille J. Watahomigie, and Ofelia Zepeda 2001 School-Community-University collaborations: The American Indian Language Development Institute. In Hale Ken and Leanne Hinton (eds.) Green book of language revitalization practice. New York: Academic Press. 371–383.
McCarty, Teresa L.; Watahomigie, Lucille J. and Akira Y. Yamamoto (eds.) 1999 Reversing language shift in Indigenous America: Collaborations and views from the field. Practicing anthropology 21,2: 1–47.

118 Akira Yamamoto
Mithun, Marianne 1993 Introduction to symposium preservation of North American Indian Languages. The annual meeting of the Linguistic Society of America. Los Angeles, California. January 7, 1993. 1999 The languages of Native North America. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Moore, John H. 1994 Yuchi. In Davis (ed.) 716.
Nakagawa, Hiroshi and Yoichi Ohtani 1995 The present status and problems of the Ainu linguistic study. Gengo Kenkyu 108:115-135.
Ostler. Nicholas (ed.) 1998 Endangered languages – what role for the specialist? Bath, England: Foundation for Endangered Languages.
Schiffman, Harold F. 1996 Linguistic culture and language policy. London: Routledge.
Tamura, Suzuko 1996 Endangered languages: the issues and researchers tasks. Gengo kenkyu 109: 140–148.
Tsunoda, Tasaku 1996 Fieldwork on Australian Aboriginal Languages. Gengo kenkyu 109: 149 – 160.
Watahomigie, Lucille J. 1994 Hualapai. In Davis (ed.) 246–247.
Watahomigie, Lucille J.; Bender, Jorigine; Watahomigie, Philbert Sr. and Akira Y. Yamamoto with Elnora Mapatis, Malinda Powskey and Josie Steele
2001 Hualapai reference grammar (Revised and expanded edition). (ELPR Publications A2-003). Kyoto: Endangered Languages of the Pacific Rim.
Yamamoto, Akira Y. 1998a Linguists and endangered language communities: Issues and approaches. In Matsumura (ed.) 213–252. 1998b Retrospect and prospect on new emerging language communities. In Ostler (ed.) 113–120. 1999a Review of Endangered languages Lenore A. Grenoble and Lindsay J. Whaley (eds.) 1998. International journal American linguistics 65,2: 233 – 240. 1999b Training for fieldwork in endangered-language communities. Practicing anthropology 20,2: 12–15.

Endangered Languages in USA and Canada 119
Appendix I:
Summary of Kinkade’s survey of Indigenous Languages of Canada (the asterisk marked numbers of speakers are taken from Statistics Canada, 1996)
Eskimo-Aleut Family:
Inuktitut (16,000 ~ 18,000 speakers in Canada, 6,000 in northern Alaska, 41,000 in Greenland) TrulyViable
Algonquian Family:
Micmac (7,000; Nova Scotia, New Brunswick, Prince Edward Island, New Foundland) Viable Malecite (*655; western New Brunswick and adjacent USA) Viable Abenaki (southern Quebec and adjacent USA) NExtinct (10 in Canada, 5 in USA) Delaware (southern Ontario, but primarily USA) NExtinct (7 ~ 8 in Canada, a few in USA) Potawatomi (southern Ontario, but primarily USA) Endangered (100 in Canada, many more in USA) Montagnais-Naskapi (*9,070; Labrador and northern Quebec) Viable Cree (60,000+; from Quebec to British Columbia) TrulyViable Ojibwa (southern Quebec to southern Manitoba and adjacent USA) Truly Viable (30,000 in Canada, 20,000 in USA) Blackfoot (*4,145; southern Alberta and adjacent USA) Viable
Athabaskan Family:
Chepewyan (*1,455; northern Manitoba, Saskatchewan, Alberta and adjacent USA) Viable Slave (southern Northwest Territories) and Hare, a major dialect of Slave (northwestern Northwest Territories) Endangered (600): Dogrib (*2,085; west-central Northwest Territories) Viable Beaver (300; northern Alberta) Endangered Sarcee (less than 50; south-central Alberta) NExtinct Kaska (200 ~ 500; northern British Columbia) Endangered Sekani (100 ~ 500; central British Columbia and western Alberta) Endangered Han (Yukon and adjacent Alaska) NExtinct (a few in Canada, 20 in USA-Alaska) Gwich’in (*430; Yukon and adjacent Alaska) Viable Tutchone (Yukon and adjacent Alaska) Viable Tahltan (40; northwestern British Columbia) NExtinct Tagish (less than 6; northwestern British Columbia, southern Yukon) NExtinct Tsetsaut (north-central British Columbia coast) Extinct (early 20th century) Babine (west-central British Columbia) Endangered? Carrier (central British Columbia) Viable Chilcotin (*705; south-central British Columbia) Viable Nicola (south-central British Columbia) Extinct (20th century)

120 Akira Yamamoto
Beothuk Isolate. Extinct (well over 100 years) Haida Isolate (Queen Charlotte Islands of British Columbia and adjacent USA) Endangered (225 in Canada, 100 in USA; language programs)
Iroquoian Family:
Huron (southern Quebec and Ontario) Extinct (well over 100 years) Petun (southern Ontario) Extinct (well over 100 years) Neutral (southern Ontario) Extinct (well over 100 years) St. Lawrence Iroquoian (southern Quebec and Ontario) Extinct (well over 100 years) Mohawk (*350; southern Quebec, Ontario, and adjacent USA) Viable Seneca (southern Ontario and adjacent USA) NExtinct (25 in Canada, larger number in USA) Cayuga (southern Ontario and adjacent USA) Endangered (360 in Canada, 10 in USA) Oneida (southern Ontario and adjacent USA) Endangered (200 in Canada, 50 in USA) Onondaga (southern Ontario and adjacent USA) Endangered (50~100 in Canada, 50 in USA) Tuscarora (southern Ontario and adjacent USA) NExtinct (7~8 in Canada, more in USA)
Kootenay Isolate (southeastern British Columbia and adjacent USA) Endangered (250 or less in Canada, a few in USA; language programs)
Salishan Family:
Okanagan (500; south-central British Columbia) Endangered (language programs) Shuswap (500; south-central British Columbia) Endangered (language programs) Thompson (500; south-central British Columbia) Endangered (language programs) Lillooet (300 ~ 400; southwestern British Columbia) Endangered (language programs) Bella Coola (less than 200; central British Columbia coast) Endangered (language programs) Comox-Sliammon (southwestern British Columbia) Endangered (400 or less of Sliammon dialect, 0 of the Island dialect of Comox) Pentlatch (Vancouver Island) Extinct (20th century) Sechelt (40; southwestern British Columbia) NExtinct Squamish (20; southwestern British Columbia) NExtinct Halkomelem (500; southwestern British Columbia) Endangered (language programs) Straits (southwestern British Columbia and adjacent USA) NExtinct (30 or less; mostly the Saanich dialect in British Columbia, no speakers of Sooke or Songish dialects)

Endangered Languages in USA and Canada 121
Siouan Family:
Dakota (southern Manitoba, Saskatchewan, Alberta and adjacent USA) TrulyViable (5,000 in Canada, 15,000 in USA) Tlingit Isolate (*145; northwestern British Columbia and adjacent Alaska) Viable
Tsimshian Family:
Nass-Gitksan (*1,200; north-central British Columbia coast) Viable Coast-Southern Tsimshian (north-central British Columbia coast) NExtinct (10 or less of Southern Tsimshian dialect); Endangered (200 or less of Coast Tsumshian dialect)
Wakashan Family:
Haisla (central British Columbia coast) Endangered (200 or less of whom 25 are fluent) Heiltsuk (central British Columbia coast) Viable Kwak’wala (central British Columbia coast and Vancouver Island) Viable Nootka (less than 600; Vancouver Island) Endangered Nitinaht (30; southern Vancouver Island) Nextinct
Appendix II:
Hinton and Montijo (1994) Survey of California Indian Languages
I will include here an abbreviated version of their more thorough survey. I use their conservative estimate of fluent speakers adding the estimated total population figures whenever available from Davis 1994.
Algic Wiyot (0) Population 450 Yurok (20 ~ 30) Population 3,500
Chumashan Chumash (0) Population 156
Cochimí-Yuman Diegueño [Kumeyaay (50), Ipai (25), Tipai (200)] Population 2,562 Mojave [Fort Mojave Reservation (30 ~ 35), Colorado River Reservation (35 ~ 50)] Population 767 Quechan (Yuma) (150) Population 3,000
Esselen Language Isolate (0) Population 80 Karuk Language Isolate (10~12) Population 1,900 Maiduan
Maidu languages [Konkow (3 ~ 5), Nisenan (1), and Northeast Maidu (1 ~ 2)] Population 2,500 Nadene Hupa (12~25) Population 150 Tolowa (4 ~ 5) Population 1,000

122 Akira Yamamoto
Palaihnihan Achumawi (5 ~ 10) and Atsugewi (3) together have the total population of 1,350.
Plateau Penutian Modoc (Klamath) (1 ~ 3) Population 2,000?
Pomoan Cahto (0) Pomo languages [Kashaya Pomo (45), Southern Pomo (1), Central Pomo (8), Northern Pomo (1), Eastern Pomo (5), Southeastern Pomo (5), Northeastern Pomo (0)] Population (all combined including Cahto Pomo) 4,766
Salinan Salinan (0) Population several hundred? Shastan Shasta (0) Population 1,300
Utian Miwok languages [Coast Miwok (1), Lake Miwok (1 ~ 2), Bay Miwok (0), Plains Miwok (1), Northern Sierra Miwok (6 or less), Eastern Centeral Sierra (6), Western Central Sierra (6), Southern Central Sierra (7)] Population 3,000 Ohlone languages (0) Population several hundreds~several thousands?
Uto-Aztecan Cahuilla (7 ~ 20) Population 2,300? Chemehuevi [Colorado river Reservation (10 or less), Chemehuevi Reservation (3)] Population 900? Cupeño (1 ~ 5) Population 700 Gabrielino (Tongva) (0) Population 1,000~2,000 Juaneño (Ajachmem) (0) Population (see Luiseño) Kawaiisu (8 ~ 10) Population 35 Luiseño (30 ~ 40) Population 2,500 (with Juaneño) Mono [North fork (10 ~ 12), Auberry (15), Big Sandy Mono (7 ~ 8), Dunlap Mono (5 ~ 6), Waksachi (0)] Population 600 Paiute languages [Owens Valley Paiute (50), Northern Paiute (25 ~ 40 in California, 1,000 in USA), California Shoshoni (20)] Population? Serrano (2) Population 85 Tubatulabal (3 ~ 5) Population 900
Washo Language Isolate (25?) Population 1,500 Wintuan
Wintun languages [Wintu (6), Nomlaki (0 ~ 1), Patwin (1 ~ 2) Population 2,500 Yanan Language Isolate (0) Population ? Yokutsan
Yokuts languages [Choynumni (8 ~ 10), Chukchansi (12), Dumna (1), Tachi (3), Wukchumne (10), Yowlumni (25 ~ 27), Gashowu (1)] Population 2,500 Yukian Wappo (2) Population ? Yuki (0) Population 1,200

Chapter 6 Language Endangerment in Northern Africa
Matthias Brenzinger
1. Introduction
Standard Arabic is the “official language” not only in the Western states of the Maghreb region, i. e. Morocco, Algeria, Tunisia, and Mauritania, but also in Libya and Egypt. After independence, most African governments assigned official roles in modern sectors such as education and administration to the languages of the former colonial powers. The governments of the Maghreb states opted for the contrary policy: Modern Standard Arabic and the liturgical Classical Arabic receive governmental support by the pan-Arabist ruling elites in these countries. Since then their policy has been primarily directed to push back French, the language of the former colonizers, by fostering the use of Modern Standard Arabic. Schools are instrumental in homogenizing the populations of North Africa through the promotion of Islam and Arabic under the slogan “one religion and one language” (Almasude 1999: 120).
The official language policy of the Moroccan government, for example, aims at reestablishing the status and function of Arabic to the level it had before the French invasion in 1912.1 To that end, government policy attempts to modernize Modern Standard Arabic for allowing its use in technology and science. The undervalued and stigmatized other languages, i. e. Amazigh and the colloquial Arabic languages have no place in such national language policies of the Maghreb states. In addition to that, Amazigh (Berber) has been and often still is regarded to be a threat to Arab Muslim identity (Boukouss 2001: 20–24). In recent years, however, the officially prevailing Arabo-Islamic ideology of “Arabization” has been challenged by a fast spreading international Amazigh renaissance. Some scholars, such as Guessoum (2002) express doubts on the underlying motives of and thus the outcomes desired by these movements. He assumes that the “Berber renaissance” is mainly a cover of the francophone Maghreb elite (in Algeria) to counter the Arab expansion. He suspects that the primary interest of those activists is the reintroduction of French in its former functions. According to Guessoum, the support of raising the status and use of Amazigh is only of secondary importance.

124 Matthias Brenzinger
2. The Amazigh (Berber) languages2
The indigenous people of northern Africa and their languages are widely known as “Berber”, but because this term goes back to “Barbarian”, they prefer the name Amazigh (Imazighen), literally “free people”. Most Amazigh seem to have agreed to call themselves and their language Amazigh or Tamazight when they use English. We will follow these conventions, with the exception of terms established in linguistic classification, such as “North Berber”.
Little is known about pre-historic times, but nobody seems to question that the Amazigh are the indigenous inhabitants of Northern Africa before the “Islamic Conquest” of the Arabs. In the 7th and 8th centuries, Arabic started to spread along with Islam among former Amazigh speakers. This Arab expansion took several hundred years. However, it was not the aforementioned high prestige Arabic varieties that replaced the ethnic tongues of Amazigh. Instead, colloquial varieties, which today are often referred to by the names of the nations, such as Moroccan Arabic, Algerian Arabic, Tunisian Arabic, have become the mother tongues of many Amazigh. These mainly oral Arabic varieties – not Standard Arabic – are still the main threat to the ancestral languages of the indigenous populations of Northern Africa.
In order to foster a common identity and join their strength, Amazigh activists generally speak of one Amazigh language by acknowledging the existence of regional varieties. While most linguists agree on a close genetic relationship, they distinguish various Amazigh languages based on linguistic analyses. Only neighboring Amazigh speech varieties are mutually intelligible and linguistic dissimilarity increases with geographical distance. Studies have demonstrated that there is a considerable variation among the Amazigh languages, not only in the lexicon, but also in their morphology (Aikhenwald 1990, 1995). Figures provided for the number of Amazigh languages range from ‘one’ to more than a 100 and some even mention as many as 5,000 local forms (Irvine 1994: 270). The 24 Amazigh languages listed in table 1 (see also Map 8) are an attempt to present an overview of the distinct Amazigh languages. Update information on the languages is mainly derived from the Ethnologue 2001 in its electronic version of December 2004 (Grimes ed. 2001). The status of most Amazigh varieties with regard to their linguistic distance needs further investigation and a coherent linguistic atlas of the Amazigh languages is still lacking (Applegate 1970).
Amazigh languages are still spoken between Mauritania at the Atlantic coast and Egypt in the east, Tunisia in the north and Burkina Faso and Niger

Language Endangerment in Northern Africa 125
in the south. Before the Arab invasion, the entire northern part of the African continent might have been a vast contiguous area of an Amazigh dialectal continuum in which neighboring varieties were mutually intelligible.
A continuum still exists in Morocco, in which speakers of the southern varieties of Tashelhit can communicate with those speaking the central varieties, called Tamazight. The latter converse with the speakers of Tarifit, the northern varieties, whereas Tashelhit and Tarifit languages are mutually incomprehensible (Yamina el Kirat, pers. com.). To the east, Tarifit borders the Kabyle area of Algeria and these two varieties are closely related and mutually intelligible, regardless of the different national affiliations (Sadiqi 1998). The Moroccan Amazigh languages are grouped together with most Algerian Amazigh languages, such as Shawiya, Shenowa, Tagargrent, and Tumzabt as “North Berber”.
The westernmost Amazigh language is Zenaga, with only a few hundred speakers in an isolated pocket in the coastal border region of Mauritania and Senegal. Most scholars consider this language to be the only surviving member of “West Berber”.
Spanish has replaced the Amazigh language of the Guanche in the Canary Islands after a final defeat in 1496. Mainly because of lack of language data, the classificatory status of Guanche will remain a matter of dispute. Based on her analyses of grammatical features, mainly the case system, Aikhenvald (1990: 113) claims a first split of Guanche (“protoBerber-Guanche”) from the ancestor language of all other Amazigh languages (“proto-Berber”).
The oasis of Siwa in Egypt is the most eastern Amazigh settlement. Their language, named Siwi is still spoken by about 10,000 people; however, since it became part of Egypt in 1920, Arabic vocabulary entered the language through formal education and military service (Vycichi 2005: 162). Siwi is related to Amazigh languages of Libya, such as Awjila and Nafusi. Dialects of the latter, namely Djerbi and Tamezret are also spoken in Tunisia. These languages together form “East Berber”.
Most Amazigh languages spoken in the southern parts of the Maghreb, such as Tamasheq and Tamajaq are classified as “South Berber”.
The sociopolitical environment for the Amazigh speech communities differs considerably in the North African States. Colonel Muammar Gaddafi, Libya’s “Leader of the Revolution”, neglects any distinct Amazigh identity and considers the “Berber” as being genuine Arabs. Gaddafi is not prepared to accept any promotion of Amazigh languages in his country. Their existence is widely ignored in Tunisia and Mauritania, because the Amazigh are few in number in these two countries (Souag 2004: 10).

126 Matthias Brenzinger
After independence, many Amazigh in Algeria maintained their ethnic and linguistic identity and even became involved in armed struggle against what they considered an Arab imperialism. In May 2002, the Algerian government agreed on a constitutional amendment by which Amazigh receives the status of a “national language”.
The most positive prospects for the future, it seems, have the Amazigh languages spoken in Morocco, not only because their speakers are the most numerous. King Mohammed VI of Morocco established “The Royal Institute of the Amazigh Culture” (IRCAM) with the Dahir of Ajdir in October 17th, 2001. This Royal Institute in Rabat has been created to preserve and promote Amazigh culture and language. The goal of IRCAM is to contribute to the implementation of the policies adopted by the King: “… which will allow for the introduction of the Amazigh language in the educational system and insure the spread of its influence in the social, cultural, media, national, regional and local contexts” Royal Dahir, Art. 2. (IRCAM 2004)
The most challenging tasks assigned to IRCAM by the king are the standardization of the so-called Moroccan Amazigh “dialects”, and the establishing of a standard Amazigh orthography.
In dealing with the first problem, IRCAM decided to produce three separate manuals for the primary level, one for Tashelhit, Tamazight and Tarifit each. For the second level, they produced a common manual in what IRCAM claims to be a standard form of Amazigh. IRCAM proceeds in standardization Amazigh and aims at finally coming up with a Moroccan Standard Amazigh. This written Amazigh variety, however, may end up as being no one’s mother tongue.
With regard to the second task, i. e. a writing system for Amazigh, there are basically two opposing positions. The Moroccan, like the Algerian government, has advocated the use of an Arabic-based script for Amazigh while most Amazigh themselves use and support a Latin-based script.
For hundreds of years, Amazigh fought against and resisted the Arab dominance, just as they did against the others, the European colonizers. Given these facts, Guessoum’s account of the positive stance towards Arabic and the Arabic script by Amazigh sounds rather suspicious; it merely represents the official version of the history from the perspective of Islamist elites.
Nos ancêtres kabyles n’ont jamais posé le problème de l’amazighité en tant que tel ; au contraire, nos savants d’origine kabyle ont toujours utilisé le verbe et les caractères arabes pour transmettre le message kabyle, se sentant ainsi mieux dans leur milieu arabo-islamique. (Guessoum 2002: 197)

Language Endangerment in Northern Africa 127
According to by far most other sources, there is no support for the introduction of the Arabic script among Amazigh. The Amazigh intelligentsia in Morocco and Algeria is predominately educated in French, and they strongly promote the use of a Roman alphabet. The governments of Mali and Niger, like that of Algeria, accepted these aspirations and decided on the use of the Latin script.
In Algeria, the government body in charge of the matter – the Haut Commision pour l’Amazighté – appears to have settled on Latin after a period of vacillation; if so, Latin (script, M. B.) will likely take hold irreversibly in the coming years as Berber is introduced in the classroom. (Souag 2004: 4)
IRCAM, i. e. the King of Morocco, came up with a rather unexpected third alternative, a Neo-Tifinagh. Given the ideological dimensions associated with the choice of Arabic or Latin, the King following the suggestion of IRCAM and opted for Neo-Tifinagh as a “neutral” choice. Each language is written in its own script: Arabic in Arabic script, French, Spanish and English in Latin script and Amazigh in Tifinagh.
At first, IRCAM introduced a Tifinagh-alphabet for “Standard Amazigh” with 33 characters. In 2003, IRCAM added some 30 more characters, which allow representing the distinctive phonemes in the now recognized three major Moroccan Amazigh “varieties”. The Moroccan government decided on the use of this official Neo-Tifinagh script for producing educational materials.
The IRCAM script seems to attract Amazigh irrespective of where they live and whether they speak Amazigh or not. Outside of Morocco, Tifinagh characters are used merely as symbols in letterheads and logos. More than 2000 years ago, “the Numidians and other early Berber kingdoms developed a script now known as Numidic, Old Libyan, or Libyco-Berber.” (Souag 2004: 1) Various stone inscriptions testify to the long history of a geometric script, which the Tuareg have preserved until today as Tifinagh. Characters from rock inscriptions and a few manuscripts formed the basis for the development of the Neo-Tifinagh script.
The Islamists support the Arabic script and claim that this script should be adopted for Amazigh because Morocco is a Moslem nation. The use of the Latin alphabet to them means the rejection of Islam through a Western secularism. It is seen as an unpatriotic support of the former colonizers and non-Moslem. Nevertheless, many Amazigh use and promote the Latin script and feel that the Neo-Tifinagh script will segregate the Amazigh language. Neo-Tifinagh is considered to be difficult to use by

128 Matthias Brenzinger
most Amazigh and even experts, who work with and developed the script, are not yet at ease in using this “artificial” writing system.
Several newspapers, periodicals and magazines are published in Amazigh, predominantly in Latin script, but also in Arabic script and to a lesser extent in Tifinagh. National radio and TV programs are broadcasted in various Amazigh languages in Algeria and Morocco. However, the internet has developed into the most important medium for Amazigh (language) activists (Almasude 1999). Several organizations in the Diaspora maintain web pages, such as the Amazigh Cultural Association in America (ACAA) and Syphax Sociaal-culturele Verenniging (The Netherlands). Update information Amazigh issues is disseminated on web portals such as Amazigh-Voice, Monde Berbere, Amazigh World and Amazigh NL.3 All these and many other networks want to help to promote and foster the Amazigh culture and language.
Language survival depends on the speakers, most importantly on their language attitudes and language behavior. Several Amazigh languages have already become extinct, such as Sened in Tunisia or Ghomara and Sanhaja of Srair in Algeria. Others, such as Zenaga in Mauritania and Sawkna in Libya are under serious threat. Kabyle, Tamasheq and Tamazight are among those languages, which spoken by large communities, seem to be safe.
More than 70% of North Africans of Amazigh origins speak no Amazigh languages, but Arabic languages only. In Morocco and Algerian about 80% of the citizens are considered to be of Amazigh origin, as are roughly 60% of those in Tunisia and Libya. Origin and identity does not necessarily match. In the latter two countries, few citizens have maintained their Amazigh identity. In contrast, increasing numbers refer to themselves as Amazigh in Algeria and in Morocco. With 11 to 14 million speakers of Amazigh languages in total, only about half of those who currently claim their Amazigh identity still speak an Amazigh language. Obviously, to call a person an Amazigh does no longer require any Amazigh languages competence. This is a most threatening fact for the vitality of Amazigh languages and serious indicator for its endangerment.
Recent studies on language vitality, such as those undertaken by Yamina El Kirat, demonstrate that not only small Amazigh languages in isolated pockets are under threat. El Kirat found that Beni Iznassen people are in large numbers abandoning their Amazigh language in favor of Moroccan Arabic. They no longer transmit their language to children, and formerly fluent speakers lose proficiency because they hardly use their ethnic language in everyday communication.

Language Endangerment in Northern Africa 129
The Beni Iznassen people have developed a very negative attitude towards their mother tongue to the extent of rejecting it and denying their Amazigh identity. Most Beni Iznassen people consider their language as being a stigma and think Moroccan Arabic is more useful than Beni Iznassen Amazigh. (El Kirat 2001: 93)
Even though some of the Amazigh languages seem to be quite safe, unstable bilingualism is widespread and puts even larger Amazigh languages at risk. Unlike “their Riffi neighbors, Beni Iznassen people are not proud of their Amazigh identity and even try hard to hide it from outsiders.” (El Kirat 2004: 44). In the rural areas, Beni Iznassen children acquire Moroccan Arabic as their first language and if they know any Amazigh at all, have only a limited proficiency. Most of their urban age-mates grow up with Moroccan Arabic and French with almost no contact with Amazigh. There is widespread language shift and an interruption of language transmission in northeastern Morocco.
It is doubtful whether current developments, in which the intellectual Amazigh elite is employing the language and script to raise political awareness, will have a positive impact on the actual language use of the rural Amazigh communities.
Brandissant la banderole de l’amazighité, ce mouvement «pour la culture berbère» n’est en réalité qu’une revendication francophone sous l’étiquette berbère. Sinon, comment expliquer cette hostilité des revendications de la berbérité à tout ce qui est arabe: culture, écriture, paroles, lettres, etc. (Guessoum 2002: 197)
Guessoum’s interpretation according to which Amazigh is being taken advantage of by a movement, whose primary goal is to oppose Arabic, may be exaggerated. Nevertheless, when movements make use of languages merely as (political) symbols – and there are indications for that with Amazigh – they do not necessarily support the maintenance of a community’s home language.
Many of the numerous Diaspora Amazigh communities in countries such as France, Spain, the Netherlands, Germany and United States retain a quite strong loyalty to their Amazigh languages. Amazigh children abroad may grow up as bilinguals, with the language of their host country and Amazigh, without speaking any Arabic. These immigrant communities play an important role in the revival and maintenance of Amazigh languages, and Salem Mezhoud even speaks of “Salvation through Migration” (Mezhoud 2005).
Several Amazigh languages have already disappeared and others are severely endangered. Only the usage in the family ensures the survival of

130 Matthias Brenzinger
a language. Most urban children in cities of the Maghreb, even those of elite Amazigh activists, do no longer acquire Amazigh languages and the break in the intergenerational transmission in most Amazigh languages is evident. The fate of those, which are still spoken by millions, relies on the implementation human and civil rights in the states of Maghreb region. The future of the Amazigh speech communities in the Diaspora will also depend on the national policies of the host countries towards immigrate languages.
3. Endangered and extinct languages of other non-Muslim communities
The most prominent “dead” language of North Africa is Coptic, which was one of the stages of Egyptian. The decline of Coptic started with the Arab conquest of Egypt in the seventh century. Until then, Coptic had been the spoken language of Egypt; written first in the hieroglyphic script, then in the hieratic and later in the demotic form of writing. About 2,300 years ago, the Egyptians adopted the Greek alphabet and added some letters to represent all the distinctive sounds of their language, then called “Coptic”.
Soon after the conquest, Arabic became the only language used in administration and pressure to apostasy to Islam increased on the orthodox Christian communities. A main factor responsible for accelerating the process of abandonment of Coptic, i. e. the orthodox Christian language, by the indigenous populations was the introduction of a progressively heavier capitation tax known as Jizyah on non-Muslims.
The Dominican traveler J. M. Vansleb reported, in the account of his journey to Upper Egypt in 1672–73, that he had met a certain Mu’allim Athanasius. Vansleb refers to him as last Copt to be fluent in the Coptic language. From the seventeenth century onwards, only formal phrases of Coptic “survived” in the reduced functional spiritual domain as “language” of the liturgy (Ishaq 1991: 604–606). Today, approximately 4 million Copts in Egypt still know some liturgical phrases, but no one can conduct natural conversations on everyday issues in Coptic. The Copts, as orthodox Christians, play an important role by easily interacting with non-Muslim foreigners in the tourist industry. They maintain their Coptic identity as well as their religious faith. Copts marry among themselves, the Coptic language, however, no longer exists as their community’s language.
Long before the spread of Islam and Arabic, Jewish communities were scattered along the North African coastline from Egypt in the east

Language Endangerment in Northern Africa 131
to Mauritania in the west. There is no proof, but “it is plausible to posit a Jewish migration from Palestine towards the West after the destruction of the first temple [586 B.C.E., M. B.]. That such a migration occurred after the fall of the second Temple [70 C.E., M. B.] is a well documented historical fact” (Udovitch and Valensi 1984: 10–11). Jewish communities in Europe and Middle East speak distinct languages and so did Jews in the Maghreb. These “Jewish languages” are in general based on the languages spoken by the host communities. They differ from these in a strong Hebrew interference and in being written in Hebrew script.
Jewish communities in North African spoke varieties of Judaeo-Berber for hundreds of years and only after the 12th century, most Jews shifted to those of Judaeo-Arabic. Today, the only Jewish communities of North Africa speaking Judaeo-Arabic live on the Tunisian island of Jerba. Berberophone Jewish communities left the African continent for Israel in the mid 1950s in large numbers. The Jerba Jews are the only community marked on the North African map (Map 8), because there was no update information on the present conditions of any other North African speech communities of Jewish languages.
Haïm Zafrani (1971: 307) claims that Judaeo-Berber, as a Hebrew-influenced Amazigh variety, was widely spoken by Jewish communities in Southern Morocco, but also by some who lived in parts of Algeria and Tunisia. According to Zafrani, North African Jews used Judaeo-Berber in all domains, within the family and in social and economic interactions. Cultural instructions as well as oral traditions were given in this Amazighbased Jewish language and it was along with Hebrew even used in religious contexts. The scanty historical sources do not allow for reconstructing the history of this presumably first North African “Jewish languages”. With the emigration of the Jews to Israel after the Independence of Morocco, a few elderly people seem to be the last with some competence in Judaeo-Berber (Zafrani 1971: 307).
In contrast to Judaeo-Berber, Judaeo-Arabic varieties spread throughout the Arabic-speaking world, including North Africa. National distinctions for these languages are frequent today, such as Moroccan JudaeoArabic, Tunisian and Algerian Judaeo-Arabic (see Grimes ed. 2001), while scholarly descriptions by linguists rather distinguish local varieties, such as Judaeo-Arabic of Fès (Brunot and Malka 1940) or Judaeo-Arabic of Constantine (Tirosh-Becker 1988, 1989).
Based on written sources, Benjamin Hary (2003: 1) distinguishes five Judaeo-Arabic periods:

132 Matthias Brenzinger
Pre-Islamic Judeo-Arabic (pre-eighth century), Early Judeo-Arabic (eighth/ninth to tenth centuries), Classical Judeo-Arabic (tenth to fifteenth centuries), Later Judeo-Arabic (fifteenth to nineteenth centuries), and Modern Judeo-Arabic (twentieth century).
Before the 15th century Judaeo-Arabic was mainly the language of Rabbis and few other Jewish intellectuals. Written documents such as letters from this small Jewish elite suggest that no great regional variation of Judaeo-Arabic existed at that time (Tedghi 2002).
This situation changed, however, in the 15th century, when the so-called Late, i. e. Later and Modern Judaeo-Arabic, varieties developed and became the languages of Jewish communities. The regional varieties of Judaeo-Arabic that evolved in various parts of North Africa are unintelligible to Arabic speakers outside the Jewish communities. Judaeo-Arabic “contains elements of Classical Arabic, dialectal components, pseudocorrections, and standardization of some features, as well as influences from Hebrew and Aramaic” (Hary 2003). In addition, influence from contact with other Jewish communities, such as Ladino-speaking ones from Spain is evident in North African Judaeo-Arabic varieties.4 Since the Hebrew script is used to write Judaeo-Arabic, these languages are generally indecipherable to non-Jews.
In the mid-20th century, most Jews left the Maghreb to live in Israel, while some others migrated to France. In Israel, the situation for JudaeoArabic was quite hostile, and there was strong pressure on the North African immigrants to adopt Hebrew. Judaeo-Arabic varieties did not receive the same recognition as other Jewish languages, for example Yiddish. Following Hebrew and English, Arabic is the third most-spoken language in Israel today and most of the Arabic-speaking Jews originate from North Africa. There are initiatives, such as Ot Brit Kodesh of the Association des Juifs de Mogador et du Maroc5 which support Judaeo-Arabic in Israel, as well as in North Africa (Morocco). However, these initiatives will not be able to reverse the decline of the Judaeo-Arabic varieties, neither in Israel nor in North Africa (Danielle Gamain, pers. com.).
In 1984, Udovitch and Valensi claim to describe the “The last Arab Jews” of North Africa. The number of these Jews on the Tunisian Island Jerba dropped from 4,500 in 1946 to 1,100 in 1984. After successive migration waves to Palestine only few Jews have remained in two villages, 300 in Hara Sghira and 800 in Hara Hebira (Udovitch and Valensi 1984: 5).
Joseph Tedghi compiled more than 2,000 Judaeo-Arabic texts from the Medieval to the Modern Judaeo-Arab period.

Language Endangerment in Northern Africa 133

Mais, en raison de l’immigration massive des Juifs du Maghreb depuis près d’un demi-siècle – vers Israël et la France notamment – et du recul de la pratique du judéo-arabe au détriment de l’hébreu et du français, un tel objectif semble de plus en plus difficile à réaliser. Ces textes constitueront donc les seules sources pour l’étude des parlers judéo-arabes voués désormais à la disparition. (Tedghi 2002: 438)

Collections of written documents, such as Tedghi’s compilation, may soon be the only source available for the study of Judaeo-Arabic, as the younger generations have already abandoned these languages.
Table 1. The Amazigh languages of Northern Africa

Map Country

Language

Speakers

Population Status

The Amazigh languages

1 Canary Islands Guanchen

0

0

e

2 Mauritania

Zenaga

?

200–300 b

3 Morocco

Tachelhit

3m

3.5 m

a–

4 Morocco

Tamazight

3m

3.5 m

a–

5 Morocco

Tarifit

1.5 m

2m

a-, a

6 Morocco

Ghomara

0

?

e

7 Morocco

Sanhaja of Srair 0

?

e

8 Algeria

Shenowa

15,000–75,000 ?

?

9 Algeria

Kabyle

2.5 m–3 m

?

a–

10 Algeria

Shawiya

1.4 m

?

a–

11 Algeria

Temashin

?

6,000

d, e

Tamazigh

12 Algeria

Tumzabt, Mzab 70,000

70,000

a–

13 Algeria

Tagargrent, Wargla

5,000

5,000

a–

14 Algeria

Taznatit

40,000

40,000

a–

15 Algeria

Tidikelt

?

Tamazigh

9,000

d, e

16 Mali, Burkina Tamasheq Faso, Niger

270,000

270,000 a–

17 Niger, Mali

Tamajaq

650,000

650,000 a–

18 Algeria, Niger, Tamahaq Libya

62,000

62,000

a–

19 Libya, Algeria Ghadamès

4,000

4,000

a–

20 Tunesia

Sened

0

?

e

134 Matthias Brenzinger

21 Libya, Tunesia 22 Libya 23 Libya 24 Egypt Other languages 25 Egypt 26 Tunisia
Israel

Nafusi Awjila Sawkna Siwi
Coptic Judaeo-Arabic Judaeo-Berber

167,000 few ? 0? 10,000
0 1,100 few ?

For defining status see Krauss Chapter 1, this volume:

“safe”

a+

stable

a–

instable; eroded

a

definitively endangered

b

severely endangered

c

critically endangered

d

extinct

e

167,000 a–

2,000

d, e

?

e?

?

a

4 m–6 m e

1,100

d

d, e

O cean

A t l a ntic

1 W. S A H A R A

6 75

8

9

10

MOROCCO 4
3

11

12

13

ALGERIA

14 15

TUNISIA 20
Mediterranean 26
21

Sea

19 23

24 22

LIBYA

25

EGYPT

18

Language Endangerment in Northern Africa 135

MAURITANIA
2
SENEGAL

MALI 17

16 NIGER

CHAD
Lake Chad

SUDAN

Map 8. Northern Africa

1 Guanchen 2 Zenaga 3 Tachelhit 4 Tamazight 5 Tarifit

6 Ghomara 7 Sanhaja of Srair 8 Shenowa 9 Kabyle 10 Shawiya

11 Temashin Tamazigh 12 Tumzabt, Mzab 13 Tagargrent, Wargla 14 Taznatit 15 Tidikelt Tamazigh

16 Tamasheq 17 Tamajaq 18 Tamahaq 19 Ghadamès 20 Sened

21 Nafusi 22 Awjila 23 Sawkna 24 Siwi

25 Coptic 26 Judaeo-Arabic

136 Matthias Brenzinger
Notes
1. The lengths and thus the impact of French colonial presence varied considerably between the Maghreb states: Morocco 1912–56, Tunisia 1881–1956, Algeria 1830–1962 (Ayoub 2002: 40)
2. I would like to thank Yamina el Kirat (University Mohamed V – Agdal/Rabat) for valuable suggestions. I am also indented to Jilali Saib and Ahmed Boukouss from The Royal Institut of the Amazigh Culture in Rabat for sharing their first hand experience on Amazigh language development. Danielle Gamain (Nice) was kind enough to provide her academic as well as personal (family history) insights on Judaeo-Arabic. Thanks for comments to Ofra Tirosh-Becker (The Hebrew University of Jerusalem), Axel Fleisch, Jonathan Allen Brindle,
3. International Amazigh web portals: http://www.amazigh-voice.com, http://www.mondeberbere.com, http://www.amazighworld.com, and http://www.amazigh.nl.
4. Ladino, the Jewish language of the Sephardic Jews of Spain, must have had a strong presence also on the African continent, at least after the 15th century. Spanish Jews fled in large numbers also to the Maghreb after their expulsion from Spain in 1498. In urban settings, Spanish Jews soon became the new Jewish elite, which absorbed small, previously existing Judaeo-Arabic speaking Jewish communities (Marx 1990: 60). Very little facts are known on the use of Ladino in North Africa, but the dominance of Ladino speaking Sephardic Jews in urban centers of the Maghreb probably had an impact on the language used by North African Jews.
5. “Ot Brit Kodesh” publishes a bilingual review entitled “Brit” in French and Hebrew.
References
Aikhenvald, Alexandra Yu. 1990 On Berber cases in the light of Afroasiatic languages. In Mukarovski, H. (ed.) Proceedings of the Fifth International Hamito-Semitic Congress. Wien: Universität Wien. 1995 Split ergativity in Berber languages. St. Petersburg journal of African studies 4: 39–68.
Almasude, Amar 1999 The new media and the shaping of Amazigh identity. In Reyhner; Cantoni; Clair and Parsons Yazzie (eds.) 117–128.
Applegate, Joseph R. 1970 The Berber language. In Sebeok (ed.) 561–586.

Language Endangerment in Northern Africa 137
Atiya, Aziz S. (ed.) 1991 The Coptic encyclopedia. New York: Macmillan Publishing Company.
Ayoub, Georgine 2002 La langue arabe entre l’écrit et l’oral. In Bistolfi (ed.) 31–52.
Bistolfi, Robert (ed.) (in collaboration with Henri Giordan) 2002 Les Langues de la Métiterranée. Paris:L’Harmattan.
Boukouss, Ahmed 2001 Language policy, identity and education in Morocco. Languages and linguistics 8: 17–27.
Brunot, Louis and Elie Malka 1940 Glossaire Judéo-Arabe de Fès. Rabat : Ecole du livre.
Caubet, Dominique; Chaker, Salem and Jean Sibille (eds.) 2002 Codification des langues de France. Paris : L’Harmattan.
El Kirat, Yamina 2001 The current status and future of the Amazigh language in the Beni Iznassen community. Languages and linguistics 8: 81–95. 2004 The lexical and morphological structure of the Amazigh of the Beni Iznassen in a context of language loss. Ph.D.-thesis. University of Rabat
Grimes, Barbara F. (ed.) 2001 Ethnologue. (15th Edition). Dallas: SIL International.
Guessoum, Abderrazak 2002 Problématique linguistique en Algérie. In Bistolfi (ed.) 187–202.
Hary, Benjamin 2003 Judeo-Arabic. Jewish language research website. Editor: Sarah Bunin Benor <editor@jewish-languages.org>
Ishaq, Emile Maher 1991 Coptic language, spoken. In Atiya (ed.) 604–607.
Irvine, A. K. 1994 The Middle East, North Africa and Ethiopia. In Moseley and Asher (eds.) 265–271.
Marx, Bettina 1990 Juden Marokkos und Europas. Das marokkanische Judentum im 19. Jahrhundert und seine Darstellung in der zeitgenössischen jüdischen Presse in Deutschland, Frankreich und Großbritannien. Frankfurt a. M., Bern, New York, Paris: Lang.
Mezhoud, Salem 2005 Salvation through migration: Immigrant communities as engine rooms for the survival and revival of the Tamazight (Berber) language. In Crawhall, Nigel and Nicholas Ostler (eds.) Creating outsiders. Endangered languages, migration and marginalization. Bath: Foundation of Endangered Languages. 109–116.

138 Matthias Brenzinger
Moseley, Christopher and R. E. Asher (eds.) 1994 Atlas of the world’s language. London: Routledge.
Reyhner, Jon; Cantoni, Gina; Clair, Robert N. St. and Evangeline Parsons Yazzie (eds.)
1999 Revitalizing Indigeneous languages. Flagstaff, AZ: Northern Arizona University.
Royal Institut of the Amazigh Culture, The 2004 Information sheet on “The Royal Institut of the Amazigh Culture” (IRCAM). Rabat: IRCAM.
Sadiqi, Fatima 1998 Berber dialects/languages. Analysis of mutual intelligibility. Notes and records 6: 1–9.
Sebeok, Thomas A. (ed.). 1970 Current trends in linguistics, 6. The Hague, Paris: Mouton.
Souag, Lameen 2004 Writing Berber languages: a quick summary. (version 2.01.) http:// www.geocities.com/lameens/tifinagh/
Tedghi, Joseph 2002 Usages de la graphie hébraëque dans la transcription des parlers judéo-arabes modernes au Maghreb. In Caubet; Chaker and Sibille (eds.) 415–441.
Tilmatinè, Mohand; el Molghy, Abdelghani; Castellanos, Carles and Hassan Banhakeia
1998 La llengua rifenya. Tutlayt tarifit. Bellaterra: Universitat Autònoma de Barcelona, Servei de Publicacions.
Tirosh-Becker, Ofra
1988 (hyry’gl)) tydwhy-tbr(b {ylyht rpsl {wgrt l# hygwlwprwmb {yqrpw hygwlwnwp +n+snwqm [The phonology and topics in the morphology of a Judeo-
Arabic translation of the book of psalms from Constantine (Algeria)]. Master’s Thesis, The Hebrew University of Jerusalem [in Hebrew].
1989 }w+n+snwq l# tydwhyh tybr(h }m twynw#l twygws [A characterization of the Judeo-Arabic language of Constantine]. twrwsm [Massrot] 3–4: 285–
312 [in Hebrew]. Udovitch, Abraham L. and Lucette Valensi
1984 The last Arab Jews. The communities of Jerba, Tunisia. Chur, London, Paris, New York: Harwood Academic Publishers.
Vycichi, Werner 2005 Berberstudien and a sketch of Siwi Berber (Egypt). (Edited by Dymitr Ibriszimov and Maarten Kossmann) (Berber studies, 10). Cologne: Rüdiger Köppe.

Language Endangerment in Northern Africa 139
Zafrani, Haïm 1971 Judaeo-Berber. In Lewis, B., Ménage, V. L., Pellat, Ch. and J. Schacht (eds.) The encyclopedia of Islam. Leiden: Brill and London: Luzac and Co. 307–308.

Chapter 7 Endangered Languages in West Africa
Roger Blench
1. Introduction
1.1. Status of West African languages
Although the 1990s saw a substantial growth in concern for language endangerment, most notably in Asia and the Pacific, the African literature has been marked more by an expansion of comment than new descriptive materials. Wurm (1996) purportedly includes a map of endangered languages in West Africa, but since these are not identified by name, this is of limited value. Brenzinger (1998) represents a step towards identifying the gaps in the African literature and papers in that volume, such as Connell (1998) and Kastenholz (1998) provide case studies of threatened or moribund languages of West Africa. Typically, funding for fieldwork addresses issues of ‘theoretical’ interest rather than attempting to provide empirical data on endangered languages and suggest policies that might halt their decline.
Blench (1998) presents a summary of the status of the languages of the Middle Belt of Nigeria. The present paper1 follows a similar format, but expands the canvas to cover the whole of West Africa, both listing endangered languages, analysing the sources of endangerment and likely impact of broadcast and literacy programmes on reversing endangerment trends. Dealing with a much larger database had made it necessary to extend and expand some of the categories used in the previous paper. The main changes are as follows;
a) The categories of language size have been extended at the upper end so that there is a category of 50,000–1,000,000 and then greater than 1,000,000.
b)Additional status categories of ‘moribund’ and ‘declining’ have been added
c) Because some languages are found in several countries, the database has been adapted to count the language when a national count is made, but to treat an individual language as a single record when other types of analysis are conducted.

Endangered Languages in West Africa 141
1.2. The changing linguistic geography of West Africa
West Africa is considered to be all countries up to the border of Cameroon, including Mauretania, but excluding North African countries. The broad pattern of language distribution suggests that closer to the desert, the absolute number of languages is lower as is the numbers of their speakers. This cannot be entirely substantiated from the data used in this paper as languages such as Berber and Arabic are spoken principally outside West Africa. Unlike East Africa, where substantial numbers of pastoralists and hunter-gatherers persisted into recent times, there is a single group of hunter-gatherers in West Africa (the Nemadi) and essentially only two groups of pastoralists, the Fule and the Tamajeq. In addition, there are nomadic fishing peoples on the Niger River. Language distribution is thus overwhelmingly dominated by large and small farming groups. A consequence of this is that the constant shifting of subsistence strategy and thereby ethnic identity characteristic of small East African groups is largely absent in West Africa (see Tosco 1998 for a theoretical argument on this point). The most common causes of language endangerment are rather patterns of cultural and economic dominance.
The last decades of the 20th century have witnessed almost continuous warfare in some parts of the region, for example in the Casamance of Senegal, in Sierra Leone and spilling over sporadically into Liberia and Guinea-Bissau. The apparently stable Cote d’Ivoire has split NorthSouth along ethnic lines leading to massive relocation of population and thus languages. Even minor skirmishes, such as that between Senegal and Mauretania, have resulted in the permanent departure of some ethnolinguistic groups and their replacement by others. Certain countries, such as Guinea, which has been relatively stable since the fall of the Sekou Touré government, have unwillingly become the semi-permanent home of refugees fleeing combat in neighbouring countries. The consequence is that numbers and locations are subject to change and survey data is best regarded as a timebound snapshot in unstable regions.
1.3. Data sources
The most important source of data is Ethnologue 20052 supplemented by the author’s own fieldwork data in Nigeria, Mali and Ghana and by discussions with in-country scholars. The Ethnologue is regularly updated and draws extensively on unpublished field reports. However, it tends to accumulate spurious languages through individuals submitting unchecked or

142 Roger Blench

tendentious entries which once ensconced, become like persistent weeds, hard to eradicate. For example, the 1992 edition of Ethnologue attributed numerous languages to Nigeria which were in reality only spoken by small migrant communities in towns. I have thus tried to cross-check the data and eliminate uncertain entries as well as adding materials from other sources. Table 1 shows the main non-Ethnologue sources drawn on for the data tables in this paper.

Table 1. Selected sources for additional data on West African languages

Country Benin Côte d’Ivoire

References Ceccaldi (1979) Ceccaldi (1978)

Ghana

Guinée Mali

Nigeria Togo

Temple (1922), Shimizu (1983), Crozier & Blench (1992) Kleinewillinghöfer (1996)
Takassi (1983)

Personal communications
Debbie Hatfield Bruce Connell, Jacques Rongier Tony Naden, Mary-Esther Kropp-Dakubu Tucker Childs Robert Carlson, Lee Hochstetler, Denis Douyon Bruce Connell, Kay Williamson (†), Barau Kato, Andy Warren, Bernard Caron

Since the data analysed in Blench (1998) was collected, I have undertaken substantial new fieldwork in Central Nigeria, focussing on Plateau languages and on Dogon languages in Mali. In almost every case where a community was visited, published data on the population numbers, location and relative health of the language was found to be inaccurate. This rather suggests that standard references must be treated with a good deal of caution.

2. Language endangerment
2.1. The status of West African languages
To try and establish the distribution of endangered languages, a status was assigned to each language in the database. The Ethnologue rarely pro-

Endangered Languages in West Africa 143

vides enough information to make such assignations unambiguously, and I have made a number of assumptions. These are;

a) Any language with over 50,000 speakers is ‘not threatened’ b)Any language with under 400 speakers is ‘definitely threatened’ c) Any language with fewer than 3,000 speakers without status data has
been assigned to ‘no information’ on the grounds that it might well be threatened and should be made a priority for research.

Extracting sociolinguistic information from published sources is a problematic exercise; in some cases, where fieldwork is undertaken, it is possible to gain a sense of the reliability of the documentation. Thus the information in this paper for Ghana, Mali and Nigeria is probably more trustworthy than for the other countries, simply because I have conducted fieldwork in these countries and also talked to other researchers.
‘Declining’ and ‘moribund’ are categories introduced since my previous paper on Nigerian languages to try and capture languages that are apparently in decline despite having a viable number of speakers. The assumption is that there are many more languages in these classes and that further sociolinguistic surveys will clarify the status of individual speechforms. Table 2 shows the numbers of languages assigned to each category on the basis of this revised categorization.

Table 2. Status of West African Languages

Status
No information Not threatened Definitely threatened Moribund Probably extinct Declining
Total

Number
304 683 55 10 16
7
1,075

Perhaps the most depressing figure in Table 2 is the large number of languages for which no reliable information is available. These are mostly small languages and therefore more likely to be threatened. The availability of information is extremely uneven, so the data was further analysed by country, as shown in Table 3. This illustrates yet again Nigeria’s ex-

144 Roger Blench

ceptional situation; its languages are less-known than any other country even in percentage terms.

Table 3. Distribution of languages with no status data by country

Country
Niger Togo Sierra Leone Mali Senegal Guinea-Bissau Ghana Liberia Mauretania Burkina Faso Côte d’Ivoire Gambia Guinea Benin Nigeria Total and Mean

Total languages
11 39 21 44 35 21 66 32
8 66 78 19 28 50 553 1,071

No data
0 4 1 5 4 3 9 5 1 12 15 5 8 16 216 304

% No data
0.0 10.3
4.8 11.4 11.4 14.3 13.6 15.6 12.5 18.2 19.2 26.3 28.6 32.0 39.1 28.4

The explanation for this is simple; all other West African countries have had a fairly active programme of language survey conducted either by the French research establishment or by the SIL. In Nigeria, since the virtual cessation of SIL activities in 1976, very limited further survey work has been conducted.3

2.2. How accurate is existing data?
A curious consequence of the expansion of the endangered languages establishment is the adoption of unnecessarily pessimistic assessments. The apparent preconditions for language death set up negative expectations that may well be falsified by (rare) field surveys. For example, surveys of Plateau languages of Central Nigeria 1993–2006 showed that in almost every case, even languages with relatively small numbers of speakers appeared to be flourishing, despite gloomy prognostications of their disap-

Endangered Languages in West Africa 145
pearance (Blench, in press). By way of contrast, Case study 1 gives an example of two related languages from the Mambiloid family of SE Nigeria which although they might appear prime candidates for endangerment are in fact thriving.
Case study 1: Mvanip and Ndunda Roger Blench & Bruce Connell: Survey notes 1999
Meek (1931) gives a short wordlist of a language he calls Magu, spoken at Zongo Ajiya town in the northwest of the Mambila Plateau in southeastern Nigeria. While undoubtedly a Mambiloid language, it seems to be distinct from Mambila proper. In Crozier & Blench (1992) the population is given as ‘less than 10,000’ and called ‘Mvano’. Following a field visit in 1999 we ascertained how incorrect this information was. The Mvanip people are only 100 (chief’s estimate) consisting of a few households in one quarter of Zongo Ajiya. Almost all individuals seemed to be fluent in the other languages of Zongo Ajiya, Fulfulde, Mambila and Ndoro. Despite this, the language seems to be alive – the Jauro (chief) assured us that the children still speak it, and we observed this to be true. A long wordlist was taped and there is no doubt this is the same language given in Meek as Magu.
When we asked for the language closest to Mvanip, to our surprise we were given the name of the Ndunda people. Ndunda is a village some 5 km. from Yerimaru, past Kakara on the tea estate road south of Zongo Ajiya. And indeed, there proved to be a people and language of this name whose existence has so far entirely eluded the reference books. Their language resembles Mvanip but the two are sufficiently distinct as to be considered separate languages. There are probably 3–400 speakers of Ndunda and the language is also alive and well, although the Ndunda settlement is much more ethnically homogeneous than Zongo Ajiya.
Mvanip and Ndunda would appear to be prime candidates for language loss. Their numbers are very small, and the populations live in close proximity to prestigious and numerically dominant languages associated with Islam. However, they seem to have developed a situation of stable multilingualism and religious synthesis that allows them to conserve their traditions without seeming anomalous to outsiders. In contrast to the Yangkam (see Case study 2), the Mambila Plateau is off major trade routes and remains highly inaccessible even in modern Nigeria.
The conclusions to be drawn from this are that much of the published, repeated and re-analysed data on the numbers, location and status of minority languages is highly inaccurate. Secondly, our understanding and thus our ability to predict relative levels of language endangerment is very limited. The plethora of models to describe the theory of language endangerment that accompany every worried text have very limited applications to the survey and analysis of actual endangered languages.

146 Roger Blench

3. Affiliation and distribution of West African languages
3.1. How many languages are spoken in each country?
Assessing the number of languages spoken in each country for analytical purposes is not quite the same as simply taking the Ethnologue figures at face value. Ethnologue tends to ‘split’ languages; in other words, language chains with high degrees of inter-intelligibility tend to appear as separate head entries. This is particularly the case with widespread languages such as Arabic and Fulfulde, which have two, three or more entries for each country in which they are spoken. Similarly, the Ethnologue includes sign or deaf languages and also colonial languages now used for national administrative purposes.4 Ethnolgue (2005) now lists ‘immigrant’ languages separately in its national statistical tables. Table 4 shows total language numbers for West African countries, but;
a) Excludes languages spoken in most countries (English, French, Arabic, Fulfulde) but treats Portuguese as part of the inventory of the country where it is spoken
b)Includes creoles as Indo-European languages the countries where they are spoken.5
c) Registers cross-border languages for each country where they are spoken (the overall total thus includes significant double-counting)

Table 4. Total of languages spoken in each country (for this analysis)

Country
Throughout Mauretania Niger Gambia Guinea-Bissau Sierra Leone

Number Country
4 Mali 8 Guinea 11 Liberia 19 Senegal 21 Togo 21 Benin

Number Country
44 Ghana 28 Burkina Faso 32 Côte d’Ivoire 35 Nigeria 39 50 Total

Number 66 66 78 553
1,075

Eliminating multiple counts for widespread languages gives a total number of languages for West Africa of ca. 1,000. The predominance of Nigeria as a percentage of all languages will continue to skrew this analysis. Were the survey to include Cameroun with 279 languages and Chad with 132, the distribution would look more balanced. In analysing this type of data, much depends on where the boundaries are drawn.

Endangered Languages in West Africa 147

On the basis of this, it seems useful to calculate approximately how many speakers a typical West African language has. Human population statistics are always highly controversial; some countries have only highly politicised speculative estimates while others have reasonably careful counts. The population figures in Table 5 are from Ethnologue (2005) and are significantly more conservative than UN estimates. Countries are sorted in descending order, with those with the most speakers per language heading the table.

Table 5. Mean no. speakers per language in West African countries

Country
Niger Mauretania Ghana Senegal Sierra Leone Guinea Nigeria Total and Mean Mali Burkina Faso Benin Côte d’Ivoire Togo Liberia Guinea-Bissau Gambia

Population
9,230,862 2,725,734 20,119,660 9,479,825 4,739,450 6,747,526 90,026,548 185,322,189 9,031,529 11,019,638 6,449,442 9,220,274 3,978,381 2,63,817 1,439,995 1,113,325

Mean no. speakers per language 439,565 302,859 242,406 231,215 189,578 174,935 174,470 172,125 167,251 159,705 117,263 100,220 94,723 79,478 57,600 50,606

For comparison, the figures for Cameroun and Chad are;

Cameroun Chad

9,638,055 5,909,406

34,442 44,432

There is little doubt that we can identify broad ecological determinants for these differing language densities; desert countries such as Niger and Mauretania the highest number of speakers per language while countries

148 Roger Blench
dominated by humid coastal forest, the lowest. Nonetheless, nationstates are not generally divided into neat ecological units; countries such as Nigeria encompass tropical rain-forest and sand-dunes, and even Togo and Benin have a wide range of environmental conditions within their borders.

3.2. How many speakers do West African languages have?

West African languages were divided into a number of size classes, based on the most recent estimates available. Given the uncertainty as to the verisimilitude of these estimates it seemed appropriate to make the boundaries of each size-class quite generous. Table 6 show the numbers and percentages assigned to each size class;

Table 6. Size classes of West African languages

Size class
< 400 400 – 3,000 3,000 – 50,000 50,000 – 1,000,000 1,000,000 + Unknown Total

Number
74 81 426 168 267 59 1,075

Without detailed sociolinguistic information it is hard to make an overall estimate of the numbers of endangered languages, but clearly any language with less than 3,000 speakers (i. e. 155) is potentially threatened.

3.3. Genetic affiliation of West African languages
Despite the linguistic diversity of West Africa, at the phylic level it is quite uniform. Niger-Congo languages dominate most countries and constitute 85% of all languages spoken there. Only Nigeria has a substantial element of another phylum, Afroasiatic. Table 7 presents a broad outline of the phyla and language families present in the West African region, with examples of specific languages;

Endangered Languages in West Africa 149

Table 7. Genetic classification of the languages of West Africa

Phylum

Family

Examples

Niger-Congo Mande

Mandinka, Busa

West Atlantic Fulfulde, Wolof, Bijogo, Kissi

Dogon

Donno So, Tomo So

Ijoid

Kalabari, Kolokuma

Kru

Dan, Wobe, Seme

Gur

Moore, Dagbane, Gulmancema, Bariba

Adamawa

Chamba Leeko, Mumuye, [Kim, Mundang]

Ubangian

Gbaya, [Zande, Ngbandi]

Kwa

Akan, Ewe, Akebu, Gun

Benue-Congo W. Yoruba, Nupe, Igbo, Idoma, Bini

Benue-Congo E. Kamberi, Tyap, Birom, Jukun, Efik

Bantoid N.

Mambila, Samba Daka

Bantoid S.

Tivoid, Beboid

Bantu

Jarawan, Ekoid

Afroasiatic W. Chadic

Hausa, Angas, Mwaghavul,

Central Chadic Bacama, Huba

Semitic

Shuwa Arabic

Berber

Tamachek

Nilo-Saharan Saharan

Kanuri, Teda

Songhai

Zarma

Unclassified

Jalaa, Bagi Me

Languages in [] are not spoken in the sampled region

‘Dogon’ is not recognised in standard reference works. The Dogon languages are a separate branch of Niger-Congo and are highly internally diverse (Williamson and Blench 2000; Hochstetler et al. 2004). Table 8 shows the numbers of languages in each major language family.

Table 8. Genetic affiliation of West African languages

Language family Berber Semitic Saharan Ijoid

Number 5 5 7 8

Language family Indo-European Unclassified Songhay Dogon

Number 9 10 13 19

150 Roger Blench

Table 8. cont.

Language family
Kru Adamawa-Ubangian West Benue-Congo Atlantic Kwa

Number
45 46 63 84 95

Language family
Mande Chadic Gur East Benue-Congo Total

Number
100 125 136 305 1,075

Afroasiatic consists almost entirely of Chadic languages, including otherwise only Arabic and Berber. The category ‘unclassified’ usually implies simply a lack of data for a language known to exist. Data exists for two languages, Jalaa and Bagi Me, which appear to be truly unclassifiable.

3.4. Sources of language endangerment
In general, West African languages are in a healthy state. Compared to Eastern and Southern Africa, only a few languages are disappearing. The clear contrast with East Africa almost certainly reflects the dominance of smallholder farming systems. A lack of mobility and a relative inflexibility in reinventing subsistence strategies tends to conserve language and maintain classic patterns of diversification such as areal spread and dialect chains. Language endangerment in West Africa generally occurs through language shift, which usually reflects the rise of a dominant culture, formerly military, but often nowadays commercial or religious. This is particularly the case with Islam; conversion to Islam was historically associated with the rise of highly militarised cultures and indeed the slave trade. Thus, Hausa, Arabic, Mandinka, Bambara, Fulfulde and Kanuri have all been associated with aggressive expansionism and the forcible conversion of enslaved peoples. In the colonial era, the convenience of these languages was such that they were frequently adopted as secondary languages of communication. Promoted by the administration they became ever more the vehicle of assimilatory forces pressing on minority languages.
Case study 2 illustrates the case of Yangkam, a language of Central Nigeria that is severely endangered through the association of its people with Islamic expansion during the nineteenth century.
Case study 2: Why is Yangkam is disappearing? Roger Blench: fieldnotes 1997
The Yangkam people live in a region west of Bashar town, on the Amper-Bashar road, in Plateau State, Central Nigeria. They are known as ‘Bashar’ or ‘Bashera-

Endangered Languages in West Africa 151
wa’ (the Hausaised name for the people) in the existing literature (Greenberg 1963; Crozier & Blench 1992). The correct name of the Bashar language and people is YàNkàm, plural aYaNkam. Crozier and Blench (1992) give a figure of 20,000 speakers of the language located in and around Bashar town, some 50 km east of Amper on the Muri road. Fieldwork in 1997 showed this estimate turned out to be entirely erroneous. Yangkam society was transformed by nineteenth century slave raiding, perhaps by the Jukun as well as the Hausa. The Yangkam converted to Islam and a relatively powerful political and trading centre was established at Bashar. At the same time they began to switch to speaking Hausa, while still retaining strongly their Bashar identity. In the region of Bashar town in 1997, there were just two old men who remain reasonably fluent in the language, in the village of Yuli some 15 km northwest of Bashar. However, at the time of the raids, the population split into two and another group sought refuge in Tukur, west of Bashar. Yangkam is spoken in some four villages, Tukur, Bayar, Pyaksam and Kiram. Even here Yangkam is only spoken by people over fifty and all the young people speak Hausa. There seems to be no likelihood that Yangkam will be maintained as speakers are quite content with the switch to Hausa. The local estimate of the number of fluent speakers is 400, and falling every year. In many hamlets around Bashar town in Wase local Government the populations are ethnically Yangkam but they no longer speak the language.
Yangkam is something of a paradox; members of the ethnic group are very proud of their history and identity, but do not associate them with retention of the language. Hausa is not spoken as a first language by any populations nearby and Bashar is today well off major routes for long-distance trade. A typescript of the history of Bashar circulates in the district, larded with non-Hausa names and words but Yangkam do not draw the conclusion that there is any link between this identity and the language they formerly spoke. Although Yangkam has nearly disappeared as a language, the populations who formerly spoke it are likely to retain Basherawa and Basheranci as their name for the people and language as long as they retain a separate identity.
The expansion of Hausa represents a confluence of Islam, political and military power and a high level of proficiency in establishing trade networks. But not all large vehicular languages in West Africa were the products of Islamization; Moore, Yoruba, Efik/Ibibio, Akan and Wolof seem to have expanded, often in a military context, but prior to or unrelated to Islam. Interestingly, these languages have been less successful in the post-colonial phase of cultural expansion, suggesting that a less pluralistic engine of expansion made the transition to a trade language was more difficult than for the Hausa or Bambara. These languages had the resources to reinvent themselves when the military option was exhausted. Islam, as also Christianity, has always had long-distance trade as a second arrow in its

152 Roger Blench
quiver. Languages with a prior embedded trade and institutional vocabulary recommended themselves to colonial administrators. Cultures with less orientation towards commerce meant that their associated vehicular languages made more limited inroads in an era of relative peace.
4. Broadcasting, literacy programmes and their impact
One guilty party usually identified by morbilinguophiles is urbanization; as individuals and households move to the cities, they lose their languages and switch to dominant speech-systems.6 There is no doubt that this is partly true, especially during the great afflux to cities in the third part of the twentieth century. However, city culture also has interesting countervailing tendencies. It provides access to communications technology, most recently FM radio, which can sometimes act to support language maintenance. In Mali and Northern Ghana, commercial broadcasting in minority languages has become a major growth area and has acted dramatically to increase the prestige of indigenous languages.7 If a language can be adapted to ‘modern’ life it paradoxically gains more prestige in rural areas. Broadcasts then become a major channel for neologisms and syntax changes to reach rural areas. A likely consequence, as in Western Europe, is that broadcast media tend to eliminate local dialect variation,8 but the experiment is too new in West Africa for any results to be measured.
Between overt government policy and ground reality huge chasms yawn invitingly. No government these days can be seen to be against minority languages, but few governments have the political will to actively support languages with small numbers of speakers. Most governments have some type of literacy bureau, proffering a few dusty pamphlets in major languages. One exception to this is Mali, which, through its agency DNAFLA, has tried to make use of a spectrum of funding sources to print primers, grammars, dictionaries for a wide variety of languages over several decades. Government involvement in literacy cuts both way; DNAFLA tried to establish a ‘standard’ Dogon that would effectively eliminate the other 20 Dogon languages from development (Hochstetler et al. 2004).
The reality is that literacy in minority languages is most likely to be driven by the resources of organizations, notably the SIL and its affiliates, who consider it a means to an end, in this case reading the Bible. For example, in Ghana, SIL (locally GILBTT) runs literacy programmes in some thirtytwo languages and is actively researching the potential of the relatively few

Endangered Languages in West Africa 153
remaining minority languages. The Ghana Bureau of Languages, by contrast, offers one or two pamphlets in about ten languages, printed many years ago in now-discarded orthographies. An intriguing exception to this is Nigeria, where the size of the economy and the growth of ethnic consciousness among minorities has been responsible for a lively enthusiasm for local publishing, especially in the popular arena, focusing on proverbs, oral literature and reading and writing. Recent publications include Gochal (1994) on Ngas, Mamfa (1998) as well as Lar and Dandam (2002) on Tarok and Nyako (2000) on Izere. This type of publishing will probably continue to expand and take in more ethnolinguistic groups.
Whether externally-driven literacy programmes really do assist language maintenance is a moot point, as they can run into the sand with threatened languages. Almost by definition it is hardly worthwhile to spend limited resources on languages whose speakers seem to be deserting them; and most programmes thus focus on ‘medium-scale’ languages with a viable number of speakers. Nonetheless, the criteria for viability varies strikingly between continents. A language with less than 1,000 speakers in Africa looks seriously endangered and is unlikely to get literacy materials; such languages in New Guinea are regularly the subject of literacy programmes.
The definition of the unit of endangerment in language survey is often problematic and it is difficult to assess whether resources should be allocated to languages that are relatively close to vigorous speech-forms. The case of Tchumbuli in Benin is a case in point (Case study 3);
Case study 3: Tchumbuli
A report on the Tchumbuli language of Benin provides some information on a little-known and endangered speech-form (Schoch & Wolf 2001). Tchumbuli is a Northern Guang language spoken in three villages in the Departement de Collines between Savé and Ouessé. These villages are Okounfo, Gbede and Edaningbe and their total population is 3,500 individuals.
The origin of the Tchumbuli is complex; they are closely related to the Chumburung of NE Ghana and oral tradition suggests that they migrated to their present site in the mid eighteenth century. However, while in Ghana they absorbed the ‘Cobecha’, mercenaries from Benin (the precolonial state in Nigeria) who had come to fight in the Ashanti wars and halted on their way home. This ethnic distinction is maintained in the Tchumbuli communities in Benin Republic today, despite the homogeneity of the spoken language. To add to the confusion, in the 1950s an expedition led by their Paramount Chief returned with a number of families back to Ghana and settled in Anyinamae, near the present-day Chumburung community. Their language has effectively been relexified and absorbed back into Chumburung.

154 Roger Blench
Tchumbuli is slowly dying as a result of contact with two major neighbouring languages, Maxi and Cabe. Maxi is part of the Fon group while Cabe is a type of Yoruba, closely related to that spoken across the border in Nigeria. In Okounfo village, the switch to Cabe has occurred, with pervasive bilingualism and Tchumbuli only known to the older generation. In Edaningbe, Maxi is replacing Tchumbuli although a more complex ethnic mixture in the village means that the process of replacement is less straightforward. In Gbede, Tchumbuli remains widely spoken although Cabe is used to communicate with outsiders and appears to be spreading among younger children.
The total number of speakers of Tchumbuli was estimated at 1838, and although this is relatively high compared with many other threatened languages in West Africa, it conceals the fact that the language is largely confined to the older generation. Paradoxically, the Tchumbuli are proud of their historical traditions and their links with Ghana. Tchumbuli illustrates the problem of how much weight to give to languages close to those that are not threatened. Tchumbuli is sufficiently close to Chumburung for linguists to classify it as a dialect. However, the results of complex interactions with Maxi and Cabe and the very different cultural traditions of the Tchumbuli have made the language quite distinct above the level of fundamental vocabulary.
Many of the factors responsible for language endangerment are contingent; they cannot necessarily be predicted from sociological variables nor prevented by well-meaning programmes. War and social disruption have been key forces displacing populations, fragmenting speech communities and prematurely ending the life of speech communities. But refugees are refugees, it would hardly be appropriate to suggest specialised assistance for those speaking threatened languages. The forces of globalization similarly depend on political stability and also the macro-economic order. It is hard to listen to the government radio station if you can’t afford the batteries.
5. The research agenda
It would be pleasant to report, that West African languages, especially those endangered by language shift, were the focus of a lively research effort. But this is far from the case; indeed the opposite is true. Why should this be so?
First and foremost, because of the moribund research establishment in African universities. Political insecurity in many countries has made it difficult for universities and other institutions to function at all. Many West African universities are in decay and staff morale is low, in part because of

Endangered Languages in West Africa 155
uncertain pay and conditions, but also because of a lack of support for research. The other body with a record of interest in research, the Summer Institute of Linguistics, now tends to regard academic publication as a low priority. Little has appeared in recent years, although the situation is patchy; Mali for example, still tries to encourage academic publication of results. The impact of the Euro-American research establishment is also limited for rather different reasons. Research increasingly uses expatriate and out-of-context informants, despite the oft-publicised danger of this approach. The declining economies of the region and the more commercial approach of Euro-American universities has meant that many fewer speakers of minority languages are visiting or studying in Europe and America. This illustrates all too starkly the neo-colonial nature of fashionable linguistics, which takes no interest in languages for themselves, merely for their potential contribution to passing seminar-room fashion. Despite much talk, the institutions that purportedly encourage Endangered Languages research have eccentric priorities, to judge by their profile in Nigeria, which has by far the largest number of endangered languages in Africa. Although fieldwork in Africa is still supported, the negative image of Nigeria deters many fieldworkers and for a country that has more than one-quarter of all African languages, research is at vanishingly low levels.
6. Conclusion
The situation of minority languages in West Africa can be summarised as follows;
a) The information base remains extremely weak for many countries b)Survey work is not a high priority for governments or academics
within West African countries, while research by outside scholars is apparently declining c) SIL surveys are useful but certainly do not focus directly on language endangerment issues, although policy is changing in this area. d)Government policy usually has little to say about endangered languages although what policies exist are generally in favour of indigenous languages e) However, government action in this area tends to be weak or non-existent f) Nonetheless, what evidence there is suggests that West African languages are generally holding their own in the face of globalization and the homogenising forces of the twenty-first century

156 Roger Blench

Appendix: Endangered languages in West Africa

The following table does not include languages that are probably extinct.

Table 9. Annotated list of severely threatened languages in West Africa

Country Languages Nigeria Akpondu Bade
Bakpinka Defaka
Dulbu Dyarim Fyem Geji cluster
Gera Gura Gurdu-Mbaaru Gyem Ilue Jilbe Kiong Kona Kudu-Camo
Luri Mvanip Ndunda Ngwaba Odut Polci cluster Reshe

Comment
Moribund Still a large number of speakers but giving way rapidly to Hausa. Probably also Duwai. No recent information About 200 speakers. Those in direct contact with Nkoroo are losing their language Giving way to Hausa Ca. 100 fluent speakers. Giving way to Hausa Giving way to Hausa Several hundred speakers of each member of the cluster. Giving way to Hausa Giving way to Hausa Giving way to Hausa Giving way to Hausa Giving way to Hausa Giving way to Efik/Oron A single village (Tourneux p.c.) Giving way to Efik. Moribund Giving way to Hausa 42 speakers in early 1990s (Bross p. c.) Giving way to Hausa Only 2 speakers remained in 2003 About 100 speakers in 1999. <400 speakers in 1999 Two villages in 1991 Only about 20 speakers in early 1980s Giving way to Hausa Still a vigorous speech community at present but giving way to Hausa

Table 9. cont.
Country Languages Nigeria (cont.) Sambe
Country Languages Somyev Yangkam Zeem/Tule/ Danshe Cote d’Ivoire Ega
Eotile Jeri Kuo
Mali Banka
Nemadi
Sierra Leone Bom
Mmani
Krim
Mauretania Imeraguen

Endangered Languages in West Africa 157
Comment
2 very elderly speakers in 2005. The language is giving way to Ninzo. Comment
About 20 elderly speakers in 1995 (Connell 1995 and p. c.). About 2-300 older speakers in 1993. These languages are probably extinct (Caron p. c. 2005).
est. 1,000 speakers in 1999. The population is switching to Dida. 200 speakers in 1999. The population is switching to Anyi. According to Kastenholz (1998: 259) there are 1,500 speakers from an ethnic population of 20,000. The Muslims are switching to Manding, the non-Muslim to Sienare Senufo. See also Kastenholz (1992).
5,085 ethnic population in 1995, but the population is switching to Bambara. The Nemadi migrate between Mauretania and Mali. There were 200 in 1977. Their language is reported to be Hassaniya Arabic with only some technical terms of unknown source and is probably not ‘endangered’.
250 speakers out of an ethnic group of 5,000 in 1991. The population is switching to Mende. Only a few speakers out of 6,800 in the ethnic group in 1988. The population is switching to Temne. 500 speakers or fewer out of an ethnic group of 10,000 in 1990. The population is switching to Sherbro and Temne.
534 speakers in 2000. No recent information.

158 Roger Blench

Table 10. Unclassified languages in West Africa

Country Languages Côte d’Ivoire Mbre Mauretania Imeraguen
Mali Bagi Me9 Nigeria Kofa Jalaa

Comment
Niger-Congo language of unknown affiliation.
534 (2000). Near Nouakchott, the region stretching from Cape Timiris to Nouadhibou. Unclassified. The language is reported to be a variety of Hassaniyya structured on an Azer (Soninke) base.
Ca. 2,000 speakers in 2005. Language isolate.
Unknown but possibly Chadic language spoken north of Yola. Moribund. Language isolate.

Sources: either quoted directly from Ethnologue 2005 or personal observation in West Africa.

1 Imeraguen 2 Mmani 3 Bom Krim 4 Nemadi 5 Banka 6 Jeri Kuo 7 Ega 8 Eotile 9 Tchumbuli 10 Reshe 11 Bade 12 Kudu-Camo 13 Gura 14 Gyem 15 Gera 16 Ngwaba 17 Jilbe

18

Polci

19

Dulbu

20

Luri

21

Guruntum-Mbaaru

22

Dugusa

23

Fyem

24

Yangkam

25

Sambe

26

Kona

27

Mvanp

28

Ndunda

29

Somyev

30

Bakpinka

31

Odut Kiong

32

Defaka

33

Ilue

SAHARA REPUBLIC

ALGERIA

LIBYA

Endangered Languages in West Africa 159
TOGO

MAURETANIA 1

MALI [4]

NIGER

SENEGAL

THE GAMBIA

GUINEABISSAU

GUINEA

2 SIERRA LEONE
3 LIBERIA

CHAD

Niger

Lake Chad

11

5

BURKINA FASO

BENIN

10

12

16

13

14 15

21

18

19 20

17

23

22

25

24

6 N I G E R I A Benue

COTE D’IVOIRE

GHANA

9

26

27 28

29

7

8

32

3031 33

CAMEROON

Map 9. West Africa

160 Roger Blench
Notes
1. The original version of this paper was submitted prior to the Bad Godesborg meeting but has been amended in April 2005 to include five additional years' data from subsequent field trips. My thanks to all those in listed in Table 1 for unpublished field data.
2. The 15th Edition of Ethnologue online edition includes much of the new data from the period 2001–2005. However, this paper includes materials collected subsequent to the deadline for closure of submissions.
3. Regrettably an attempt to restart survey work in Nigeria in 2001 was stalled by policy problems in the relevant institutions.
4. This is not to say that French, English or Portuguese should be excluded, especially as they are clearly the first language of a large number of resident expatriates and are increasingly becoming the ‘home’ language of city families.
5. This is highly controversial linguistically, since many standard creoles are considered to be better analysed as African languages heavily relexified from the external (usually I–E) language. However, for the purposes of this analysis they can be excluded from the count of African languages assigned to specific phyla.
6. I use this term advisedly; in Nigeria at least, the would-be urban migrant usually has to contend with at least two ‘duelling’ languages, for example, Hausa or Yoruba and English. Effective communication skills usually involve rapid code-switching between these.
7. Nigeria has long had government broadcasts in numerous languages, especially from state capitals. However, these seem to have had much less impact than commercial stations, presumably because the desire of government to control content has made them much less interesting for listeners.
8. At the same time, broadcast media may well act to spread new speech-styles. Within England, ‘Estuary English’ has undoubtedly been diffused as a consequence of its dominance in the media.
9. New data can be downloaded at: http://www.rogerblench.info/Linguistics%20papers%20opening%20page.htm
References
Blench, Roger M. 1998 The status of the languages of Central Nigeria. In Brenzinger (ed.) 187 – 205. in press. Plateau languages – state of the art. Papers from the conference on the retirement of Ludwig Gerhardt, Hamburg 2004. T. Schumann (ed.) Available at: http://homepage.ntlworld.com/roger_blench/Unpublished %20papers%20 Languages.htm

Endangered Languages in West Africa 161
Brenzinger, Matthias (ed.) 1998 Endangered languages in Africa. Köln: Rüdiger Köppe.
Ceccaldi, Pierrette 1978 Essai de nomenclature des populations, langues et dialectes de Côte d’Ivoire. Paris: EHESS, CEA, CARDAN. 1979 Essai de nomenclature des populations, langues et dialectes de la république populaire du Bénin. Paris: EHESS, CEA, CARDAN.
Connell, Bruce 1995 Dying languages and the complexity of the Mambiloid group. Paper presented at the 25th Colloquium on African Languages and Linguistics, Leiden. Abstract available electronically at: http://lucy.ukc.ac.uk/dz/index.html. 1998 Moribund languages of the Nigeria-Cameroon borderland. In Brenzinger (ed.) 207–225.
Crozier, David and Roger M. Blench 1992 Index of Nigerian languages (edition 2). Dallas: SIL. [N.B. an electronic third edition is available at: http://homepage.ntlworld.com/roger_blench/Language%20data/ composite%20Index%20of%20Nigerian%20Languages%20ed. %20III.pdf).
Gordon, R. 2005 Ethnologue (15th edition), Dallas: Summer Institute of Linguistics.
Grimes, Barbara F. 2000 Ethnologue (14th edition), Dallas: Summer Institute of Linguistics.
Hochstetler, J. Lee, Durieux, J. A. and E. I. K. Durieux-Boon 2004 Sociolinguistic survey of the Dogon language area. SIL International. Available at: http://www.sil.org/silesr/2004/silesr2004-004.pdf
Kastenholz, Raimund 1992 Une première note sur le jeri.kuo (langue mandé des Jeri): Repartition géographique et matériel lexical. Cahiers Ivoiriens de Recherche Linguistique, 29: 19–60. 1998 Language shift and language death among Mande blacksmiths and leatherworkers in the diaspora. In Brenzinger (ed.) 253–266.
Kleinewillinghöfer, Uli 1996 Die nordwestlichen Adamawasprachen – eine Übersicht. Frankfurter Afrikanistische Blätter, 8: 81–104.
Shimizu, K. 1983 Die Jarawan-Bantusprachen des Bundesstaates Bauchi, Nordnigeria. In Vossen Rainer and Ulrike Claudi (eds.) Sprache Geschichte und Kultur in Afrika. Hamburg: Buske. 291–301.
Takassi, Issa 1983 Inventaire linguistique du Togo. Abidjan: ILA/ACCT.

162 Roger Blench
Temple, O. 1922 Notes on the tribes, provinces, emirates and states of the Northern Provinces of Nigeria. Lagos: CMS Bookshop.
Tosco, Mauro 1998 “People who are not the language they speak”. On language shift without language decay in East Africa. In Brenzinger (ed.) 207–225.
Williamson, Kay and Roger Blench 2000 Niger-Congo. In Nurse, Derek and Bernd Heine (eds.) African languages.. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 11–42.
Wolf, K. and G. Schoch 2001 A sociolinguistic survey of the Tchumbuli language area. Unpublished report. SIL, Cotonou, Benin.
Wurm, Stephen A. (ed.) 1996 Atlas of the world’s languages in danger of disappearing. Canberra/ Paris: Pacific Linguistics/UNESCO.

Chapter 8 Endangered Languages in Central Africa1
Bruce Connell
1. Introduction
Research done over the last 10–15 years and documented primarily in two collections edited by Brenzinger (Brenzinger 1992, 1998), as well as a number of individual papers scattered in the literature (particularly Brenzinger, Heine and Sommer 1991), appears to show that the situation regarding language endangerment in Africa may be less dire than that reported for a great many other parts of the world. This however is not to suggest that all is fine with African languages; one of the reasons for this perception may be that language shift in Africa often involves the adoption of another African language rather than that of a European colonial power, and as such may escape the eyes of many researchers whose primary interests are not in language endangerment per se.2 A second, and more important, reason may be the relatively high degree of multilingualism found in many parts of Africa, which may tend to obscure the degree of language shift in progress. However perhaps most important, as other papers in this volume attest, to a large extent this perception may be no more than a reflection of our lack of knowledge of the linguistic situation in a great many parts of Africa; a lack of available information. In this chapter, I examine the question of language endangerment in Central Africa. The findings and conclusions presented here are based primarily on my own fieldwork, discussions with and contributions from colleagues and the small number of relevant published sources, in particular the online edition of the Ethnologue (Grimes 2000). Colleagues who have provided information through personal communications include Stephen Anderson, Keith Beavon, Roger Blench, Raymond Boyd, Ed Brye, Myles Leitch and Jim Roberts.
Several countries in the Central African region are not reported in the Ethnologue as having threatened languages, however, at the same time for these countries a great many languages are listed for which not even a population estimate is available. Many of these are revealed in the discussion below to be in what may be considered an endangered state. Table 1 presents the countries which, for the purposes of this chapter, are considered

164 Bruce Connell
as comprising Central Africa, together with an estimate of the total population of the country, the number of languages spoken, the number believed to be endangered, and those for which we have no relevant information. I identify and include languages with fewer than 1,000 speakers as being endangered, though it should be pointed out that as a cut-off point this figure is arbitrary. The number of known extinct languages is included in Table 1, on the assumption that these represent relatively recent language deaths and may therefore help give some indication as to the general situation in each country. I tend to a pessimistic view with respect to those languages for which there is no data: the absence of information in these cases may well be indicative of the low status or prestige and small number of speakers that lead to language endangerment. While this is obviously not always the case, evidence confirming this view, at least in the case of certain languages in Gabon and Congo, is given below. It is also possible that some of those languages for which no information is available may simply be alternative names for languages for which data does exist, though it should be noted that the Ethnologue does include alternative names where these are known. Information in Table 1 is drawn largely from Grimes (2000).
Before proceeding with the discussion of the current situation of language endangerment in Central Africa, it may be useful to have some background on the geography and history of the region, since these factors are relevant to understanding the present situation and the vitality of individual languages.
1.1. Geographical perspective
The area under consideration covers a large portion of the African continent, and the topographical and climatic variations found within this zone are correspondingly diverse. The northern-most part of the region (i. e. much of Chad and the extreme north of Cameroon) is desert; this gives way to grasslands in Central African Republic (CAR), and then forest as one approaches the equatorial zone. The southern part of Democratic Republic of Congo (DRC) is mostly savanna. One also finds considerable variation in altitude in Central Africa, from mountainous regions and dissected plateaus, to lowland plains. Rivers have typically facilitated movement and defined trade routes in much of Central Africa, and populations more distant from the trade routes have tended to be more isolated. Although there is no space to examine the issue in depth here, it is safe to assume that geography has had a determining influence on the distribu-

Endangered Languages in Central Africa 165

tion of languages in the region, on their exposure to other languages, and consequently on their vitality. Evidence of this is presented below.

Table 1. Central African countries and basic language/population data. Population estimates from Grimes (2000)

Country Cameroon
CAR Chad
Congo DRC Equatorial Guinea Gabon

Population 14,305,000
3,485,000 7,270,000
2,785,000 49,139,000 431,000 1,167,000

Languages 286
69 132
61 219 13 41

Endangered languages
7 with < 2,000 speakers; 31 with < 1,000 speakers (6 nearly extinct); 6 extinct 6 with < 2,000 speakers; 4 with < 1,000. 15 with < 2,000 speakers; 16 with < 1,000 speakers (5 nearly extinct); 2 extinct None listed with < 2,000 speakers 3 with < 2,000 speakers; 4 with < 1,000 speakers; 1 extinct 1 with < 1,000 speakers
2 with < 1,000 speakers

Data 54
0 15
30 65 2 11

1.2. Historical perspective
It is well established that the Bantu languages have spread from a postulated homeland in the Nigeria-Cameroon borderland to the point where they now cover virtually all of sub-Equatorial Africa. There is also a consensus that this diffusion began at least 3,000 years ago, with some scholars arguing there is evidence to suggest the dispersal is more likely to have begun nearer to 4,000 years ago (e. g. Clist 1995). Much of the geographical area considered in this paper is now populated almost exclusively by Bantu languages (i. e. with the exclusion of Northern Cameroon, Chad, parts of CAR and northeastern DRC). Obviously then, the languages of the preBantu inhabitants have been absorbed or replaced; a number of languages must have succumbed to the expansion of Bantu. In southern Africa, the Khoisan languages are generally considered to be remnants of languages that pre-existed the Bantu expansion. For Central Africa, most scholars of the region consider that the various hunter-gatherer (Pygmy) groups present constitute remnant populations, however there appear to be no

166 Bruce Connell
real remnant languages, or indeed much evidence at all of those that must surely have existed. The Pygmies all speak the language of their immediate neighbours, whether Bantu, Central Sudanic or Ubangian. It is a matter of some controversy, though, whether distinct “Pygmy languages” ever existed, given this lack of evidence (see Blench 1999). It is beyond the limits of this paper to delve into this issue, so I simply note that the region in question would have been Bantu-ized early, possibly 2,000–4,000 years ago assuming a 4,000 year expansion, and that this time depth is quite probably sufficient for virtually all traces of pre-existing languages to have been obliterated, through obsolescence or absorption. Indeed it must be sufficient given that, as stated, there are no remnant languages in the region, Pygmy or otherwise, though there is no suggestion that the region was uninhabited prior to the Bantu expansion. This may be compared with southern Africa, where there are remnant languages, but which was only first touched by the Bantu expansion several hundred to a thousand years ago.
The Bantu expansion in a sense continues to have an effect on the linguistic make-up of Central Africa, particularly in the south-eastern region of this geographical zone, as Swahili spreads and replaces smaller languages. The effect Swahili has had on smaller languages in East Africa, in particular Tanzania, is already well documented (Batibo 1992; see also Wardhaugh 1987). Its influence continues to grow and spread.3 A similar phenomenon is now in evidence in the western region of Central Africa, with the growth of Lingala.
Finally, a brief look at recent history, and the current situation. Many of the countries in the central African region have experienced serious conflict and warfare within the last two decades: Congo and the Democratic Republic of Congo are most notable among these, and the region has also been influenced by conflict in adjoining countries such as Angola, Burundi, Rwanda, and Sudan. It is not yet possible to assess the effect these conflicts have had on local languages. But it is apparent that a great many people – entire ethnic groups – have been driven from their homelands and dispersed, with the potential loss of group cohesiveness and consequent weakening of the linguistic base.
2. Linguistic structure of Central Africa
2.1. Distribution of languages by phyla
Four major language phyla are found in Africa, Niger-Congo, Afroasiatic, Nilo-Saharan, and Khoisan. Languages from three of the four are found in Central Africa, though only two, Niger-Congo and Nilo-Saharan, are

Endangered Languages in Central Africa 167

widespread in the region, and only Niger-Congo is found in all countries. Afroasiatic languages are found in Chad and the northern part of Cameroon, while Khoisan doesn’t extend far enough north to be included in the region under study though, as already noted, many scholars assume that the Khoisan languages were at one time more widespread. Table 2 shows the number of languages per phyla in each of the countries under consideration.

Table 2. Languages in Central Africa by phyla and by country

Country
Cameroon CAR Chad Congo DRC Eq. Guinea Gabon Total

NigerCongo
217 51 24 58
194 8 39
591

Afroasiatic
60 0 53 0 0 0 0
113

NiloSaharan
6 14 48
0 24
0 0 92

Unclassified
1 1 2 0 0 1 0 5

Total
284 66 127 58
218 9 39
801

Proportionally, Niger-Congo comprises two thirds of the total language population of Central Africa; most of these belong to two branches within Niger-Congo, Adamawa-Ubangi and Benue-Congo, and of these almost half are Narrow Bantu languages. Indeed all, or virtually all, the languages of Equatorial Guinea, Gabon, Congo, and Democratic Republic of Congo, are Narrow Bantu.

2.2. Demographic breakdown
It is also of interest to view the number of languages per country against the population of the country; that is, a breakdown in terms of average number of speakers per language, and the number of languages within a given range of speakers. Table 3 shows this information. In considering the information in this table, it should be borne in mind that many languages are spoken on both sides of a national frontier, or even in three and sometimes four countries. It should be reiterated that although I have arbitrarily set fewer than 1,000 speakers as indicative of a language being

168 Bruce Connell

endangered, the number of speakers is by no means a sure way of evaluating the vitality of language – at least one case discussed below provides evidence of this.

Table 3. Average number of speakers per language and number of languages by size class for Central African languages

Country
Cameroon CAR Chad Congo DRC Eq. Guinea Gabon

Average
51,000 50,500 55,900 45,700 224,400 33,150 28,460

1,000 2,000 10,000 50,000

22

7 56

66

3

3 15

19

7 10 18

39

0

0 10

14

2

3 26

49

0

1

4

2

2

0 14

13

50,000+
133 26 48 19 84 1 6

Unknown
46 0 5 15 54 1 4

3. Language endangerment in Central Africa
It has often been assumed that the languages of much of Central Africa are relatively stable, in part due to their relative isolation one from another. This view is reflected in the information gleaned from the Ethnologue and examined above, which showed for several countries (Equatorial Guinea, Gabon, Congo, and DRC) little or no indication of threatened languages, and indeed few if any languages with less than 2,000 speakers. Recently gathered information shows there is greater need for concern than previously thought. The following subsections attempt to give an impression of language endangerment in selected Central African countries. I emphasize the impressionistic nature of these reports.
3.1. Congo
Congo is one Central African country for which no endangered languages have been reported. Bonjo is one of the Congolese languages for which no population figures are given in the Ethnologue. It is presented here as being representative of what constitutes an endangered language in Congo. Bonjo is a Bantu language (C10) spoken in and around the regional capital of Impfondo (Likouala Region), on the Ubangi River. Recent reports

Endangered Languages in Central Africa 169
from the field (Myles Leitch, personal communication) suggest Bonjo has 2,000-3,000 speakers and that it is subject to severe competition from Lingala, a regional lingua franca and trade language. Lingala is spoken by an estimated 300,000 people in Congo, but its primary population base is in DRC; its total population, including second language speakers, numbers several million. It has had a preferred position in the region going back to early colonial times, if not farther, when its use was promoted by the Belgians in preference to other smaller local languages (or French). Bonjo is still spoken by the young generation of adults, though it is increasingly used for ceremonial and symbolic purposes only. Lingala is learned and used as primary language by children. Indeed, Lingala appears to be gaining the upper hand on a number of local languages; a similar shift, for example, is underway among Teke speakers near Brazzaville. (Teke is a relatively large language, with roughly half a million speakers in Congo; the dialect in question has approximately 5,000 speakers.) On the other hand, an example of a small language in Congo that is relatively stable is Babole (Bantu C20; population 3,000–4,000). Unlike Bonjo, Babole is holding its own against Lingala, despite the fact that all Babole also speak Lingala. Lingala, though, is not typically used in the Babole region among Babole, who maintain a high degree of pride in their own language. The differentiating factor between Babole and Bonjo appears to be location with respect to a strong center of trade language dominance; historically, and today, the major trade route in Congo followed the Congo and Ubangi Rivers. This is the region where Lingala and its influence are strongest.
Another Congolese language for which some information is available is Mbosi (Bantu C30). Mbosi is spoken by approximately 200,000 people – over 10% of the population of Congo – and as such we would expect it to be not under threat at the present time. Reports are, however, somewhat to the contrary, as Mbosi appears to be giving way on two fronts. Mbosi speakers also know Lingala, Teke and French; now, multilingualism in itself does not constitute a threat (one might argue it is the solution to language endangerment), but in this case the youngest generation in the urban centers now tends not to use or learn Mbosi, though those in the villages still do. Lingala is again the local lingua franca and trade language, and French is of course used in government offices, schools, and churches (Ruth Chatfield, personal communication). While the situation in Congo is said not to be as worrisome as elsewhere in Central Africa, this assessment seems in need of revision: Mbosi is likely to be either typical of languages in Congo or on the ‘healthy’ end of the spectrum; evidence that it is in the early stages of decline does not bode well for the Congolese situation in general.

170 Bruce Connell
3.2. Gabon
The situation in Gabon appears to be worthy of greater cause for concern than that in neighbouring countries. The languages listed for Gabon for which no population figures were available in the Ethnologue, or which were said to have approximately 1,000 speakers, are: Bwisi (also spoken in Congo), Kande, Mahongwe, Sake, Sighu, and Vumbu. Recent reports (Leitch personal communication) reveal that of these all but Bwisi appear to be seriously threatened. All are underdocumented. Current population estimates for these are as follows:
Kande (B30): less than 1,000 speakers Mahongwe (B20): less than 1,000 speakers Sake (B20): very small group Sighu (B20): several hundreds only Vumbu (B20): several hundreds only
Another Gabonese language, Benga (A30), is identified by linguists in Gabon as the most advanced case of language contraction. While the Ethnologue lists this language as having 3,000 speakers, most of whom are in Equatorial Guinea, in Gabon there are said to be only small groups of older speakers remaining. Since the Benga areas in the two countries are contiguous, pending information to the contrary it is prudent to assume the language may not be faring much better in Equatorial Guinea.
The three main factors contributing to language endangerment in Gabon are identified as:
(i) Urbanization: there has been sizeable migration away from tribal homelands to the capital Libreville, resulting in the break-up of linguistic communities, increased use of lingua francas, and lower prestige of local languages.
(ii) The impact of French colonization: the strong and sustained influence of French culture, language and politics has contributed to a massive devaluing of local languages.
(iii) The oil-based economy: this underlies the other two factors, with all three working together to undermine respect for and use of local languages.
The encouraging news from Gabon is that local linguists, together with SIL workers, are beginning to take interest in the situation of indigenous Gabonese languages.

Endangered Languages in Central Africa 171
3.3. Cameroon
After Nigeria, Cameroon is the most linguistically heterogeneous country in Africa – in fact, if considered in terms of languages per capita, Cameroon is more complex than Nigeria. The Ethnologue information presents Cameroon as the Central Africa country with the most worrisome situation: 31 languages with fewer than 1,000 speakers, six of which are said to be nearly extinct, and another 54 for which there is no information. Most of those that we know to be endangered are situated in the borderland with Nigeria; most of those for which we have no data are also in the borderland. Indeed in this area we see entire sub-groups of languages disappearing. Sketchy information suggests this is the fate of the Furu subgroup, one of which is listed as having 600 speakers, another with 400, and a further three which are said to be nearly extinct and known to only a very small number of old people. The Furu languages have reportedly given way to Jukun and Cameroon Pidgin. However, these languages are so remote and so little is known of them that, while they are believed to be Bantoid, it is not certain what their genetic affiliations are and whether they actually do constitute a separate genetic grouping in themselves. Another language subgroup in the area, Western Beboid, may also be on the brink. Most of the languages believed to constitute this subgroup are among those for which the Ethnologue offers no population estimate. A recent survey by SIL members (Ed Brye, personal communication) indicates these languages to be spoken in a string of villages, each with its own language and a population of roughly 500 people. Until recently, perhaps, their isolation may have kept these languages relatively stable; however the isolation is now breaking down. The need for a lingua franca is obvious, and Cameroon Pidgin is now widely used in the area.
The situation of another subgroup of languages, still in the same general region, but somewhat less remote, is better known (Connell 1998). The languages Cambap, Njerep, Kasabe and Yeni formed a subgroup of Mambiloid languages, apparently a cluster within the large Mambila language complex. Today Cambap is the only one of these four that is still spoken on even a more or less daily basis (Connell 2002). It has approximately 30 speakers, while Njerep has four ‘rememberers’ (Connell and Zeitlyn 2000). Kasabe and Yeni are extinct, though for both of these there are people who recall songs in the language, and Kasabe was documented to some extent before its last speaker died (Connell, in prep). Two other languages in the immediate vicinity also bear mention: Njanga, a conservative dialect of Kwanja is now known by fewer than 20 peo-

172 Bruce Connell
ple, while Bung is remembered best by one non-native speaker. A third, also on the brink, is Somyev the language of a former blacksmith caste, which has fewer than five speakers in Cameroon and approximately 15 in Nigeria.
The circumstances surrounding the demise of these languages, while perhaps not unique in the African context, do not fit commonly anticipated patterns. The speakers of these languages are all multilingual, typically having a repertoire of three or four languages though many knowing upwards of six. Detailed knowledge of the factors that precipitated the downfall of these languages is now lost to time, but it seems probable that invasion from the north – either the Chamba or later the Fulbe, or perhaps both in their turn – resulted in a decimation of the local populations. This led to a greater degree of intermarriage with neighbouring peoples than previously and a concomitant shift to the language of the neighbours. This has resulted in two characteristics which set this situation apart. First, Fulfulde, the language of the incoming Fulbe, has become the lingua franca in the area, but not the language of choice for any of the indigenous groups. Use of Fulfulde is, by and large, restricted to market situations and use with strangers and others with whom no common other language can be found. The other notable characteristic is that former speakers of these languages, having shifted to a neighbouring language rather than that of a colonial power or even a regional lingua franca, have adopted a language and culture not too different from their own. The sense of estrangement often found to accompany the disappearance of a language and its culture, seemingly has not played an overbearing role in this situation. Nevertheless, there is clearly a strong sense of loss, which is tempered to some extent by pragmatism; and while there is little interest in language revival (“Why do we need it?” “Who would we speak it with?”), among the Camba there is satisfaction in seeing their language documented for posterity. However, a more unfortunate side of the situation also exists. Use of both Fulfulde and French is gradually on the increase, especially among school-aged children, with a situation similar to, but by no means as advanced, as that reported by Schaefer and Egbokhare (1999) regarding use of English among the Emai in Southern Nigeria. And, lastly, the languages to which people have switched, particularly Kwanja, are small and they themselves may be under serious threat within two or three generations.

Endangered Languages in Central Africa 173
4. Summary and conclusions
There has been, and still is, an absence of detailed information regarding language endangerment in Central Africa. For some parts of this geographical zone, this has led to an assumption of relative linguistic vitality. Recent indications, though, are that even in these areas, a number of languages are severely endangered, and that this number is increasing. In other areas – Chad, Cameroon apart from the Nigeria borderland, and DRC, the situation may indeed be relatively stable, though we note again that little if any relevant survey work has been done in these areas. In addition, civil war in both Congo and DRC may well prove to have a devastating effect on a number of languages in these countries, just as it appears to be doing elsewhere in Africa, for example in Sudan.
At present, the number of languages in Central Africa known or believed to be endangered constitutes only a small proportion of the total number of languages in the region, though this may be no more than a reflection of our ignorance of the situation. It must also be noted that, with the possible exception of Gabon, little action if any appears to be taken by governmental or local organizations to preserve, protect, and promote indigenous languages. Considerable effort is needed simply to provide basic information as to numbers of speakers, language use in the home and other settings, and intergenerational transmission, to assess the real extent language endangerment in Central Africa.
Appendix: Endangered languages in Central Africa
The following Table 4 includes languages in Central Africa known to be seriously endangered, or those spoken by fewer than 1,000 people. The list is not comprehensive, as there remains considerable work to be done to assess the viability of languages in many parts of Central Africa. Languages known to be extinct are not included. Population figures refer to estimated numbers of speakers rather than size of ethnic group. Languages for which no population assessment is available from any source are not included, unless the endangered status of the language is definitely known. It is possible, indeed likely, that many of these are also endangered.

174 Bruce Connell

Table 4. Seriously endangered languages in Central Africa

Country Language (Affiliationon)

Popula- Comment tion

Cameroon

1 Akum

600

(Benue-Congo)

2 Bakole (Bantu A 20)

300

3 Baldamu

3

(Chadic, Mandara A5)

4 Bati (Bantu)

800

5 Beezen

400

(Benue-Congo)

6 Bikya

1

(Benue-Congo)

7 Bishuo (Benue-Congo) 1

8 Bubia (Bantu A 20)

600

9 Bung (Bantoid?)

3

10 Busuu

8

(Benue-Congo)

11 Cambap

30

(Mambiloid)

12 Dimbong (Bantu A 50)

13 Eman (Tivoid)

800

14 Fungom (Grassfields Bantu)

1,000

15 Hijuk

400

(Bantu A 50)

16 Isubu (Bantu A 20)

800

17 Iyive (Tivoid)

< 1,000

18 Kendem (Bantoid)

1,000

19 Langa (Mambiloid)

< 500

20 Mono (Adamawa Mbum) 1,000

21 Ndai (Adamawa, Mbum) few

22 Ngong (Jarawan Bantu) 2

23 Njerep

4

(Mambiloid)

(Furu cluster) Cameroon Pidgin also used.
No longer used on a daily basis.
(Furu cluster) Cameroon Pidgin also used? (Furu cluster) Now speak Jukun. 1 speaker reported in 1986. (Furu cluster) Now speak Jukun. Also speak Duala. No native speakers; now use Kwanja. (Furu cluster) Now speak Jukun; used only for reunions. Youngest speaker aged 45–50; now speak Kwanja.
Pidgin, Ipulo also used.
Also use Yangben, Bassa, French, Yambasa. Also use Mokpe, Duala.
Kenyang, Pidgin also used. Still used in the home; Fulfulde, other languages also spoken.
Possibly extinct. Youngest speaker aged about 60; now speak Mambila.

Endangered Languages in Central Africa 175

Table 4. cont.

Country Language (Affiliationon)

Popula- Comment tion

Cameroon (cont.) 24 Nubaca
(Bantu A60)
25 Somyev (Mambiloid)
26 Tuotomb (Bantu A40) 27 Yasa
(Bantu A30) 28 Zumaya (Chadic, Masa) Central African Republic 29 Birri
(Central Sudanic) 30 Bodo (Bantu D30) 31 Ganzi (Ubangi, Ngbaka) 32 Geme (Ubangi, Zande) 33 Ngombe
(Ubangi, Ngbaka) 34 Ukhwejo
(Bantu A80) Chad 35 Berakou (Nilo-Saharan,
Bagirmi) 36 Boor
(E. Chadic A) 37 Buso (E. Chadic A) 38 Fongoro (Nilo-Saharan,
Bagirmi) 39 Goundo
(Adamawa-Kim)
40 Jonkor Bourmataguil (E. Chadic B)
41 Kendeje (Nilo-Saharan, Mabang)

800
15 – 20 < 1,000 1,500 total
200 15 550 1,400 < 2,000
2 < 100 40 – 50
30
< 1,500 < 2,000

Ewondo, Basaa, or French are used as second languages, French dominates among the younger generation. Former blacksmith language; mostly in Nigeria. Speakers bilingual in Tunen, Pidgin. Spoken in Cameroon, EquatorialGuinea and Gabon. Only a few speakers left (1987).
Bilingual in Zande; assimilated by the Zande through marriage. Scattered throughout CAR. Maybe intelligible with Baka. Sango used as second language. Apparently not used by younger people Population threatened by sleeping sickness increase.
Has given way to Shuwa Arabic and Kotoko; possibly extinct. Dialect of Miltu spoken in Dumraw village. Shifting to Bagirmi. Possibly now extinct. Status unknown; possibly extinct.
Spoken only by older people in three villages; younger people shifting to Nancere, Kabalay. Replaced by Chadic Arabic; may still known by children in one village. Only in the home; Maba and Masalit used outside.

176 Bruce Connell

Table 4. cont.

Country Language (Affiliationon)

Popula- Comment tion

Chad (cont.)
42 Koke (Adamawa, Mbum)
43 Kujarge (unclassified) 44 Laal (Adamawa?) 45 Massalat
(Nilo-Saharan, Maban) 46 Mbara (Chadic,
Biu-Mandara, B) 47 Miltu (E. Chadic A) 48 Noy
(Adamawa, Mbum) 49 Toram
(E. Chadic B)
Congo

600
< 1,000 < 500 10

Majority bilingual in Shuwa Arabic or Fania.
Status unknown, Possibly extinct.

< 1,000

< 300 36
< 4,000

Speakers shifting to Bagirmi.
Speakers shifting to Sar; nearly extinct.
Younger generation speaks Chadic Arabic.

50 Bonjo (Bantu C10)

< 3,000 Speakers shifting to Lingala.

Equatorial Guinea

51 Gyele (Bantu A80)

30 total Also spoken in Cameroon.

Democratic Republic of Congo

52 Beeke (Bantu D20) 53 Boguru
(Bantu D30) 54 Kari (Bantu D30) 55 Ngbinda (Bantu D30)

< 1,000 < 500 total < 1,000 few

Giving way to Ndaka. Spoken mailnly in Sudan.
Scattered groups. possibly extinct.

Gabon 56 Benga (Bantu A30) 57 Kande (Bantu B30) 58 Mahongwe (Bantu B20) 59 Sake (Bantu B20) 60 Sighu (Bantu B20)

< 1,000 < 1,000 < 1,000 < 1,000

Spoken by small groups of old people. Threatened, undocumented. Threatened, undocumented. Threatened, undocumented. Threatened, undocumented.

61 Vumbu (Bantu B40)

< 1,000 Threatened, undocumented.

Endangered Languages in Central Africa 177

NIGER

Lake Chad
29

38 CHAD

NIGERIA

24

Benue

19 18

4561 12 15 9 11 16
2 714
3

22 17 8 20 10
CAMEROON
23 2113 Yaoundé

Ndjamena

42 34

39

31 37

33

30 40 41

32 36 35
27

CENTRAL AFRICAN REPUBLIC

Bangui 28

51 50

SUDAN
25 26 Ubangi

EQUATORIAL

GUINEA

44

47 45

46

43

Libreville
GABON 48
49

Congo
D E M . R E P. C O N G O

CONGO

Map 10. Central Africa

Notes
1. Research contributing in part to this to this paper is funded by ESRC grant R000237450 “Language Death in the Nigeria-Cameroon Borderland” and conducted under the auspices of the Ministry of Technical and Scientific Research, Cameroon.
2. Indeed, this is precisely the case with certain languages discussed later in the paper. Linguists and missionary linguists alike failed to note either the existence or at least the precarious state of Bung, Cambap, Kasabe, Njerep, and Somyev, none of which are recorded in the Atlas Linguistique du Cameroun.
3. Swahili is not the only language in Tanzania which has come to replace other local languages. Batibo (1992) also discusses, in particular, Maasai and Sukuma.

178 Bruce Connell
References
Batibo, Herman 1992 The fate of ethnic languages in Tanzania. In Brenzinger (ed.) 1992: 85 – 98.
Biesbrouck, Karen; Stefan Elders and Gerda Rossel (eds.) 1999 Challenging elusiveness: Central African hunter-gatherers in a multidisciplinary perspective, Leiden: Centre for Non-Western Studies.
Blench, Roger M. 1999 Are the pygmies an ethnological fiction? In Biesbrouck, Elders and Rossel (eds.) 1999: 41–60.
Brenzinger, Matthias (ed.) 1992 Language death: Factual and theoretical explorations with special reference to East Africa. Berlin: Mouton de Gruyter. 1998 Endangered languages in Africa. Köln: Rüdiger Köppe.
Brenzinger, Matthias; Heine, Bernd and Gabriela Sommer 1991 Language death in Africa. Diogenes 153, 19–44.
Clist, Bernard 1995 Gabon: 100000 ans d’Histoire. Libreville: Sepia.
Connell, Bruce 1998 Moribund languages of the Nigeria-Cameroon borderland. In Brenzinger (ed.) 207–225. 2002 Phonetic/phonological variation and language contraction. International journal of sociology of language 157: 167–185. in prep. A Kasabe voice (working title).
Connell, Bruce and David Zeitlyn 2000 Njerep: A postcard from the edge. Studies in African linguistics. 95– 125.
Grimes, Barbara F. (ed.) 2000 Ethnologue (14th Edition). Dallas: SIL International. CD-ROM edition.
Schaefer, Ronald P. and Francis O. Egbokhare 1999 English and the pace of endangerment in Nigeria. World Englishes 18: 381–391.
Wardhaugh, Ronald 1987 Languages in competition. Dominance, diversity, and decline. Oxford: Basil Blackwell.

Chapter 9 Language Endangerment in Southern and Eastern Africa
Matthias Brenzinger
1. Introduction
Southern and Eastern Africa are commonly referred to as the cradle of humankind. The autochthonous peoples in this part of the world most probably spoke Khoisan languages. The following sections will describe how Khoisan languages have vanished in each of these regions.
First, the decline of still spoken Khoisan languages will be the focus of the sketch on the Southern African region.
Secondly, we will turn to Eastern Africa where, unlike in Southern Africa, Bantu-speaking immigrants arrived only recently. The distribution of languages in Eastern Africa has been constantly reshaped by immigration over the past 5,000 years. Large-scale population movements, as well as recent migrations will be the main perspective in the description of language endangerment in Eastern Africa.1
2. Southern Africa and the decline of the Khoisan languages
Considerable confusion still prevails through an inconsistent use of the terms Khoisan, Khoe (Khoi) and San. This terminological obstruction apparently requires some clarification.
A short historical sketch of the colonial period will outline the oppressive rule as the main cause for the decline of Khoisan languages in the Cape.
While many Khoisan languages have already disappeared, the ones that still exist are either on the verge of extinction or at least endangered, even the “healthiest” one, which is Khoekhoegowab.
An overview of the present situation of language endangerment among the Khoisan languages will precede a map and the endangered language list, presented in the final section.

180 Matthias Brenzinger
2.1. The terms Khoisan, Khoe, Khoekhoe and San
The physical anthropologist Leonhard Schultze Jena (1928) coined a new term Khoisan, by compounding “Khoe” (Khoi), the general term for “person” in the languages of the Central Khoisan branch and “Saan”, “huntergatherers, foragers” in Khoekhoegowab2. Isaak Schapera introduced Khoisan as a classificatory term in social anthropology, by which he included the herding Khoekhoe, formerly known as “Hottentots” and the foraging San, often referred to as “Bushmen” (Schapera 1930). From the 1950s onwards, Joseph Greenberg tried to establish Khoisan as an exclusively linguistic term: Khoisan is one of the four phyla in his classification of the “Languages of Africa” (Greenberg 1966). Already Schapera stated that language is the most reliable single criterion for dealing with the “Khoisan people” (Schapera 1930). Referring to this assumption, Phillip Tobias in 1956 advocated the use of “the language criterion” as suggested by Schapera: “We could do no better than follow this authority on the Khoisan peoples” (Tobias 1956: 175). Until today, however, even linguists do not consistently follow this well-thought suggestion.
Geneticists, social anthropologists, and linguists use quite different definitions of the term Khoisan, but major problems arise in those usages of the term, in which features associated with these different research perspectives are fused.
Widespread perplexity prevails with the terms Khoe and San because many scholars mingle aspects of physical appearance and mode of subsistence together with linguistic affiliation. The term San has developed into the current self-reference among the activists of the former hunter-gatherers of Southern Africa, who increasingly reject the previously used label “Bushman”. Not all the people and communities, who refer to themselves as San, share the stereotypical biological features set up for them by physical anthropologists, such as short size and fair skin color. People may call themselves simply San because they speak a Khoisan language or claim a hunter-gatherer past. In the Republic of South Africa, by far most San speak no Khoisan language, but Afrikaans instead. Without speaking a Khoisan language, accounts of a foragers past and features of physical appearance are the criteria by which these people claim San identity.
In the course of the adjustment to a politically correct naming of the people, the term San entered discussions as a reference for languages: “San languages” replaced the former term “Bushmen languages”. Archeologists such as Garth Sampson (1988: 15 “San languages”), anthropolo-

Language Endangerment in Southern and Eastern Africa 181
gists such as Edwin Wilmsen (1989: 1, “San-speaking people, San-speakers”) and Jiro Tanaka (1980: 9, “San language family”), and unfortunately, even linguists such as Anthony Traill (1996: 161, “the Khoe and San languages”) widely employed these inappropriate notions.
”San languages”  or “Bushmen languages” in the old terminology – as a group of languages, which is exclusively spoken by hunter-gatherers or people of a certain physical type, do not exist. The phrasing “Khoe and San languages”3 is particularly misleading, but also “Khoekhoe and San languages” fuels the extensive misconception, which links way of live with language. There is no grouping of Khoekhoe languages of pastoral societies as opposed to other so-called “San languages” of foragers, as for example, claimed by Diedrich Westermann (1949: 14).4 Khoekhoegowab, the language of the pastoral Nama and Damara, is closely related to languages of former hunter-gatherers, such as Khwe and Naro. In linguistic terms, however, the latter languages of hunter-gatherers are only very distantly related to other languages spoken by hunter-gatherer communities, such as !Xu˜ ) and !Xóo˜ ). Finally, Khoekhoegowab is not the language of herders only, but also of the formerly hunting and gathering Hai ’om and Au ei.
In linguistic terms, Khoe languages refer to the entire Central Khoisan branch. To contrast Khoe languages (= Central Khoisan) and the notion “San languages” makes no sense, as most of the Khoe languages are spoken by former foraging peoples. Khoekhoegowab is the only surviving Khoekhoe language and, together with the non-Khoekhoe languages, forms Khoe, i. e. the Central Khoisan branch. Thus, languages spoken by various hunter-gatherer communities are fundamentally diverse while the language of Khoekhoegowab-speaking herders is closely related to some of the languages spoken by hunter-gatherers.
In our discussion, Khoisan, Khoekhoe and Khoe (= Central Khoisan) are terms used strictly in the linguistic classification of languages and they bear no cultural or racial implications for speakers. San, with its cultural and physical connotations, has no meaningful role to play in discussions on linguistic classifications. Linguists widely agree on which languages are Khoisan languages and which are not. This shared usage is rather surprising, as there is no substantiation of any genetic link between the major branches of Khoisan languages, as claimed by Joseph Greenberg (1966: 66–84), i. e. Northern, Central and Southern South African Khoisan, as well as the Tanzanian isolates Hadza and Sandawe. The established, pragmatic use of the term Khoisan includes all “click languages”, with the exception of Bantu languages (such as Xhosa, Zulu) and the Cushitic lan-

182 Matthias Brenzinger
guage Dahalo, as these latter languages obviously borrowed their clicks from Khoisan languages.
The still limited knowledge on the Khoisan languages results in an inflated number of language names. Further studies will probably demonstrate that quite a number of names used to refer to distinct Khoisan languages, as listed in Table 1, are in fact names for different communities, some of which speak the same language. Gui and Gana speak one and the same language, and also Xaise and !Goro claim to be one speech community with a common language, as do Danisi and Tshara (Hasselbring 2000).
Dialects of one language may have entered classifications as names for distinct languages, such as for example, Buga. Khwe (Kxoe) is a language with very little dialectal variation, and the two regional speech varieties are Xom-Buma vs. Xo-Buga. Buga-Khwe in Botswana and Xo-Khwe in Namibia speak the same Eastern variety of the Khwe language.
Finally, languages may disappear from the list, because they have never existed, such as for example Ganda. Rainer Vossen collected language data from Kwere Seriri, a famous Khwe elder who lived as the headman in Khwai till his death in 1995. Vossen (1997: 77) labeled the language Ganda, even though Kwere Seriri himself insisted to speak Xo-Buga variety.5 Khwe call the Bantu-speaking Nyemba in Angola Ganda. Khwe usually call community members from Angola either Buma-Khwe or Mbunda-Khwe, but they may also refer to them as Nyemba-Khwe or |Ganda-Khwe. Seriri’s wife Tsoxee Leitho and his grandson Keitiretse Kwere both emphasize, however, that Seriri and his ancestors originated from the Okavango Delta area of Botswana. According to them and other residents of Khwai, Seriri spoke no distinct language, but the Xo-Buga variety of Khwe from Khwai.
With the obstacles discussed in identifying the status of still spoken Khoisan varieties, we may assume a doubtful scientific value for most of the more than 100 language names, which exist for extinct Khoisan languages, especially those names noted in the early days of colonial presence in the Cape region. Unfortunately, the history of Khoisan language speech communities prior to the arrival of the Dutch in the 1650s seems to be out of reach for today’s scholarly analysis.
The figures commonly provided for the number of Khoisan languages range from 30 to 35 (e. g. Güldemann and Vossen 2000). In excluding extinct and non-existing languages, however, we come up with only 20 language names. Among those, several are mutually intelligible and share a dialectal relationship. This means, that the total number of Khoisan languages is below 20.

Language Endangerment in Southern and Eastern Africa 183
2.2. Xam, a case of a physical and cultural genocide
In April 2000, a new coat of arms, was launched in the post-apartheid South Africa, and the motto of the state emblem is: !Ke e: xarra ke. This sentence from Xam, a Southern Khoisan language, is translated as “diverse people unite”. There are no speakers of Xam left today.6 The phrase was coined on the basis of language documents, collected more than 90 years ago, and nobody knows if native speakers of Xam ever used these words to express such a notion.7 Nevertheless, the documents of the Xam language form an important testimony of the autochthonous peoples of Southern Africa. The first words and some phrases of Xam where recorded by Hinrich Lichtenstein during his travels between 1803 and 1806. In 1870, Wilhelm Bleek and Lucy Lloyd (1911) began to document the Xam language, and the collection of extensive texts reveals that Xam at that time was still a vital language. Bleek and Lloyd worked in the Cape Town prison with Xam, who served sentences of imprisonment mainly for stock theft. In 1910-11, Dorothea Bleek visited remnant groups of Xam and found some bilingual in Xam and Afrikaans, while most others were already monolingual in Afrikaans. In the following years, the Xam identity and their language disappeared altogether (Traill 1996: 168).
What had happened to these people, their culture and language? Anthony Traill (1996) provides a description of the complex socio-historical context, which led to the decline of the Xam and their language. The strategies used by the intruding colonial powers to destroy the indigenous hunter-gatherer societies in the Cape area, as well as those employed by the San in their resistance, have been analyzed by Nigel Penn (1996).
The ‘trekboers’ were the first colonialist to push into the interior of South Africa, entering into a ruthless competition for natural resources. These frontier farmers appropriated watering places for their cattle and killed large numbers of game with their guns. The hunter-gatherer communities responded to this invasion into their land and to the massive destruction of their basis of subsistence with guerrilla tactics. San attacked kraals at night, frequently killed the guards and stole the cattle or sheep. When possible, they drove the livestock into hidden places to consume the meat, otherwise they simply killed the animals to destroy the farmers’ property.
In the 1750s, the colonists decided to respond to the resistance with commandos. First, commandos were introduced to subjugate the pastoral Khoekhoe of the Western Cape. The Dutch intruders took their land and cattle and used the Khoekhoe as forced laborers (Penn 1996: 83). In the early missions against San, the commandos, that consisted now of Boers,

184 Matthias Brenzinger
Bastards, Xhosa and Korana, had twin objectives: “crushing of resistance and the capture of women and children for use as laborers” (Penn 1996: 83). The official policy at that time allowed the ‘trekboers’ to “sweep the San out of their path or incorporate them into their economy as unfree laborers” (Penn 1996: 85). Between 1770 and 1800, “the ‘trekboers’ and the San were involved, literally, in a life or death struggle” throughout the entire interior of the Cape escarpment (Penn 1996: 82).
In 1774, a General Commando was set up to destroy any San resistance on a large scale. Commonly, the various sections of the General Commando took off in surprise attacks at dawn, against individual kraals of sleeping San. Against guns and horse-mounted enemies, the numerically small San communities had no chance to strike back. The casualties among members of the commandos were very few, if any at all, while Khoekhoe fighting in the first lines were killed or injured. Very few Boers were wounded or killed, while thousands of male San lost their lives. Instead of capturing them, the commandos usually shot male San, because they considered them as being of no economic value.
More than 70 years after the General Commando, between 1851 and 1869, commandos in Bushmanland again killed large numbers of Xam (Traill 1996: 165). The frontier farmers had given up attempts at ‘civilizing’ the San, at transforming their ‘predatory existence’ into the live of pastoralists (Penn 1996: 81).
“By the 1870s the last remnants of the Cape San were being hunted to extinction by the Boer and ‘Bastaard’ usurpers of Bushmanland. Those who were not shot starved to death in the dusty margins of South Africa’s most marginal land, whilst a handful, mainly women and children, lived out their days as captive laborers on their vanquishers’ farms” (Penn 1996: 82).
Traill seems to contradict this interpretation of Penn and plays down the role of physical violence in the demise of the Xam culture and language.
“The genocide practiced on the Xam for over a century was obviously an important contributory factor, and it is quite likely that numbers of Xam actually abandoned their language out of self-defense in response to this. But it is not accurate to imply that it was the only (Brenzinger and Dimmendaal 1992: 3) or even the main factor. The evidence that had been reviewed above also supports a more conventional explanation based on the social disintegration of the Xam and their subjugation as a class of menial laborers” (Traill 1996: 183).
Traill further argues that through a process of ‘taming’, the Xam identity was extinguished. However, this ‘taming’ involved again killing of male

Language Endangerment in Southern and Eastern Africa 185
San and treatment of all San “with utter contempt” (Traill 1996: 183). Traill seems to have a somewhat apologetic understanding of what is commonly called genocide.
Colonial farmers eventually saw male San as a type of vermin or beast, “fit only for extermination, while San women and children were of not much economic interest” (Penn 1996: 89). Now, in addition to the commandos, also ‘hunting parties’ went out for the sole reason to kill San people. Thus, the war in the nineteenth century changed its objectives, as the farmers no longer aimed at breaking San resistance, but eradicating the San society.
“This conviction, deeply etched into the nineteenth century, even after the San had dropped their guard. The San perished not because it was so fatal but because of the legacy of violence inherited from the eighteenth century frontier” (Penn 1996: 85)
Penn (1996: 91) explains that the South African San perished because of the murderous ideas of the colonialists, who “never forgot the violent hatred which they had learnt in their struggle with the San during the eighteenth century”. The colonial war against the Xam, which finally led to the extinction of Xam identity and their language, is one of the cruelest events of African history, a case of physical and cultural genocide.
2.3. The endangered Khoisan languages
While close genetic relationship among the languages of the Central Khoisan grouping has been attested (cf. Vossen 1997), the relationship between the major branches of Khoisan and the position of so far unclassified isolated Khoisan languages remains a major challenge to linguists. The following groupings of Khoisan languages do therefore not claim to represent genetic relationships between the language groupings at higher levels.
The only Khoisan language which seems to be “safe” is Khoekhoegowab, a Central Khoisan language spoken by pastoral Nama and Damara, as well as, by the Hai om and Aakhoe, formerly hunter-gatherers. Reports by Dutch settlers from the late 17th century indicate the existence of a dialect continuum of Khoekhoe languages from Cape Khoekhoe in the south far into Angola in the north (Haacke 2002: 1). The Cape Khoekhoe languages – still vital in 1652 – ceased to exist within three generations. The Khoekhoe pastoralists along the southern and eastern Cape shifted to Afrikaans or to Xhosa. !Ora and Xiri, two Western Khoekhoe

186 Matthias Brenzinger
languages, survived until recently. Today, however, all descendants of Korana who spoke !Ora and the Griqua speakers of Xiri have lost these languages and taken Afrikaans as their first language (Traill 1996: 161).
With regard to Kede, the following observation made by Carlos Estermann recalls the state of the Kede and their language predating 1960, when he visited Angola for the last time.
“They are called Kede (Ovakede) by the Kwanyama, while in their own language, they are designated as Sa Mu !Kwe. This language is a Hottentot dialect, but may be considered dead today, at least on the Angolan side, for the few old people who once spoke it are no longer of this world.” (Estermann 1976: 16).
No reports on Kede in Namibia exist, which makes in most likely, that the most northern Khoekhoe language is no longer spoken.
The last Khoekhoe language of Central Khoisan, i. e. Khoekhoegowab, is well documented and receives official recognition as a language of instruction in the Namibian educational system. Despite these facts, Wilfrid Haacke and Eliphas Eiseb consider even Khoekhoegowab to be an “endangered language” (Haacke and Eiseb 2002: iii). After Oshiwambo, with 713,919 speakers, Khoekhoegowab has the second largest speech community of the Republic of Namibia, with 175,554 speakers (cf. census figures of 1991 by language spoken, Haacke 1996: 32). Outcomes of several surveys demonstrate, however, that Nama and Damara take on a negative stand against the formal use of their language. Khoekhoegowab speakers are reluctant to enrol their children in schools in which their language is employed as medium of instruction (Laurentius Davids, p. c.). Even languages spoken by large communities may indeed disappear, as we know from other cases, if a negative attitude towards their language prevails among the speech community. The Khoisan languages as a whole, must therefore be considered to be endangered.
Among the non-Khoekhoe languages of the Central Khoisan grouping, Naro, spoken predominantly in Botswana and Khwe, with major speech communities in Namibia, Botswana and South Africa seem to be the most stable and vital.
Naro is spoken by roughly 9,000 persons as a first and by about the same number as second language. Long-term language work by religious missions has created a strong sense of linguistic identity among the Naro. Naro has been standardized and submitted to writing. Literacy in Naro is not restricted to the religious contexts, but has become an important feature of Naro identity. While Naro seems to be quite strong, the Ts’ao di-

Language Endangerment in Southern and Eastern Africa 187
alect of Naro as spoken in the Kuke region, is about to be replaced by “standard” Naro (Visser p. c.).
The Khwe amount to about 7,000 people in total, and up to 5,000 of them might be considered speakers of the Khwe language. The Khwe language seems to be safe in Namibia, at least for the time being, as all children speak Khwe as their first language in the Caprivi Strip. However, like many members of other minorities in Botswana, in this country also Khwe communicate increasingly in Setswana, even at home.
Since the early 1960s living conditions for San, i. e. Khwe and !Xu˜ (see below) and other inhabitants of Angola were primarily determined by war. Ill-educated San, who are widely considered as being an inferior people by Bantu-speaking neighbors, were easy to recruit into foreign armies with a regular income and promises of a higher status. From the early 1960s onwards, San were employed by the Portuguese to fight against the various liberation armies in Angola. In southeastern part of Angola about 30% of the San population lost their lives in the first two years of the independence struggle. In 1974/75, after the defeat of the Portuguese colonizers, San soldiers fled from Angola in large numbers to Namibia. They got involved in another war by fighting for the South African Defense Force against the Namibian liberation fighters and the MPLA (Popular Movement for the Liberation of Angola). After the independence of Namibia in 1989, more than 1,300 Khwe withdrew together with the South African army to South Africa, where they live in the Diaspora since then and most children there grow up with Afrikaans as the first language.
Xam ceased to be spoken in the early 1920s and last speakers of other Khoisan languages of the !Ui branch, such as Ng, Kx’au, Ku ’e, and !Gã !ne passed away a decade later. One or two people spoke Xegwi in the 1960s but the last of them died in 1988 (Traill 1996: 164). !Ui languages used to be spoken throughout the entire interior of Southern Africa, but today no intact speech community of any of the !Ui languages exist anymore. Among the 600 Khomani (= Khomani), less than 20 old people still speak the N u language. These few speakers of a language of the !Ui language group, are the most prominent last speakers on the entire African continent.
At the Namibia-Botswana border spread over a vast area, about 2,000 speaker of !Xóõ form the last speech community of a Southern Khoisan language. Despite their small number, Traill (1985) describes !Xóõ as a dialect cluster.
Hua has not yet shown any links to other Khoisan groupings. This language is spoken by less then 200 people in the northwestern part of Botswana, near Khutse. The language seems to bevanishing, as no chil-

188 Matthias Brenzinger

dren speak Hua but acquire SheKgalaghari as their first language instead, along with the national language Setswana (Batibo (2005).
Kwadi is one of the most referred to extinct Khoisan languages. It was spoken in southwestern Angola by only a few remaining individuals in the 1950s, and it became extinct before 1970. António de Almeida identified 50 Kwadi people as the only survivors of this ethnic group, back in 1960 (Almeida 1965: 29). With regard to their Khoisan language Almeida says, “at present only four or five elder Kwádi can speak it” (Almeida 1965: 39). Father Carlos Estermann (1976: 42), who traveled extensively between 1924 and 1960 in the southwestern part of Angola, knew the Kwadi area very well and only came across a few elderly speakers of Kwadi in his later visits to the area. He quotes the first mentioning of what he identifies as Kwadi people. A. de Oliveira de Cadornega reported in the História geral das guerrs angolanas in 1681 of people “who understood nothing that he said; their language is like a clicking, …” (Estermann 1976: 38). Finally, Ernst Westphal conducted fieldwork in 1965 with the Kwadi and notes, “The language presents many problems and only three people seem to use it regularly when together” (Westphal 1971: 396).
Tom Güldemann and Rainer Vossen analyze Westphal’s scarce Kwadi language data and find typological similarities of Kwadi to Central Khoisan and Sandawe in that they are all SOV languages with a head-final noun phrase, and they also share sex-based gender suffixes (Güldemann and Vossen 2000: 119–120). However, they claim no proof of a genetic relationship with these findings, and leave Kwadi unclassified.
According to Estermann (1976), Kwadi disappeared between 1920 and 1970. Most of the last members of this small speech community died of diseases (tuberculosis) and the remaining few individuals gave up their language. It is highly unlikely that persons with any competence in Kwadi are still living today.

Table 1. The Khoisan languages of Southern and Eastern Africa

Language
Central Khoisan: Khoekhoe 1 Khoekhoe-gowab 2 Cape Khoe-khoe varieties 3 Kede 4 !Ora 5 Xiri

Speakers Population

200,000 0 0 0 0

200,000 0 ? ? ?

Status8
a– 1700 1960 ? 1970s ? 1970s

Language Endangerment in Southern and Eastern Africa 189

Table 1. cont.
Language Central Khoisan: non-Khoekhoe 6 Naro (Ts’ao) 7 Gui 8 Gana 9 Khwe 10 Ani 11 Xaise 12 !Goro 13 Deti 14 Shua 15 Ts’ixa 16 Danisi, Tshara 17 Kua 18 Tshoa Northern Khoisan 19 !Xu˜ (Ju) Southern Khoisan 20 Xam 21 N u 22 Kx’au 23 Ku ’e 24 !Gã !ne 25 Xegwi 26 ŋ u 27 !Xóõ Unclassified Isolates 28 Hõã 29 Kwadi 30 Hadza 31 Sandawe

Speakers Population Status8

9,000

9,000

a–

2,300

2,300

a–

1,500

1,500

a–

6,000

7,000

a

1,100

1,300

b

600

800

c

1,200

1,200

a

few

few

d, e

1,700

1,700

a

400

400

b

670

670

b

2,500

3,000

b

380

380

c

10,000

10,000

a–

0 0 0 0 0 0 10-20 6,000

0 600 0 0 0 0 500 6,000

1920s 1930s 1930s 1930s 1930s 1988 d a–

200 0 800 ? 70,000

? 0 800 70,000

d 1960 a a–

190 Matthias Brenzinger

For defining status see Krauss Chapter 1, this volume:

”safe”

a+

stable

a–

instable; eroded

a

definitively endangered

b

severely endangered

c

critically endangered

d

extinct

e

29 ANGOLA
3

ZAMBIA

UGANDA

KENYA

19
NAMIBIA 1

9 10

15

16

6

8 17

7

BOTSWANA 27
28 18

14 13
11
12

30
31 TA N Z A N I A

26 25
SWAZILAND

4

23

LESOTHO

22 21

24

5

20

SÜDAFRIKA

2

Map 11. The Khoisan languages of Southern and Eastern Africa

Language Endangerment in Southern and Eastern Africa 191
3. Eastern Africa and the scenarios of language endangerment
In most parts of the world, local languages are replaced by nationally dominant ones. In Africa, however, there are still various ongoing “traditional” language shifts, which take place in sub-national contexts. In the present review, brief case studies of such languages shifts experienced in Eastern Africa will illustrate types of language replacement that will soon be gone. The still existing variety of language endangerment settings in Eastern Africa will be presented in a typology of present-day shift scenarios.
3.1. Migrations in pre-colonial times
For Eastern Africa, as for most other parts of the continent, there is no information on specific language shifts that took place in the more distant past. Oral traditions generally do not cover more than a couple of centuries and there are no written accounts on African languages that were once spoken in the hinterlands. The reconstruction of the early history of language displacement, therefore, relies on assumptions based on the analysis of the current language maps, as well as on insights gained in the study of the ongoing “traditional” language shifts.
By applying methods of historical linguistics and by considering findings from other disciplines, the present language distribution in East Africa suggests the following interpretation: Dramatic changes in East African history have always been triggered by the arrival of waves of immigrants. For the last 5,000 years or so, various Nilotic, Cushitic, and Bantu-speaking populations spread, after arriving in East Africa, very often at the expense of previous arrivers and “indigenous” populations. These migrants departed from the central regions of present-day Sudan and from Ethiopia; others entered East Africa from the southern region of Angola.
These successive expansions of different cultures and languages caused language shifts and inevitably, many previously established “immigrant” languages of the region were replaced. In the course of these population dynamics, the number of “indigenous” languages decreased constantly and they were finally wiped out. Only seldom have scholars been able to detect traces of such now extinct languages. Christopher Ehret and Derek Nurse (1981) have identified remnants of the language of the so-called Taita Cushites in some Bantu languages, namely the Taita – Taveta, spo-

192 Matthias Brenzinger
ken in the southeastern part of Kenya. The “Taita” Cushites and their language vanished, but they left lexical traces in Bantu languages that might have become their new mother tongues. All ancestors of Cushitic- and Nilotic-language speakers came from the north and arrived in East Africa with their cattle at different times over the last 5,000 years. The “indigenous” hunter-gatherer population in Eastern and Southern Africa – prior to this influx of immigrants – spoke languages that were most likely related to present-day Khoisan languages.
The term “indigenous languages” has been widely employed in studies of language endangerment settings in other parts of the world. Very often, there is a contrast between “indigenous” endangered languages versus replacing languages of intruding colonial powers or spreading national languages of modern nation states. For the African continent, one needs to consider the relative connotation of “indigenous”. With a rather exclusive use of the term, only Khoisan languages would qualify as “indigenous languages” for the African regions under discussion, as speakers of all other languages are immigrants. In a wider meaning, quite recently evolved languages, such as Afrikaans and Fanagalo, might be called “indigenous language”, as they are spoken solely on the African continent. It seems to make not much sense to call, for example, Southern Cushitic languages more indigenous to East Africa than Bantu languages, only because the ancestors of present-day speakers of the former languages arrived a couple of thousand years earlier. Obviously, the blunt contrast “indigenous” versus “non-indigenous languages” does not capture the complexity and dynamics of language displacement scenarios on the African continent.
3.2. The decline of languages of the “last” hunter-gatherer communities
Some 12,000 ago all languages on earth were spoken by hunter-gather communities. Around that period, the number of human languages might have reached its peak, as the small bands of foragers were highly mobile and most probably spoke distinct languages. With the dawn of animal husbandry, the numbers of members of (speech) communities increased and contacts between communities were more regular. When men started farming and even more when they founded large settlements, the number of distinct languages on earth dropped dramatically.
Small hunter-gatherer communities might have assimilated to larger pastoral and agricultural societies not only in the mode of production and

Language Endangerment in Southern and Eastern Africa 193
culture, but also by taking over the language of the pastoralist right from the invention of these new economies. Hunter-gatherer communities that had been living in balanced, symbiotic relationships with numerically dominant groups might have voluntarily decided or might have been forced to abandon their heritage language for various reasons, for example, at times of stress and disaster. Case studies of more recent language shifts of former hunter-gatherer communities reveal insights into the variance even of language shifts that took place in quite similar contact situations.
Maasai dominance and culture has spread over a wide area of East Africa and many hunter-gatherer communities have lost their distinct identity and language though pressure, but also due to the charms of a pastoral live stile. Aasáx and Yaaku are both Cushitic languages of former hunter-gatherer communities that were replaced by the Maasai variety of the Maa language that is classified as Eastern Nilotic.
The Aasáx, speakers of a Southern Cushitic language lived in the Maasai plains in northern Tanzania. Aasáx-speaking hunter-gatherers were affiliated with the then regionally dominant Maasai pastoralists, in what one may call a symbiotic relationship. The “Rinderpest” from 1891 to 1896 changed the contact setting dramatically. Most Maasai lost their cattle, the base of cultural, social and economic life to them, and about 50% of the Maasai died during these years of hunger and of smallpox. The surviving, now cattle-less pastoralists had to rely on the help of agricultural neighbors and hunter-gatherers (see Winter 1979).
While larger agricultural communities were able to keep the impact of the Maasai refugees low, the weaker hunter-gatherer groups could not. Among them, in the course of time the help-seeking lodgers developed into occupation troops. In order to have total control of their new environment, the Maasai banned the use of the mother tongue of their hosts.
By the time the Maasai started to leave the Aasáx settlements to build up new herds, many Aasáx had established close ties with them. For a short period, the language was still used occasionally by men on hunting parties, but the final phase of decline of the Aasáx language started about 1910. Assimilated to agricultural communities as well as pastoralists, Aasáx ceased to be used in everyday communication in the following decade. After that time, only a few individuals retained some knowledge of the Aasáx language. In the early 1970s, Christopher Winter recorded the history of the Aasáx by the last speaker of the language. Kimíndet ole Kiyang’ú, the last Aasáx speaker, died in 1976 at the age of about 88 years. However, more than half a century before that, according to Winter, the language had ceased to exist as a communities’ media in as much as most

194 Matthias Brenzinger
Aasáx had already then shifted to the Maasai variety of Maa as their first and main language.
The members of the Mukogodo community settled in a mountainous area, just north of Mt. Kenya. They belong to the pastoral Maasai society and speak a variety of the Maa language. 100 years ago, their ancestors lived as hunter-gatherers in that same area, in rock shelters, and they spoke Yaaku. This Cushitic language was still mother tongue to some 1,000 people in the beginning of the 20th century. At that time, the neighboring communities that spoke several different languages began to shift to the Maasai culture and to take over the Maa language. Yaaku as well started to adopt the pastoral economy and along with that Maasai customs, such as female circumcision, the age-set system (in which groups of men go through initiation and other stages of life together) and marriage ceremonies. When Yaaku women began marrying neighboring pastoralists, their parents received livestock as bridewealth, not only beehives, as was the Yaaku custom. According to Cronk (1989) this was ultimately the main cause for abandoning the hunter-gatherer way of live, as Yaaku parents now demanded cattle as bridewealth, also from young Yaaku brooms.
In the beginning of the 1930s, the Yaaku community decided to stop teaching their own language to their children and to use Maa among themselves instead. In 1971, when Heine conducted his research and heard about this previous public decision on abandoning the heritage language, only 51 people had some language competence in Yaaku. At that time, some very few old people still used Yaaku in everyday communication. On a joint trip to Mukogodo with Bernd Heine in 1989, we did not come across any fluent Yaaku speakers. A few elders remembered only fragments of the old Yaaku. Recent attempts by some young community members to revive their heritage Yaaku language, althoug worthy of support, are most probably coming too late. Only a brief grammatical sketch (Heine 1975) as well as mainly botanical and honey-hunting terms of the vocabulary are the available language data of Yaaku (Brenzinger, Heine and Heine 1994).
Yaaku and Aasáx were once spoken by people that were called “Dorobo”; a derogative term of the Maa-speaking pastoralist for cattle-less people. Other East African languages of such small communities are the now extinct Elmolo in Northern Kenya and K’wadza in central Tanzania, as well as the threatened Dahalo language that is still spoken on the northern part of the Kenyan coast. These Cushitic languages, as well as several severely endangered Nilo-Saharan languages, such as Akie in Tanzania, Okiek and Omotik in Kenya and Nyang’i in Northern Uganda, are (or

Language Endangerment in Southern and Eastern Africa 195
were) spoken exclusively by former hunter-gatherer communities. However, these languages belong genetically to language families with all other members being spoken by pastoralists. Possibly, hunter-gathering ancestors shifted to these languages, adapted from now extinct pastoral communities, or they themselves were pastoralist in the past and at time lost their cattle.
In Eastern Africa, the Hadza in Central Tanzania are the only huntergatherers who still speak a Khoisan language. The Hadza are less than 800 persons and their language and culture must be regarded as endangered, given the small number of community members.
The other East African language generally considered to belong to Khoisan is Sandawe. The Sandawe have lived as farmers with animal husbandry, at least for many hundreds of years, and their language seems to be safe.
3.3. Scenarios of language endangerment
On the African continent, the loss of speakers in one African language is typically the gain of speakers in another African language. English and French, the languages of the former colonial powers, are not replacing African languages, at least not for the time being. In other terms, these languages have not yet become mother tongues of communities. The fact that African languages replace other African languages, does not mean that language endangerment on the African continent is less severe than in other parts of the world, as distinct languages disappear.
In most parts of the world, namely Australia, the Americas, Europe and Japan, minority languages are increasingly under threat of being replaced by the official languages of national states. The scenarios, in which African languages are threatened, however, still range from sub-national settings to national contexts, while “globalization” has only started to have some impact on language use patterns. In analyzing language contact environments, three different contexts may be distinguished, that also reflect diachronically successive language shift settings: the recent global context, the established context of nation states, and the traditional sub-national context.
A few languages benefit from global merging, and at present mainly English and Spanish seem to be gaining speakers in the context of globalization. The “world economy” demands adjustment and reaches even the most remote rural areas in developing countries, in the same way as “world

196 Matthias Brenzinger
religions” do. A reduction of cultural diversity goes along with developments generally paraphrased as westernization, christianization, arabization, modernization, urbanization and industrialization. Global ideologies spread through modern mass media and formal education system, preparing also the way for a rapid expansion of a few “global” languages. These so-called “world languages”, however, are so far acquired as additional, not as first languages and for that reason, languages have rarely been replaced in the context of globalization. Major East African languages, such as Amharic, Swahili and Setswana, are in competition with English, but of course they are not threatened to become extinct by the loss of domains and functions.
In the context of national states, governments rely on languages in which they run their countries. African governments predominantly use the languages of the former colonial powers for this purpose, and these are the prevailing languages in administration, in secondary and higher education, in modern literature, as well as in the mass media. The knowledge of these imported languages is still – after 50 years of independence – confined to the educated elite and to the urban centers, and for that very reason, English and French have not yet replaced African languages.
Swahili in the Republic of Tanzania and Setswana in the Republic of Botswana are among the few African languages that are official media of nation-wide communication. These languages are challenging the vitality of the other languages in their respective national context. The motives of speakers of minority languages for shifting to these nationally dominant languages are obvious; better prospects in social and economic mobility for themselves and their children. Swahili threatens more than 130 other Tanzanian languages, while Setswana does the same to about 30 languages spoken in Botswana. Governmental language policies in Botswana foster the use of the national language Setswana not only as a second, but also as a first language. Other East African languages with a nation-wide distribution, such as Kinyaruanda and Kirundi, do not dominate other languages, because they – maybe no longer – exist within the national boundaries. Twa communities in Rwanda and Burundi still maintain a distinct culture and identity. While they speak Kinyaruanda and Kirundi today, they might as well have had their own distinct linguistic heritage.
African languages of small speech communities, however, were threatened in the past exclusively and are threatened still today predominantly by languages of other African languages and in sub-national contexts. For minorities that speak severely endangered languages, the languages of the immediate neighbours are generally more attractive than the estab-

Language Endangerment in Southern and Eastern Africa 197
lished national majority languages. Thus, very small languages are commonly threatened and replaced in local contact situations. In Southern Ethiopia, for example, ‘Ongota is replaced by Ts’amakko (Tsamay), Kwegu (Koegu) by Mursi, Shabo by Majang and Harro by Bayso. Speech communities of minority languages in all these cases abandon their languages for quite different reasons to adopt another minority language as a new mother tongue.
Ethno-linguistic minorities in Sub-Saharan Africa generally live in subnational contexts in multilingual settings, mainly because of marginalization. Bad government in many African states and policies of exclusion by the economically dominant countries of the world deny members of minorities, access to economic and social progress.
Poor infrastructure has kept many rural communities in isolation and some languages are spoken until today for that reasons. Quite a number of languages, for example, survived on islands in lakes of the East African Rift Valley such as Elmolo in Lake Turkana, Gats’ame in Lake Chamo, Haro in Lake Abbay, and Zay in Lake Zway. All these languages, however, either have disappeared (Elmolo) or are severely endangered, because the island-communities are leaving their isolated islands to live among other speech communities on the main land.
Sub-national settings, such as the ones mentioned in this chapter, are the most ancient scenarios of language displacement. Even when linguae francae spread as media in regional trade relations, these languages were commonly acquired as additional languages and for that reason did not challenge any mother tongues. With the rise of centralized power centers and the establishment of national states, ethnic languages have been increasingly threatened, very often through physical force. In Sudan, for example, an Arab elite has not only resettled entire communities, but also committed physical genocide in the Nuba mountains and other parts of the country. Since 1989, far more than a million people were killed and numerous communities where wiped out in the government’s attempt to spread Islam and Arabic to the entire Sudan. Languages disappeared because the speech communities have been either dispersed or extirpated. The endangerment of communities, of course, must be the main concern in these cases of physical violence, however, the distinct cultures and languages of such people should not be ignored, because they are the reason for their suppression.
In most Nation states, national dominant majority languages threaten minority languages. In Sub-Saharan Africa, in contrast to other parts of the world, most languages of ethno-linguistic minorities have survived

198 Matthias Brenzinger

until today, because their speakers have been and are still being marginalized and neglected, that is excluded from national developments. As such barriers will fall, communities will also abandon their languages in order to participate in economic and social benefits.
Through mass media the charms of modern advertising and consumer goods reaches even local communities and world languages are spreading along with that. African languages will increasingly disappear, as communities will be allowed to participate in economic and social progress.
With about one third of the world’s languages, the African continent is among the linguistically richest areas on our planet. Thus, a great deal of the future of linguistic diversity in general depends on what is going to happen to the African languages.
For a discussion of the terminology and designators used in the following tables, refer to Krauss Chapter 1, this volume:

”safe”

a+

stable

a–

instable; eroded

a

definitively endangered

b

severely endangered

c

critically endangered

d

extinct

e

The columns Set A and Set B refer to criteria for selecting and ranking of endangered languages most urgently in need for documentation ( see Introduction to this volume). The four figures in Set A and two figures in Set B range from 1–4 (“–” no information) and they provide the following information (left to right):
Set A: Speaker/population ratio: – = 0; 1 = < 5%; 2 = 5–10%; 3 = 11–50%; 4 = 51–90%. Language transmission: 1 = no; 2 = <10%; 3 = 20–70%; 4 = close to 100%. Language use: 1 = none; 2 = few, marginal; 3 = some key domains; 4 = all, most. Attitude towards their own language: 1 = negative; 2 = neutral; 3 = not supportive
to maintenance; 4 = strongly supportive.
Set B: Scientific (linguistic) value): 1 = genetic status unknown; 2 = language isolate; 3 =
specific aspects; 4 = closely related languages are described or vital. Current extend of documentation: 1 = no data; 2 = poorly known; 3 = sketches; 4 =
well documented.

Language Endangerment in Southern and Eastern Africa 199

Table 2. Endangered Languages in Eastern Africa

Language
1 Aasáx (T) 2 Aja (S) 3 Aka (S) 4 Akie (K, T) 5 Alagwa (T) 6 Anfillo (E) 7 Arbore (E) 8 Argobba (E) 9 Baygo (S) 10 Bayso (E) 11 Berti (S) 12 Birkid (S) 13 Boguru (S) 14 Bong’om (K) 15 Bongo (S) 16 Boni, Aweera (K) 17 Buga, Mangayat (S) 18 Bussa (E) 19 Dahalo (K) 20 Dair (S) 21 Dilling (S) 22 Dimme (E) 23 El Hugeirat (S) 24 Elmolo (K) 25 Fongoro, Kole (S) 26 Gafat (E) 27 Ganjule, Gats’ame,
Harro (E) 28 Gula (S) 29 Gule/Anej (S) 30 Gweno (T) 31 Hozo (E) 32 Indri (S) 33 Jebel Haraza (S) 34 K’emant (E) 35 Karo (E) 36 Keiga (S) 37 Kelo (S)

Speakers
?0 200 300 50 10,000 > 100 < 3,000 10,000 0 > 3,000 0 0 494 – < 10,000 > 3,000 400 > 4,000 < 400 1,000 5,000 > 4,000 ?0 0 ? few 0 < 2,000

Population
few – – > 500 10,000 1,000s < 6,000 < 60,000 850 3,260 – < 100 – 2,500 < 10,000 < 4,000 – > 6,000 < 400 – – > 6,000 ? 200 > 400 ? > 1,000 0 2,656

Set A
-,-,-,-,-,-,-,-,-,2,1,1,4,4,2,2 1,1,1,1 -,-,-,1,1,1,2 -,-,-,4,4,2,2 -,-,-,-,-,-,-,-,-,4,2,2,1 4,-,2,3,3,3,2 -,-,2,– 4,2,2,1 -,-,-,-,-,2,3,3,1,-,-,1,-,-,-,-,1,1,1 -,-,-,3,3,2,3

Set B
-,3,-,3,2 3,2 2,1 -,4,3 -,3,2 -,-,2,3,2 -,1 3,2 3,2 -,3,2 2,3,2 3,2 -,3,1 -,3,3 3,2

Status
d, e c, d c, d c a c b b e a e e c a a a b a b c a a d, e e d d a

few 100s < 10 few 3,000 700 0 1,500 200 6,000 > 200

< 2,000 1,000 1,000s – – – 170,000 – – –

-,-,-,- -,- c

1,1,2,1 3,2 d

4,4,3,4 4,1 d

-,-,-,- -,- a

–

-,- b

-,-,-,- -,- e

1,1,1,1 3,3 c

-,-,-,- 3,- d

-,-,2,- -,- a

-,-,2,- -,- d

200 Matthias Brenzinger

Table 2. cont.

Language
38 Kidie Lafofa (S) 39 Kinare (K) 40 Ko (S) 41 Komo, Koma (E) 42 Kore (K) 43 Kw’adza (T) 44 Kwegu (E) 45 Logorik (S) 46 Lorkoti (K) 47 Moda (S) 48 Molo (S) 49 Mursi (E) 50 Napore (K) 51 Na’o, Nayi (E) 52 Nyang’i (U) 53 Omo Murle (E) 54 Opuuo/Shita (E) 55 Omotik/Laamoot (K) 56 Ongamo (K, T) 57 ‘Ongota/Birale (E) 58 Qwarenya (E) 59 Segeju (K) 60 Shabo (E) 61 Soo/Tepeth (U) 62 Sogoo (K) 63 Suba (K, T) 64 Tennet (S) 65 Ts’amakko (E) 66 Tumtum (S) 67 Wali (S) 68 Yaaku (K) 69 Yulu, Binga (S) 70 Zay, Zway (E)

Speakers
< 600 0 < 5,000 < 1,400 0 0? > 200 2,000 0 600 > 100 3,200 ?0 3,000 < 10 few few < 50 > 300 > 10 ?4 ?0 < 500 100 ?0 < 40,000 4,000 < 8,000 7,300 < 500 ? 0/3 3,000 < 1,000

Population
– > 300 – < 1,500 < 250 few < 500 – < 10 – – 3,200 < 20 < 4,000 < 100 425 300 100s > 3,000 > 100 > 30,000 few > 600 > 5,000 few < 80,000 – – – – > 3,000 – ? 5,000

Set A
-,-,2,-,-,-,-,-,-,-,-,1,-,-,-,-,-,-,1,1,1,1 -,-,-,-,-,-,-,-,-,-,-,1,-,-,-,-,-,-,-,-,1,1,1,1,1 1,1,1,1 -,-,-,2,1,1,1 2,1,1,1 2,1,1,2 1,1,1,1 -,-,-,3,2,1,1 1,1,1,1 -,1,1,1 3,3,2,2 -,-,2,-,-,-,-,-,2,-,-,-,-,-,-,-,-,-,4,3,1,2

Set B
-,3,2 3,-,3,3 3,2 3,3 -,3,3 -,3,2 -,3,2 3,2 3,2 3,3 -,3,2 3,2 2,2 3,2 3,3 2,2 3,3 3,2 3,3 3,2 3,2 -,-,2,2 -,3,2

Status
d e a b e d d b e b d a d a d d d, e c d c d, e d b c d, e a b a a c d, e a d

Countries: E – Ethiopia, K – Kenya, S – Sudan, T – Tanzania, U – Uganda Main source for Sudan: Gordon (ed) 2005. Ethnologue.

Language Endangerment in Southern and Eastern Africa 201

SUDAN

R

ed S ea

33

ERITREA

25
13 9

11

12

28 2 32

17 69

15

DEM. REP. CONGO

20

23 67

21

36 45 66

40

38

47 48 64

29 37
3

58 34

26

8

31

6

54 41

70

60 53

51

49

22

44

10

35 27

65 57 18

7

24 50 52
61

ETHIOPIA

K E N YA

UGANDA
14

68 46

Lake Victo ria 63
RUANDA
BURUNDI
TA N Z A N I A 43
Lake T anganyika

39
55 56 30
5 1
4

16 62
19 42
59

Map 12. Eastern Africa

I n d i a n O c ea n

202 Matthias Brenzinger
Notes
1. I would like to thank Mats Exter, Jim Bennett, and Lenore Grenoble for valuable comments on a previous version of this paper.
2. Haacke (2002) suggested changing Khoisan to Khoesaan by referring to the underlying correct spellings of the source terms from Khoekhoegowab. As argued further below, Khoisan should only be used as a technical term of linguistic classification, and not in the meaning “herders” and “foragers”. For that reason, we prefer the obviously artificial term and spelling Khoisan.
3. The people who are referred to by “Khoe” in this phrase call themselves Khoekhoe.
4. “Die Buschmannsprachen sind untereinander eng verwandt, haben aber zu anderen Sprachgruppen keine genetischen Beziehungen. … Das Hottentottische (Khoekhoe, M. B.) steht ebenso isoliert wie die Sprachen der Buschmänner” (Westermann 1949: 14). “Es liegt auch kein haltbarer Grund vor, die Sprachen der Hottentotten und der Buschmänner als genetisch verwandt anzusehen” (Westermann 1949: 9).
5. “Mein Informant Siriri [Seriri, M. B.], der nur widerwillig zugab, Gandakhoe zu sein, bestand auf Búgákhòè auch als Selbstbezeichnung seiner Leute. Auch der Sprachname stimmte mit dem Búga-Namen überein” (Vossen 1997: 77).
6. It is highly unlikely that any Xam speakers are still living. 7. xarra “different, separately”, !ke e: xarra “people who are different, strang-
ers” (D. Bleek 1956: 363), ke “to meet, be together with” (D. Bleek 1956: 566) 8. The years in this column refer to the time when the last fluent speakers passed
away.
References
Almeida, António de (edited by Tobias, P. V. and J. Blacking) 1965 Bushmen and other Non-Bantu peoples of Angola. Three lectures by António de Almeida. Johannesburg: Witwatersrand University.
Barnard, Alan 1980 Khoesan Southern Africa as a culture area. Namibiana 2,2: 7–15.
Batibo, Herman 2005 Hua: a critically endangered Khoesan language in the Kweneng District of Botswana. In Crawhall, Nigel and Nicholas Ostler (eds.) Creating outsiders. Endangered languages, migration and marginalization. Bath: Foundation of Endangered Languages. 87–93.
Bleek, Wilhelm Heinrich Immanuel and Lucy C. Lloyd 1911 Specimens of Bushmen folklore. London: George Allen and Co.
Brenzinger, Matthias (ed.) 1992 Language Death. Factual and theoretical explorations with special reference to East Africa. Berlin and New York: Mouton de Gruyter.

Language Endangerment in Southern and Eastern Africa 203
Brenzinger, Matthias and Gerrit J. Dimmendaal 1992 Social contexts of language death. In Brenzinger (ed.) 3–7.
Brenzinger, Matthias; Heine Bernd and Ingo Heine 1994 The Mukogodo Maasai. An ethnobotanical survey. Köln: Rüdiger Köppe.
Cassidy, Lin; Ken Good; Isaac Mazonde and Roberta Rivers 2001 An assessment of the status of the San/Basarwa in Botswana. Windhoek: Legal Assistance Centre.
Cronk, Lee 1989 From hunters to herders: Subsistence change as a reproductive strategy among the Mukogodo. Current anthropology 30,2: 224–234.
Ehret, Chrisopher and Derek Nurse 1981 The Taita Cushites. Sprache und Geschichte in Afrika 3: 125–168.
Estermann, Carlos (edited by Gordon D. Gibson) 1976 The ethnography of Southwestern Angola. I: The Non-Bantu peoples. The Ambo Ethnic Group. New York, London: Holmes and Meier.
Gordon, Raymond G. (ed.) 2005 Ethnologue: Languages of the world. (15th edition) Dallas, Tex.: SIL International. Online version.
Greenberg, Joseph 1966 The languages of Africa. Bloomington: Indiana University and The Hague: Mouton and Co.
Güldemann, Tom and Rainer Vossen 2000 Khoisan. In Heine and Nurse (eds.) 99–122.
Haacke, Wilfrid H. G. 1996 Language and literature in Africa, Study guide for Core Module HSL 0111, part 1, Department of African Languages, University of Namibia. 2002 Linguistic evidence in the study of origins: The case of the Namibian Khoekhoe-speakers. (UNAM Inaugural Lecture Proceedings) Windhoek: University of Namibia.
Haacke, Wilfrid H. G. and Eliphas Eiseb 2002 A Khoekhoegowab dictionary with an English-Khoekhoegowab Index. Windhoek: Gamsberg-Macmillan.
Hasselbring, Sue 2000 Where are the Khoesan of Botswana? In: Batibo, Herman M. and Birgit Smieja (eds.) Botswana: The future of the minority languages. Frankfurt a. M.: Peter Lang.
Heine, Bernd 1974/75 Notes on the Yaaku language. Afrika und Übersee 58,1/2: 27–61 and 119 – 138.
Heine, Bernd and Derek Nurse (eds.) 2000 African languages: An introduction. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

204 Matthias Brenzinger
Penn, Nigel 1996 “Fated to perish”: the destruction of the Cape San. In Skotnes (ed.) 81 – 91.
Schapera, Isaak 1930 The Khoisan peoples of South Africa: Bushmen and Hottentots. London: George Routledge and Sons.
Schultze Jena, Leonhard 1928 Zur Kenntnis des Körpers der Hottentotten und Buschmänner. Jena: Gustav Fischer.
Sampson, Clavil Garth 1988 Stylistic boundaries among mobile hunter-foragers. Washington, London: Smithsonian Institute Press.
Skotnes, Pippa (ed.) 1996 Miscast: Negotiating the presence of the Bushmen. Cape Town: University of Cape Town.
Tanaka, Jiro 1980 The San, hunter-gatherers of the Kalahari. A study in ecological anthropology. (Translated by David W. Hughes). Tokyo: University of Tokyo Press.
Tobias, Phillip V. 1956 On the survival of the Bushmen, with an estimate of the problem facing anthropologists. Africa 26: 174–186.
Traill, Anthony 1985 Phonetic and phonological studies of !Xóo˜ Bushman. Hamburg: Helmut Buske. 1996 !Khwa-Ka Hhouiten Hhouiten “The rush of the storm”: The linguistic death of Xam. In Skotnes (ed.) 161–183.
Vossen, Rainer 1997 Die Khoe-Sprachen. Ein Beitrag zur Erforschung der Sprachgeschichte Afrikas. Köln: Rüdiger Köppe.
Westermann, Diedrich 1949 Sprachbeziehungen und Sprachverwandtschaft in Afrika. Sitzungsberichte der Deutschen Akademie der Wissenschaften zu Berlin. Philosophisch-historische Klasse, 1949, No. 1. Berlin: Akademie-Verlag.
Westphal, Ernst O. J. 1971 The click languages of Southern and Eastern Africa. In Sebeok, T. (ed.) Current trends in linguistics, Vol. 7: Linguistics in Sub-Saharan Africa. 367–420.
Wilmsen, Edwin N. 1989 Land filled with flies. A political economy of the Kalahari. Chicago, London: University of Chicago Press.
Winter, J. Christoph 1976 Language shift among the Aasáx, a hunter-gatherer tribe in Tanzania. Sprache und Geschichte in Afrika 1: 175–204.

Chapter 10 Endangered Languages in Europe
Tapani Salminen
1. Introdution
In western Europe, the knowledge of endangered languages among laymen and many linguists is limited to a small number of classic examples like Basque, the Celtic languages, Frisian, and Romansch, as well as, perhaps, Saami or Sorbian. It is the purpose of this article to show that, besides the best-known cases, there are many other languages in Europe that are, indeed, often marginalized or ignored by linguists and authorities alike. A related goal is to give a consistent and analytical assessment of the actual language divisions in a continent where literary traditions and other extra-linguistic factors tend to obscure language boundaries. Before entering strictly European matters, however, I try to present a global overview of what has been achieved by previous studies in classifying languages according to their levels of endangerment.1
2. Earlier studies in levels of language endangerement
While this book undoubtedly represents the first comprehensive and systematic survey of endangered languages on a world-wide scale, it has several predecessors. Some of the earlier projects have had quite ambitious goals but their implementation has often left a lot to be desired. A few landmarks from the past decade follow.
The first collective work to contain broadly comparable data from various continents was Endangered languages (Robins and Uhlenbeck 1991), published under the authority of the Permanent International Committee of Linguistics (CIPL), which under Stephen Wurm’s direction became one of the central institutions in enhancing the study of endangered languages. It did not cover the world, one of the missing parts being, incidentally, Europe, but it gave a clear picture of the worldwide wave of language endangerment and extinction and thus boosted further research in the field.

206 Tapani Salminen
More linguists became concerned and awakened to action when the first issue of Language in 1992 published a collection of papers on language endangerment edited by Kenneth Hale. One of the contributions included Michael Krauss’s well-known predictions of rapid loss of language diversity (Krauss 1992) that were widely quoted in the media.
One of the immediate responses came from the 1992 International Congress of Linguists in Quebec, which had endangered languages as a special topic, and where Michael Krauss elaborated his views on the extent of language loss (Krauss 1993). Participants commonly agreed that the maintenance and documentation of endangered languages should be given the utmost priority.
In 1992, the Endangered Languages Committee of CIPL held a meeting in Paris under the auspices of UNESCO, where most leading linguists active in the field were present. On the initiative of Stephen Wurm, the meeting launched a major plan to collect and publish data on all endangered languages in the world, including a research project called the UNESCO Red Book of Endangered Languages, and a research centre called the International Clearing House for Endangered Languages (ICHEL), whose establishment was entrusted to Shigeru Tsuchida.
The Red Book project was carried out by a number of regional experts, who by the end of 1993 prepared reports consisting of standard one-page summaries of each endangered language, with information about the state of the language (the presence of children speakers, mean age of youngest speakers, total number of speakers, etc.) as well as relevant sources, in other words, the scope of the project was in many ways similar to the present one.
The Clearing House was opened at the Department of Asian and Pacific Linguistics of the University of Tokyo in 1994, and with Tasaku Tsunoda as its director, it was officially inaugurated in 1995 in connection with a symposium on endangered languages (Matsumura 1998). Already in 1994, the authors of the Red Book reports were requested to send their contributions to the Clearing House, and over the course of the development of the Internet, some of reports were made available via the WWW. Curiously, the Red Book project is only mentioned in passing in the symposium proceedings (Krauss 1998: 110, Wurm 1998: 195), so it seems that at that time it did not have a priority status on the Clearing House agenda. Consequently, the project has not received much publicity, and several reports, including all of the Americas and parts of Asia have been missing. Recently, however, the first data on endangered languages in the Americas, those of Bolivia, appeared on the Red Book homepage at the ICHEL

Endangered Languages in Europe 207
site, so the Red Book is still alive and may one day become the extensive databank open to the public as it was intended to.
The only printed publication related to the Red Book project is the Atlas of the world’s languages in danger of disappearing. This atlas was first published in 1996 (Wurm 1996) and revised, enlarged and updated in a second edition (Wurm 2001).
One of the problems with the UNESCO Red Book of Endangered Languages was that UNESCO itself effectively lost interest in it. For instance, there was no mention of it when the UNESCO Director-General in 1998 decided about a new project called the UNESCO Report on the World’s Languages. It remains to be seen what comes out of the latter project, which is coordinated by the UNESCO Centre of the Basque Country, and has distributed questionnaires to language specialists and activists across the world. The general problem with this line of work is that incoming data is of uneven quality, which means that sorting out the data may take more time and energy than actively looking for information in published sources.
Another initiative to collect information of endangered languages was made by the Linguistic Society of America’s Committee on Endangered Languages and their Preservation under the supervision of Akira Yamamoto. Information was gathered through special survey questionnaires (Yamamoto 1998), and an updated summary of the data is available at the LSA website. Since the participants are typically leading experts on the languages on which they have reported, the quality of the survey is high, but the coverage of the world is, by necessity, random. For instance, there are only three survey questionnaires on European languages, on Gascon, Sorbian, and Faetar, yet these contain very useful data.
A major source of information on all languages, irrespective of their endangerment status, the Ethnologue (Grimes 1996) should not be left without mention here. The main problem for a user interested in the least-known languages of the world is the frequent lack of exact and explicit source references, which makes it difficult to assess the background of occasional conflicts with other sources.
Other works with global data are the Atlas of the world’s languages (Moseley and Asher 1994) and The encyclopedia of language and linguistics (Asher 1994). Some of the regional and country-specific publications that are largely devoted to the status of endangered languages are Collis (1990) for Arctic regions, Brenzinger (1992, 1998) for Africa, Solncev and Mikhalchenko (1992), Vakhtin (1993), and Neroznak (1994) for the Russian Federation, and Shoji and Janhunen (1997) for northern areas. Jen-

208 Tapani Salminen
niges (1997) is a useful bibliography focusing on western Europe. It was published by the European Bureau for Lesser Used Languages, which has produced a great number of interesting publications on minority languages within the European Union. An earlier bibliography covering most parts of Europe is Pogarell (1983).
The history of language endangerment studies in Europe partly differs from the course of events in the rest of the world. Crucially, European minority language communities have not been politically subjugated and socially stigmatized to the same extent as indigenous communities in other continents, which means that they have been able to pursue their interests independently of each other. It is therefore not easy to formulate continent-wide generalizations. The roots of the field go further back in history than in other parts of the world, at least to the aftermath of the First World War. Nevertheless, the official policies of most European countries until recent decades were designed to eradicate minority languages.
Early publications dealing with language endangerment in Europe took a decidedly political view-point, for example Lingual minorities in Europe (Holmestad and Lade 1969), which consists of proceedings of a conference arranged by proponents of the New Norwegian literary language in Norway, and includes heated debate on the rights and the very existence of minority languages in areas which continue to be highly problematic for minority language communities, notably Greece.
Another line of publications – more closely related to language endangerment but from the angle of an outside observer rather than somebody directly concerned with the developments – is represented by Welsh and the other dying languages in Europe (Adler 1977). Several other, but generally more superficial presentations of the situation of endangered languages in Europe appeared in the 1970s and 1980s, but one book, Minority languages today (Haugen, McClure and Thomson 1981 [1990]), a collection of papers presented at the first International conference on minority languages in Glasgow in 1980, constitutes a clear landmark in its indepth discussions and the first signs of what Lucille Watahomigie and Akira Yamamoto have aptly called ‘action linguistics’. The same year saw the publishing of one of the most important case studies in the emerging field, namely Language death: the life cycle of a Scottish Gaelic dialect (Dorian 1981). Since then, the term ‘language death’ has been gradually replaced with ‘language endangerment’, as linguists have become aware of their possibilities not only to reflect on but also to take action in response to the threat of language extinction.

Endangered Languages in Europe 209
3. Special features of language endangerment in Europe
Europe is the home of most of the colonial powers in world history, and European languages are therefore well represented amongst those languages that are replacing others in every continent. In Europe itself, the picture of language endangerment is complex, but as a rule, the languages threatening the existence of others are the official languages of nationstates. With few exceptions, the leaders of these states have seen and largely still see linguistic and cultural pluralism as an unwanted historical relic undermining the so-called national unity of their countries, and have harnessed the government machinery for assimilating minority languages and cultures. Consequently, the large majority, more than two thirds, of European languages are endangered, while those languages that function as the official and dominant languages of European states, numbering less than fifty, can be regarded as very safe compared to languages with the same numbers of speakers in the rest of the world. It should be remembered, though, that a nominal official status does not necessarily secure the position of a language if it is not the factual dominant language of the country, as is well known from the case of Irish Gaelic in the Republic of Ireland.
There are several other features characteristic of the situation in Europe that affect the forecast of language survival in one direction or the other, some of which are dealt with here.
For one thing, it is obvious that languages with small numbers of speakers tend to be more endangered than those with much larger numbers. In Europe, however, the correlation between the number of speakers and the level of endangerment is remarkably poor. There are languages like Faroese with some 50,000 speakers but facing no immediate threat, while languages with several hundred thousand speakers, for instance Breton and Erzya, are definitely, or in the case of Breton, severely endangered. Similarly, North Saami, with its 30,000 speakers, while endangered, is perhaps less so than Romani, spoken by a couple of million people.
A high level of language maintenance among smaller peoples like the Faroese and the North Saami is the result of their relative isolation and their naturally evolved cultural autonomy which at least since recently has been supported by enlightened policies of the leadership of the states to which they are subjugated. By contrast, Breton and Romani are examples of languages treated with open hostility by the authorities in the countries where they are spoken. In most countries, political and administrative decision-makers take less extreme attitudes towards minor-

210 Tapani Salminen
ity languages, but tend to be indifferent to their fate and reluctant to support them. A special case within Europe was the Soviet Union, where the official policies originally favoured linguistic pluralism but a dramatic change after the Second World War made a shift to Russian monolingualism among minority peoples the desired goal, if not in theory, at least in the implementation of educational and other cultural policies. The relatively strong position of larger minority languages such as Erzya is largely due to the ineffectiveness of the Soviet machinery in achieving its goal.
In recent years, the general atmosphere in most European countries, including the Russian Federation and to some extent France, has become more positive towards the maintenance of non-official languages. In many cases, however, the changes are cosmetic and, when more substantial, may have come too late to stop the gradual erosion of language communities. There are contrary examples to the recent positive trends as well, for instance, the position of Sorbian weakened after the unification of Germany from what it was in the German Democratic Republic. One country where hardly any positive changes have taken place is Greece, which contrary to its democratic traditions, continues to disregard the existence of minority languages and to suppress the freedom of expression of their speakers. The even more extreme case of Turkey, is beyond the scope of this article.
As the number of language families in Europe is low, it is common that the dominant and the minority languages are closely related. This situation tends to lead to, in Stephen Wurm’s terms (this volume), both linguistic and sociolinguistic endangerment, which means that both the structures and the functions of the minority languages are being reduced. Furthermore, regional languages genetically close to the official language are often labelled ‘dialect’ or ‘patois’ by authorities and community members alike, which hampers their maintenance and development.
Another feature typical of Europe is the high level of political organization of minority language communities. In many cases, political activism has led to a fuller recognizition and occasionally to a genuine autonomy of a minority people, but there are examples of controversies, internal splits, and counterproductive actions within such movements as well. The recent history of the North Saami can be mentioned as an example of a success story: these communities have been able to secure a semiautonomous area in northern Norway and to gain a better status in Finland and Sweden as well. The North Saami also functions as a model and a source of moral support to many other members in the so-called fourth

Endangered Languages in Europe 211
world movement of indigenous peoples. On the other hand, North Saami activists tend to marginalize the other Saami language communities, which are much smaller and lack political weight. The North Saami also appear reluctant to allow a definitive survey of their own community presumably in fear of finding out that their number is smaller that expected which might have a negative impact on their further demands for political rights.
The Occitan movement of southern France is another characteristic example of cultural and political awakening in minority language circles. In France in particular, literary activities are standardly regarded as the highest level of culture, and Occitan activists have adopted this view in the propagation of a normative written use for several quite distinct language communities in the area. ‘Occitan’ is therefore perhaps better understood as the name of a cultivated literary language than a label for all spoken varieties in the area. It can be noticed that while there is a productive albeit occasionally discordant network of individuals actively working on Occitan literature, the spoken use of Occitano-Romance languages in France is diminishing rapidly, and a cleavage between the ‘pure’ written Occitan and the ‘mixed’ vernaculars seems to be getting wider.
4. Technical and terminological issues
Before we can start putting languages on scales we must know what the languages are. Many linguists would start and finish the discussion on defining the distinction between ‘language’ and ‘dialect’ by saying that it is all too relative an issue and not really a linguistic one, and that no absolute criteria can ever be found for making it. I do not share that view and have grown quite tired of its endless repetitions. While there certainly are borderline cases, not least in Europe, it is usually quite easy to say which linguistic isoglosses amount to language boundaries and which do not, and the truly problematic cases are better regarded as challenges than obstacles. The problem is rather that the units recognizable as languages according to the most objective and consistent criteria do not correspond to the languages listed by authorities or linguists working from a traditional perspective.
Most misunderstandings in these questions arise when languages are equalled with literary traditions. While it is commonplace that one literary language is used per one language community, it is by no means a rule. There may be several literary traditions for a single language (Norwegian

212 Tapani Salminen
and Serbo-Croat being prime examples), or a language community may lack a literary language and use a literary tradition based on another, perhaps closely related language in a diglossic manner.
Another source of confusion is the normative usage of speech dictated by elite groups of nation-states. Most readers have probably heard that “a language is a dialect with an army and a navy”. It seems that many people have not understood the critical and ironic nature of this slogan, but this becomes obvious from the fact that it was first stated in a language without an army or a navy, namely Yiddish.
Insofar as literary use or political boundaries do not define languages, it is possible to work within a strictly linguistic framework, as long as one strives for maximally consistent criteria when dealing with borderline cases. One has to choose between two policies, either a lumping procedure, where highly distinct varieties can at least historically be united and therefore regarded as dialects of one language, or a splitting strategy, which sees each straightforwardly identifiable distinct variety as an independent language. Since the latter policy is in much better accordance with ethnolinguistic pluralism, lumpers being typically those who want to subjugate smaller groups under larger ones without respecting their distinctiveness, I choose to be a splitter and would like to think that so do most people who are in direct contact and cooperation with language communities. In this framework, no question about the status of, for instance, Frisian or Saami arises, but they are undoubtedly language groups rather than single languages. There is, of course, a risk of taking the splitter approach too far, this is why employing consistent criteria across the continent, and the world, is so vital.
At the same time it must be readily acknowledged that there are different kinds of languages, and also different kinds of dialects, with regard to their affinities with other varieties. The concept of ‘regional languages’ as it is been used here refers to languages that are distinct from but sufficiently close to the dominant language of their area to live with it in a diglossic situation. Regional languages are typical of large areas of many European countries, notably Germany, France, and Italy.
There are also cases which I would like to call ‘co-languages’ (alternative term suggested by Christopher Moseley: ‘twin languages’), meaning two (or more) varieties that are linguistically very close but whose few distinct features are nevertheless commonly seen as decisive, and whose borderline is vague or does not coincide with the officially defined language areas. Examples of co-languages in Europe would be Galician and Portuguese, or Bulgarian and Macedonian. The Oc languages of southern

Endangered Languages in Europe 213
France as well as Campidanese Sardinian and Logudorese Sardinian varieties might be called co-languages as well, but the use of the term should obviously not be inflated to the extent that it refers to all pairs and groups of closely related languages.
Furthermore, there are varieties that are geographically detached from a closely related larger variety, and these have been called either isolated or outlying or diaspora dialects, classic examples being Channel Islands French and Cypriot Arabic. At least in the context of language endangerment, it seems appropriate to call them languages rather than dialects, and the term that I adopt here is ‘outlying languages’.
A few languages in Europe have a wide and discontinuous geographic distribution, often across several regions and beyond the boundaries of the continent. These ‘non-territorial’ languages include the Jewish languages Judezmo and Yiddish, as well as Plautdietsch and Romani. The most wide-spread language in Europe is easily Romani, and it may prove better to treat it as a group of perhaps seven languages rather than a single one, but this and related matters are aptly discussed in Matras, Bakker and Kyuchukov (1997). A major omission in this article are the so-called mixed languages with Romani influence, i. e. Angloromani, Traveller languages, Caló, and similar languages in the Balkans, but it is truly difficult to find information about their endangerment status. Needless to say, the same goes with secret in-group languages like Hantyrka, Rotwelsch, or Shelta. Both types of languages are dealt with in Bakker and Mous (1994).
Many other European languages are, because of a practical necessity, beyond the scope of this presentation, for instance sign languages, classical languages like Latin, and artificial languages like Volapük, although many of them may well be described as endangered. Languages spoken across the borders of Europe but with the majority of speakers outside Europe, notably Kazakh, Tundra Nenets, and Turkish, are not described below. Europe is defined as excluding all of Caucasia but including the island of Cyprus.

214 Tapani Salminen

ICELAND

28 2930 32 31

33

27

94

NORWAY SWEDEN
FINLAND

26

25

36

22 23

24

37

RUSSIA

72

38 39

34 35

36

ESTONIA

40 LATVIA

88
89 95 91 90

72

21

UNITED

DANMARK

LITHUANIA

85

IRELAND

KINGDOM

20

44

72

NL 42

45

43

48

99 BELARUS

86

14

B85

46 GERMANY 47

POLAND

99

41

23 4

19 1

13

15

12

FRANCE

16 10
6 7

11

17

CH 67

50

8

9

58

60 59

CZECH 72

R. 72 SLOVAKIA

87

72

UKRAINE MD

AUSTRIA 6654666731SLO 61 75 77
62

49 HUNGARY

83 101

HR BIH

ROMANIA 100

97

79

YUGO-

101

100 98 97

5 SPAIN

18
51 5554 57 56

ITALY 74 70 53 68
69 52

SLAVIA 72 BULGARIA

AL MK78

73

76

GREECE

74

80

TURKEY

82

CYPRUS 84

73 ISRAEL 81
85

93 92 96
103 102
100

PORTUGAL

Map 13. Europe

Endangered Languages in Europe 215

1 Basque

36 Karelian

71 Resian Slovene

2 Galician

37 Lude

72 Romani

3 Asturian

38 Olonetsian

73 Judezmo

4 Leonese

39 Veps

74 Italkian

5 Aragonese

40 Livonian

75 Istriot

6 Gascon

41 Walloon

76 Aromanian

7 Languedocian

42 West Frisian

77 Istro-Romanian

8 Provençal 9 Alpine Provençal

43 Saterlandic 44 North Frisian

78 MeglenoRomanian

10 Limousin

45 Low Saxon

79 Vojvodina Rusyn

11 Auvergnat

46 Lower Sorbian

80 Arvanite Albanian

12 Gallo

47 Upper Sorbian

81 Yevanic

13 Norman

48 Kashubian

82 Tsakonian

14 Channel Islands French

49 Burgenland Croatian 83 Csángó Hungarian

50 Romansch

84 Cypriot Arabic

15 Picard

51 Algherese Catalan

85 Yiddish

16 Poitevin-Saintongeais 52 Gardiol

86 Plautdietsch

17 Francoprovençal

53 Faetar

87 Rusyn

18 Corsican

54 Gallurese Sardinian 88 Eastern Mari

19 Breton

55 Sassarese Sardinian 89 Western Mari

20 Welsh 21 Irish Gaelic

56 Campidanese Sardinian

90 Erzya 91 Moksha

22 Scottish Gaelic

57 Logudorese Sardinian 92 Udmurt

23 Scots

58 Piedmontese

93 Permyak

24 South Saami

59 Ligurian

94 Komi

25 Ume Saami

60 Lombard

95 Chuvash

26 Pite Saami

61 Emilian

96 Bashkir

27 Lule Saami

62 Romagnol

97 Crimean Tatar

28 North Saami

63 Friulian

98 Krimchak

29 Inari Saami

64 Ladin

99 Karaim

30 Skolt Saami

65 Cimbrian

100 Nogay

31 Akkala Saami

66 Mócheno

101 Gagauz

32 Kildin Saami

67 Töitschu

102 Trukhmen

33 Ter Saami

68 Arbëreshë Albanian 103 Kalmyk

34 Ingrian

69 Griko

35 Vote

70 Molise Croatian

216 Tapani Salminen
5. Survey of endangered languages in Europe
In terms of genetic classification, European languages belong to the following units:
the Basque language, the Albanian, Baltic, Celtic, Germanic, Hellenic, Romance, and Slavonic branches, and the Romani language of the Indo-Aryan subbranch of the Indo-Iranian branch of the Indo-European language family, the Kalmyk language of the Mongolic language family, the Cypriot Arabic and Maltese languages of the Arabic branch of the Semitic language family, the Chuvash language, and several languages of the Kipchak and Oguz subbranches of the Common Turkic branch of the Turkic language family, and the Finnic, Hungarian, Mari, Mordvin, Permian, and Saami branches of the Uralic (also known as Finno-Ugrian) language family.
Since the genetic classification of European languages, and the history of settlement of some of them, will be treated in more detail in the Encyclopedia of the World’s Endangered Languages (Moseley, forthcoming), there is no further discussion on the subject here.
The following discussion attempts to evaluate the endangerment status of all autochthonous languages of Europe. Because of the wide ethnolinguistic and geopolitical variation characteristic of the continent, the discussion is divided into six geographic sections. In each section, most of the endangered languages of the area appear in tables following the general format employed in this book. For several of them, supplementary information is included in the preceding text.
In addition, several ‘regional’ languages, meaning those languages that are closely related to the dominant language of their area, are only mentioned in the text and do not appear in the tables. In most cases they are in a relatively stable diglossic relationship with the dominant language and therefore only ‘potentially endangered’, but often the situation is unclear, and these languages and their status are invariably in need of thorough documentation. Their exclusion from the tables is not to be understood as a statement against their importance or relevance, on the contrary, one of the reasons for their different treatment is that they have not been studied from the point of view of language endangerment to the extent that the number and age structure of speakers and other crucial data were available.
Languages that have become extinct in the modern era are briefly mentioned before each table.

Endangered Languages in Europe 217
European languages not included in the tables, whether dominant, regional, or extinct, appear in italics in the text. Endangered dialects of languages that on the whole appear safe are only added in parentheses, even when they are spoken by minority communities, like in the case of Alsatian in France, which, while very different from standard German, is close to the other Alemannic varieties spoken in Germany and Switzerland. In each case, readers are urged to study both the text and the tables before drawing far-fetched conclusions about the distribution and status of endangered languages.
Readers who want to quote figures and other language-specific data should keep in mind that this presentation is largely based on secondary sources, and is itself therefore a tertiary source. Since European languages are generally well-documented, finding suitable primary sources for individual languages is relatively easy, and always recommended. One must remember, though, that different sources may present conflicting data. This means that the figures and evaluations in this presentation are often based on educated guesses as to the reliability of the sources.
The geographic sections are the following: (i) Western Europe, i. e. the Iberian Peninsula, France, and the British Isles; (ii) Northern Europe, notably the Baltic and the Nordic countries; (iii) Central Europe, covering the Low Countries, Germany, Switzerland, Austria, and eastern Central Europe; (iv) Italy; (v) the Balkans; and (vi) Eastern Europe, largely corresponding to the European parts of the Commonwealth of Independent States. For practical reason, Judezmo and Romani are included in the Balkans section, and Plautdietsch and Yiddish in the Eastern European section.
For several languages, a relatively large proportion of current speakers reside outside Europe, but except for the non-territorial languages mentioned above, the figures generally refer to the communities that remain in Europe. Speakers who have learnt a language through formal teaching and only rarely have an active command of it are also not included in the figures. This makes a huge difference for Irish, but also influences the accounts of other languages with a strong position in the school system like Basque and Welsh. In their cases, quite a few young people become fluent in the standard forms of the languages but have little use for them in life outside school, especially because the language is often not used with relatives.
5.1. Western Europe
Dominant languages in the area are English, French, Portuguese, and Spanish (also called Castilian). Lorrain and Champenois may be better

218 Tapani Salminen
classified as separate Oïl languages but are here treated as dialects of French. Occasionally other names like ‘Morvandiau’ appear in tentative lists of Oïl languages.
The only language without a state-wide official status that need not be regarded as endangered is Catalan (including Valencian), with 6 million speakers.
The only regional language not included in the table is Extremaduran, with reports about its distinctiveness, numbers of speakers, and endangerment status being conflicting.
The numbers of speakers of Galician (also called Gallego) and Scots (also called Lowland Scots) can be called into question, because it is difficult to estimate how many people in Galicia and Scotland use local varieties of Spanish and English instead.
Reliable estimates about the numbers of speakers of the Oc languages Auvergnat, Languedocian, and Limousin, and the Oïl languages Gallo, Norman, Picard and Poitevin-Saintongeais are difficult to come by. One could make calculations based on statements that 10 per cent of the population of their geographic areas are speakers. The one thing that is clear is that they are all severely endangered. The figure for Alpine Provençal in the table is based on the figure for Italy alone, and it must in reality be larger, and the Provençal figure correspondingly lower, insofar as they and the given Gascon figure are at all trustworthy. Gascon is marked “c+” in the table, thanks to the more vigorous language community on the Spanish side of the border where it is known as Aranese.
Asturian (also known as Bable) and Leonese are closely related and often regarded as one language. It seems, however, that original Leonese is largely extinct in Spain, while in Portugal, Leonese, locally known as Mirandese, is used actively. It is solely this group that the figure for Leonese is based on.
A well-known example of a language granted a nominal official status but which is not the factual dominant language of the country is Irish Gaelic (also called Irish) in the Republic of Ireland: the number of its every-day users continues to shrink, and this development can hardly be compensated by its ceremonial functions (Hindley 1990).
Extinct languages in the area include Mozarabic, the Jewish languages Shuadit (also called Judeo-Provençal) and Zarphatic (also called JudeoFrench), as well as Cornish, Manx Gaelic (also called Manx), and Norn. Cornish, or rather a reconstructed version of it, and Manx Gaelic have speakers who have learnt them at language classes, but from the point of view of primary speakers they must be considered extinct, Cornish long since.

Endangered Languages in Europe 219

Table 1. Western Europe

Language

Speakers

Basque Galician Asturian Leonese Aragonese Gascon Languedocian Provençal Alpine Provençal Limousin Auvergnat Gallo Norman Channel Islands French Picard PoitevinSaintongeais Francoprovençal Corsican Breton Welsh Irish Gaelic Scottish Gaelic Scots

800,000 ? 100,000 10,000 < 30,000 250,000 ? < 250,000 > 100,000 ? ? ? ? 10,000
? ?
150,000 200,000 250,000 550,000 60,000 65,000 ?

A

B

abcdabc

3333414

3322114

2222214

1222214

1222214

2222214

2212214

2212214

3222214

1111214

1111214

2111114

2111114

1112114

Level
b b c c c c+ c c b– c– c– c– c– c–

2 1 1 1 1 1 4 c– 2 1 1 1 1 1 4 c–

2222214 b 3222214 b 2222314 c 3333314 b 1 2 2 3 3 1 4 b– 2223314 b 3322114 b

5.2. Northern Europe
Official languages in northern European countries are Danish, Estonian, Finnish, Icelandic, Latvian, Lithuanian, Norwegian, and Swedish. The area under discussion also includes adjacent parts of the Russian Federation, with Russian as the official language. Faroese is co-official in the Faroe Islands, and despite its relatively small number of speakers it cannot be regarded as endangered.

220 Tapani Salminen
In my understanding, ‘Nynorsk’, or New Norwegian, is a literary language based on non-endangered Norwegian dialects, and should not be dealt with in a discussion on endangerment of spoken languages.
Regional languages not found in the table are at least Dalecarlian, Jutish, Latgalian, Scanian, Torne Valley Finnish (including Finnmark Finnish), and Võru Estonian, of which at least Dalecarlian is likely to be endangered.
The case of Torne Valley Finnish is one that I know personally so I am able to give a brief description of the situation. Torne Valley Finnish, while usually known through literary activities in Sweden, is spoken on both sides of the Finnish–Swedish border, and on the Finnish side, its diglossia with standard Finnish is reasonably stable. Torne Valley Finnish, while having several characteristic features, is nevertheless so close to western Finnish dialects, including that of my own, that there are no obstacles to mutual understanding. Recognizing it as a separate language is therefore not quite consistent with the moderate splitter-type classification employed in this presentation, which after all that splitting still includes several languages with extensive dialect differences. This being said, it is probably instrumental to the speakers on the Swedish side that the language is cultivated in its local form, and in my view, similar actions would be very welcome in Finnish Torne Valley, and in similar settings everywhere.
Among the Saami (also spelled Sámi) branch, the language boundaries are generally quite clear, the overall differentiation being more extensive than, for instance, in Romance or Slavonic branches of the Indo-European family. Akkala Saami (also known as Babino Saami), being reasonably close to both Skolt Saami and Kildin Saami, is not always recognized but treated as a dialect of either of the neighbouring languages. Since the choice which language it should be a dialect of is basically arbitrary, the only unambiguous solution is to keep it separate from both.
Of the Finnic languages listed below Lude is not always and Olonetsian only rarely recognized as a separate language from Karelian. It is true that the neighbouring languages in the chain from Finnish through Karelian, Olonetsian and Lude to Veps are close to one another, but the language boundaries are nevertheless clear, and it is far from obvious that Karelian is actually closer to Olonetsian than to Finnish, or that Lude is closer to Olonetsian than to Veps. The only consistent solution is therefore to recognize fully the distinct position of both Olonetsian and Lude.
Hopefully, there are no major mistakes in the numbers of speakers published in this presentation, but it may be instructive to discuss briefly the background of the hugely erroneous figure of 500 speakers for Ter

Endangered Languages in Europe 221

Saami that I kept publishing several years ago, e. g. in Grünthal and Salminen (1993). First, I made an elementary mistake by counting all the 2,000 ethnic Saami in the Russian Federation as speakers while only less than half of them actually had claimed knowledge of the native language. Then I blindly assumed that the speakers were more or less evenly distributed among the eastern Saami languages while all other Saami communities except the Kildin Saami one had been forcibly removed from their home areas and consequently assimilated to Russians and partly to Kildin Saami. The figures given below should be as reliable as possible, and those of eastern Saami languages, in particular, are based on field observations of my knowledgeable colleague Leif Rantala.
The only language in the area to become extinct in the modern era is Kemi Saami.
While most endangered languages appear to be constantly losing speakers, it may be worthwhile to notice that at least in some Lule Saami communities, the language that had already lost its function as the means of communication among children was successfully introduced back to the playground through a concentrated collective effort.
Vote is an example of a language that does not seem to die easily. Already in the 1950s, the number of Vote speakers was given at approximately 50, and yet today, the same number is reported. The reason for this miraculous survival is rather mundane though. Several decades ago when linguists were still able to record ‘pure’ Vote they simply ignored speakers whose language, in their view, had been ‘corrupted’ by neighbouring languages. Today only the latter type of Vote is heard, so in the absence of anyone else, its speakers must qualify.

Table 2. Northern Europe

Language
South Saami Ume Saami Pite Saami Lule Saami North Saami Inari Saami Skolt Saami Akkala Saami

Speakers
500 10 10 2,000 30,000 300 300 8

A

B

Level

a bcd a bc

2 223 3 14

c

1 112 3 34

d

1 112 3 34

d

2 222 3 14

c

3 333 3 14

b

2 223 3 14

c

2 223 3 14

c

1 112 3 33

d

222 Tapani Salminen

Table 2. cont.
Language
Kildin Saami Ter Saami Ingrian Vote Karelian Lude Olonetsian Veps Livonian

Speakers
700 6 300 50 40,000 5,000 30,000 6,000 10

A

B

Level

a bcd a bc

2 222 3 14

c

1 112 3 33

d

2 222 2 14

c

1 111 2 33

d

3 222 2 14

b

2 222 2 14

c

3 222 2 14

b

2 222 2 14

c

1 113 2 34

d

5.3. Central Europe
Dominant languages in the area are Czech, Dutch, German, Hungarian, Polish, and Slovak. Not the first official language in Luxembourg, Luxembourgian (also called Moselle Franconian) nevertheless has a strong position in a triglossic society, and cannot be regarded as endangered.
Regional languages not included in the table are Alemannic (including Swiss German and Alsatian), Bavarian (including Austrian German), Western Flemish, Limburgian, Ripuarian, and Eastern Slovak. Most of these languages live in stable diglossia with official and standard languages and need not be regarded as endangered. There are further Flemish and Franconian varieties that may be labelled regional languages but are here treated as dialects of Dutch and German, respectively.
By contrast, Kashubian (also called Cassubian), which has functioned quite like a regional language in northern Poland, is now definitely and perhaps severely endangered. There are widely different estimates of the numbers of its speakers, ranging up to 150,000, but such huge figures probably refer to speakers of a local Polish dialect instead.
The number of speakers of Low Saxon (also known as Low German) is a few million, but no exact figures seem available.
The figure for East Frisian (also known as Saterland Frisian or Saterlandic) may be too optimistic, as some sources only give 1,000 speakers.
Extinct languages in the area are Old Prussian and Polabian, and Slovincian may be added as an extinct outlying language closely related to Kashubian.

Endangered Languages in Europe 223

Table 3. Central Europe

Language

Speakers

Walloon West Frisian East Frisian North Frisian Low Saxon Lower Sorbian Upper Sorbian Kashubian Burgenland Croatian Romansch

300,000 350,000 2,000 8,000 ? 10,000 20,000 < 10,000 < 20,000
< 50,000

A

B

Level

a bcd a bc

2 222 1 14

c

3 333 3 14

b

2 222 3 14

c

2 223 3 14

c

3 333 2 14

b

2 222 2 14

c

3 222 2 14

b

2 222 2 14

c

3 222 1 14

b

3 333 3 14

b

5.4. Italy
The dominant language in the area is Italian (also called Tuscan). Maltese, an official and non-endangered language in a small neighbouring country, may be mentioned here.
Regional languages not included in the table are Venetan, Central Italian, South Italian, and Sicilian. They seem to live in stable diglossia with Italian but would in all likelihood qualify as potentially endangered.
The figure for Lombard is subject to suspicion, and it seems impossible to say anything about the numbers of speakers of the other Gallo-Romance languages. Ligurian appears to be giving away to Italian much faster than the others.
Italiot Greek is locally known as ‘Griko’, to make a distinction from more recent Greek-speaking settlers.
The figures for the Sardinian languages are also rough estimates. It may be pointed out that Gallurese and Sassarese are more closely related to Corsican that to Sardinian proper, consisting of Campidanese and Logudorese (including Nuorese).
‘Walser’ conventionally refers to both Germanic varieties in Aosta Valley, one of which is a typical, rather independent outlying language called ‘Töitschu’, and the other one, known as ‘Titsch’, is very closely related to and in constant contact with cross-border Alemannic in Switzerland. The Walser data below is only supposed to cover ‘Töitschu’.

224 Tapani Salminen

Table 4. Italy Language

Speakers

Algherese Catalan Gardiol Faetar Gallurese Sardinian Sassarese Sardinian Campidanese Sardinian Logudorese Sardinian Piedmontese Ligurian Lombard Emilian Romagnol Friulian Ladin Cimbrian Mócheno Walser Arbëreshë Albanian Italiot Greek Molise Croatian Resian Slovene

20,000 ? 700 < 100,000 < 100,000 < 500,000 < 500,000 ? ? 4,000,000 ? ? < 500,000 30,000 2,000 2,000 2,000 100,000 20,000 3,500 1,000

A

B

Level

abcdabc

3222114 b

2222214 c

3 2 2 3 2 1 4 b–

3222314 b

3222314 b

3223314 b

3223314 b

3223214 b

2222214 c

3223214 b

3222214 b

3222214 b

3222314 b

3333314 b

2 2 2 3 1 1 4 b–

3223114 b

3223114 b

3222114 b

1212114 c

2222114 c

3223114 b

5.5. Balkans
Dominant languages in the area are Albanian, Bulgarian, Greek, Macedonian, Romanian, Serbo-Croat, Slovene, and Turkish. Pomak in Greece is currently treated as a dialect of Bulgarian but may be reclassified as an outlying language, undoubtedly an endangered one.
‘Bosnian’, ‘Croatian’, and ‘Serbian’ are literary languages based on closely related central South Slavonic dialects. Many speakers resent the linguistic designation ‘Serbo-Croat’, and any of the names of the literary languages can be used synonymously depending on the context.
The only language in the area to become extinct in the modern era is Dalmatian.

Endangered Languages in Europe 225

Of non-territorial languages, Judezmo (also known as Judeo-Spanish, Ladino, or Haketía) is still spoken in Bulgaria, Greece and European Turkey by a few thousand elderly people who survived the Holocaust and decided not to emigrate, but the vast majority of its speakers now live in Israel, and to a lesser extent in Western Europe and the United States. Of the other Jewish languages, Italkian (also called Judeo-Italian) is actively used only in a small community on the island of Corfu, and Yevanic (also called JudeoGreek) may be extinct, the remaining speakers, if any, living in Israel.
The numbers of speakers of minority languages spoken in Greece are difficult to assess, and the figures for Aromanian (also known as MacedoRomanian), Megleno-Romanian (also called Meglenitic), Arvanite Albanian, and Tsakonian may be far too high.
One outlying language, Pontic Greek, covered by the UNESCO Red Book report, is excluded from here because it is based in Anatolia, although most speakers have emigrated to Europe.
Vojvodina Rusyn, despite its name, appears to be more closely related to Eastern Slovak than Rusyn, but it has developed a few idiosyncratic features typical of an outlying language.
Gagauz (see Eastern Europe below) is spoken beyond its base area in and around Moldova in several small pockets in Bulgaria, Macedonia and European Turkey, collectively known as Balkan Gagauz, or slightly misleadingly, Balkan Turkic. The Balkan Gagauz varieties might deserve the status of outlying languages but very little information is available about them.

Table 5. Balkans

Language
Romani Judezmo Italkian Istriot Aromanian Istro-Romanian Megleno-Romanian Vojvodina Rusyn Arvanite Albanian Yevanic Tsakonian Csángó Hungarian Cypriot Arabic

Speakers
? 300,000 ? 1,000 100,000 1,500 5,000 25,000 50,000 < 50 300 20,000 500

A

B

Level

a bcd a bc

3 222 3 23 b

2 1 1 2 3 1 4 c–

1 112 1 34 d

2 222 3 14 c

3 222 1 13 b

2 222 1 14 c

2 222 1 12 c

3 222 1 14 b

2 222 1 12 c

1 112 1 33 d

2 212 2 12 c

2 222 1 14 c

2 1 1 2 2 1 4 c–

226 Tapani Salminen
5.6. Eastern Europe
Dominant languages in the area are Russian and Ukrainian. The Belarusian language, while co-official in Belarus, functions much like a regional language with regard to Russian, and can be called potentially endangered, the vagueness of such a designation notwithstanding. Polissian is a variety closely related to and currently treated as a dialect of Belarusian but it may become recognized as a regional language instead.
The only language with several million speakers but without statewide official status is Tatar, which as a whole cannot be characterized as endangered. Because of the geographic splintering of the language area, however, many distinct Tatar dialects are losing ground to Russian.
The only other Slavonic, hence regional language in the area is Rusyn (also known as Carpatho-Ruthenian), which has a large but unknown number of speakers in the Ukraine and a few in Poland (locally known as Lemke), where it is not recognized officially, and a substantial number of speakers in Slovakia where it is gaining recognition. However, everywhere it must be regarded as endangered.
There are communities traditionally speaking varieties of Albanian, Bulgarian, and Greek in the Black Sea area. It remains an open question to which extent these might be called outlying languages.
Komi (also called Zyryan) and Permyak are often regarded as one language and collectively referred to as Komi (in this broader sense, ‘Zyryan’ is not synonymous). Their relationship can perhaps be described through the concept of co-languages. There is also a small isolated community whose traditional language is so-called Yazva Komi, or Eastern Permyak, which may qualify as an outlying language rather than a Permyak dialect.
The Mari languages are often known by the names of their principal dialects, Meadow Mari (for Eastern Mari) and Hill Mari (for Western Mari).
Most speakers of Nogay live in northern Caucasia, but there are two separate Nogay communities in Europe, one in Crimea, and another in Dobruja. The base area of Crimean Tatar was Crimea, but almost all speakers were evicted in the aftermath of the Second World War and relocated in Central Asia, from where some have returned to Crimea. There are also Crimean Tatar speakers in Dobruja, but little information is available about the situation of Turkic languages there.
Krimchak (also called Judeo-Crimean Tatar) may be on the verge of extinction. Its linguistic distinctiveness is not quite clear in the same way as that of other Jewish languages, notably Judezmo and Yiddish.

Endangered Languages in Europe 227

The only language in the area to become extinct in the modern era is Gothic. The Iranian language Alan was spoken in the Middle Ages in several pockets across eastern Europe, but while they have all disappeared, the language is continued as Ossete in Caucasia.
Most speakers of Yiddish (also called Judeo-German) live in the United States and Israel, but there are several tens of thousands of speakers in Western Europe, and over 100,000 speakers in eastern Europe. The drastic drop in numbers is evident when we compare the present figure 1,000,000 speakers with the estimated 4,000,000 speakers in the 1960s and the 11,000,000 speakers before the Second World War and the Holocaust. Young speakers are extremely few, except in a community in Antwerp, Belgium, where Yiddish functions as a school language for a group of children who thus learn it at least as a second language.
Plautdietsch is an outlying language closely related to Low Saxon spoken originally in Russia and from there translocated to Central Asia and Siberia and spread to the Americas.

Table 6. Eastern Europe

Language

Speakers

Yiddish Plautdietsch Rusyn Eastern Mari Western Mari Erzya Moksha Udmurt Permyak Komi Chuvash Bashkir Crimean Tatar Krimchak Karaim Nogay Gagauz Trukhmen Kalmyk

1,000,000 100,000 ? 500,000 50,000 500,000 250,000 500,000 100,000 250,000 1,400,000 1,000,000 < 250,000 < 100 200 80,000 < 200,000 18,000 150,000

A

B

Level

a bcd a bc

2 222 3 14

c

3 222 1 14

b

3 223 1 14

b

3 333 3 14

b

2 223 3 14

c

3 222 3 14

b

3 222 3 14

b

3 333 3 14

b

3 222 3 14

b

3 222 3 14

b

3 333 3 14

b

3 333 2 14

b

2 223 3 14

c

1 112 1 34

d

1 212 2 14

c

3 333 2 14

b

3 222 2 14

b

3 223 1 14

b

3 223 2 14

b

228 Tapani Salminen
6. Problems in assessing levels of endangerment in Europe
European languages have a reputation of being fairly well studied, at least from a purely grammatical point of view, and while this is generally true, there are quite a few contrary examples, notably in the Balkans. Endangerment status, by contrast, is insufficiently known for many if not most of the European languages. The main problem that remains is that the factors employed here and in similar studies in general are static rather than dynamic by nature. Since we are primarily interested in the future rather than the present state of the languages under scrutiny, the most crucial piece of information would be the rate of change in the level of endangerment. The present factors, however, do not immediately shed light on that. Another important factor that is not revealed by the above treatment is the variation within one language, which in Europe can be very extensive.
A related problem is how to weigh different factors. It goes without saying that the absolute number of speakers does not always indicate the strength of the language community. The definition of an ethnic group, in its turn, is very vague, in the European context in particular, so the percentage referring to that concept (set A, factor a) may tell little of the situation. Consequently, in the above treatment, this factor has been effectively replaced with the mean age of youngest speakers, which generally correlates with the proportion of the speakers and non-speakers in an ethnic group. Clearly the one factor that defines the level of endangerment in itself is the presence of children (set A, factor b) and young adults among speakers, and since a bundle of factors can be identified around this issue, one may want to think of ways to further elaborate evaluations based on it.
As to the functions (set A, factor c) and attitudes (set A, factor d) attached to languages, the static nature of the factors becomes pronounced. What we really need to know is whether these features are changing or have stabilized.
I would like to think that the question of how closely the language is related to another, perhaps non-endangered one (set B, factor a) is of little consequence. All languages represent a unique set of features, and without offering to study a particular language on the basis of its alleged lack of interest, its specific characteristics will forever remain unnoticed. I am also convinced that we do not want to save languages in isolation of cultures but rather wish to see languages survive as cultural media, and all cultures are, in my view, equal irrespective of linguistic affiliations. In this way, all languages would score 3, i. e. “a special case important to study”, but above, I have tried to follow the standard guidelines.

Endangered Languages in Europe 229
The level of documentation (set B, factor b) is clearly important for prioritizing documentation projects, and further elaboration could be useful to get a balanced view of both the quantity and quality of previous works. At the same time, a project proposal should be evaluated against its own background, whether it brings forth new information of a language that may be well known from other viewpoints.
The final factor concerning the fieldwork conditions (set B, factor c) is generally irrelevant in Europe, because overwhelming obstacles are few, even in strongly anti-minority societies like Greece.
A few terminological discrepancies notwithstanding, a basic consensus of the levels or degrees of endangerment can be said to exist, at least with respect to languages, which have ceased to be spoken by children. For them, the scale ‘definitely’ vs. ‘severely’ vs. ‘critically endangered’ seems appropriate, and the last-mentioned term is clearly superior to both ‘nearly extinct’ and ‘moribund’, the latter one being both vague because languages without children speakers are all equally sure to die and offensive to many because of its unconditional nature.
The question of characterizing languages that are still learnt and used by some children but less commonly now than before, are the ones for which terminology may need sharpening. I occasionally use the term ‘potentially endangered’ but I do not find it satisfactory because all languages certainly have that potential. In the tables, I have lumped those languages that are merely ‘eroding’, i. e. rapidly losing speakers in young age groups, with those that are ‘definitely endangered’, supposed to have no speakers below the age of young adults, because from a practical point of view. Iinternal variation in each language community in question tends to obscure the difference in any case, and technically, “a–” simply looks too much like “a” while it factually is closer to “b”.
Postscriptum: The author no longer considers Basque, Galician, Welsh, Scots, West Frisian, Low Saxon, Rusyn, Chuvash or Bashkir as strictly endangered, but their status should nevertheless be carefully monitored. An updated classification would have Asturian-Leonese, Emilian-Romagnol, Limburgian-Ripuarian and Sorbian (with the literary languages Lower Sorbian and Upper Sorbian) as single languages rather than groups of two languages. Furthermore, Yevanic (Judeo-Greek) appears to have been a literary variety of Greek instead of a separate spoken language. Mócheno as a Germanic variety is apparently extinct, and can at least historically be subsumed under Cimbrian. On the other hand, Cypriot Greek may perhaps be added to the list of regional languages in relatively stable diglossia. As anticipated in the text, Yazva Komi is currently treated as an

230 Tapani Salminen
outlying language rather than a Permyak dialect. Outlying languages ignored in the text include Gottscheerish (originally spoken in Slovenia; closely related to Bavarian), Mariupolitan Greek (in the Ukraine), Crimean Turkish (as distinct from Crimean Tatar; originally in the Ukraine), and Urum (or Greek Tatar; in the Ukraine as well as in Georgia). Channel Islands French can be better seen as a cover term for three separate outlying languages, Alderney French, Guernsey French, and Jersey French. Three varieties of Nogay, known as Alabugat Tatar, Karagash, and Yurt Tatar, are spoken in isolated communities in southern Russia and have been influenced by Tatar, Kazakh, and Kalmyk, respectively, thus gaining the status of outlying languages.
Notes
1. Acknowledgements: I have carried out this task while working as a researcher of the Academy of Finland. I thank all colleagues who have helped me finding and sorting through information, Paul Fryer for revising my English, and the editor of this volume for his unyielding patience.
References
Adler, M. K. 1977 Welsh and the other dying languages in Europe: a sociolinguistic study. Hamburg: Helmut Buske.
Asher, R. E. (ed.) 1994 The encyclopedia of language and linguistics 1–5. Oxford: Pergamon Press.
Bakker, Peter and Maarten Mous (eds) 1994 Mixed languages: 15 case studies in language intertwining. Studies in language and language use 13; Amsterdam: IFOTT.
Brenzinger, Matthias (ed.) 1992 Language death: factual and theoretical explorations with special reference to East Africa. (Contributions to the sociology of language, 64) Berlin, New York: Mouton de Gruyter. 1998 Endangered languages in Africa. Köln: Köppe.
Collis, Dirmid R. F. (ed.) 1990 Arctic languages: an awakening. Paris: Unesco.
Dorian, Nancy C. 1981 Language death: the life cycle of a Scottish Gaelic dialect. Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania Press.

Endangered Languages in Europe 231
Grimes, Barbara F. (ed.) 1996 Ethnologue: languages of the world. 13th edition. Dallas: Summer Institute of Linguistics.
Grünthal, Riho and Tapani Salminen 1993 Geographical distribution of the Uralic languages [a map with a legend]. Designed by Pirkko Numminen. Helsinki: Finno-Ugrian Society.
Haugen, Einar; McClure, J. Derrick and Derick Thomson (eds.) 1981 Minority languages today: a selection from the papers read at the first International conference on minority languages held at Glasgow University from 8 to 13 September 1980. Edinburgh: Edinburgh University Press. [2nd edition 1990].
Hindley, Reg 1990 The death of the Irish language. London, New York: Routledge.
Holmestad, Einar and Arild Jostein Lade (eds.) 1969 Lingual minorities in Europe: a selection of papers from the European Conference of Lingual Minorities in Oslo. Oslo: Det Norske Samlaget.
Jenniges, Wolfgang (ed.) 1997 Select bibliography on minority languages in the European Union. 2nd, revised edition. Brussels: European Bureau for Lesser Used Languages.
Krauss, Michael 1992 The world’s languages in crisis. Language 68: 4–10. 1993 The language extinction catastrophe just ahead: should linguists care? In Les langues menacées: actes du XVe Congrès international des linguistes, Québec, Université Laval 9–14 août 1992 = Endangered Languages: Proceedings of the XVth International Congress of Linguists, Quebec, Université Laval, 9–14 August 1992. Sainte-Foy: Presses de l’Université Laval. 43–46. 1998 The scope of the language endangerment cricis and recent responses to it. In Matsumura (ed.) 101–113.
Matras, Yaron; Bakker, Peter and Hristo Kyuchukov (eds.) 1997 The typology and dialectology of Romani. (Amsterdam studies in the theory and history of linguistic science 4: Current issues in linguistic theory 156). Philadelphia, Pa.: J. Benjamins Pub. Co.
Matsumura, Kazuto (ed.) 1998 Studies in endangered languages: papers from the International Symposium on Endangered Languages Tokyo, November 18–20, 1995. (ICHEL linguistic studies 1). Tokyo: Hituzi Syobo.
Moseley, Christopher (ed.) forthcoming Encyclopedia of the world’s endangered languages. Curzon Press.
Moseley, Christopher and R. E. Asher (eds.) 1994 Atlas of the world’s languages. London: Routledge.

232 Tapani Salminen
Neroznak, V. P. (ed.) 1994 Krasnaja kniga jazykov narodov Rossii: Ènciklopedicheskij slovar’spravochnik. Moskva: Academia.
Pogarell, Reiner (ed.) 1983 Minority languages in Europe: a classified bibliography. Berlin: Mouton.
Robins, Robert H. and Eugenius M. Uhlenbeck (eds.) 1991 Endangered languages. Oxford: Berg Publishers.
Shoji, Hiroshi and Juha Janhunen (eds) 1997 Northern minority languages: Problems of survival. (Senri ethnological studies 44); Osaka: National Museum of Ethnology.
Solncev, V. M. and V. Ju Mikhalchenko (eds.) 1992 Jazykovaja situacija v Rossijskoj Federacii: 1992 [with a detailed English summary: The language situation in the Russian Federation: 1992]. Moskva.
Vakhtin, Nikolaj 1993 Korennoe naselenie Krajnego Severa Rossijskoj Federacii. Sankt-Peterburg: Izdatel’stvo Evropejskogo Doma.
Wurm, Stephen A. 1998 Methods of language maintenance and revival, with selected cases of the language endangerment in the world. In Matsumura (ed.) 191–211.
Wurm, Stephen A. (ed.) 1996 Atlas of the world’s languages in danger of disappearing. Paris: UNESCO Publishing. Canberra: Pacific Linguistics. [first edition] 2001 Atlas of the world’s languages in danger of disappearing. Paris: UNESCO Publishing. [second edition, revised, enlarged and updated]
Yamamoto, Akira 1998 Linguists and endangered language communities: issues and approaches. In Matsumura (ed.) 213–252.

Chapter 11 Language Endangerment in the CIS
Olga Kazakevich and Aleksandr Kibrik
1. Introduction
Over two hundred languages are spoken in the CIS and about one third of them fall into the category of endangered languages. Three regions of different types and degrees of language endangerment might be easily distinguished on the territory of the CIS: Siberia and the Far East (the north of the European part of Russia with its four endangered languages might be also added), the Caucasus (Russia, Azerbaijan and Georgia), and Central Asia (Tajikistan and Uzbekistan). The Crimea peninsula (Ukraine) presents an additional islet of language endangerment (see Table 1, Maps 14–16). Though these areas were until recently parts of one state – the former USSR – their history, the traditional occupations of their indigenous populations and their language situations display significant differences. They should therefore be considered separately. The information presented below is taken from a number of publications of the last decade,1 personal communication with colleagues working on the endangered languages of the region,2 and some results of our own fieldwork experience. In addition we employed the materials from the database “Languages of indigenous minority peoples of Russia” developed at the Research Centre on Ethnic and Language Relations of the Institute of Linguistics (Russian Academy of Sciences).3
Before we discuss each area of language endangerment separately, a few remarks on their common history as part of one state, first the Russian Empire and then the USSR, are in order. We will pay special attention to educational issues since, among the various factors contributing to language endangerment and leading to language shift in different parts of the world, education appears to be one of the most significant, and the CIS is no exception in this respect.
Russia was proclaimed an empire at the beginning of the 18th century. During the 18th and 19th centuries its territory grew, and so did the number of languages spoken within its boundaries. Language loss, however, was also present. The list of languages which disappeared during this period is

234 Olga Kazakevich and Aleksandr Kibrik
not too long (but we should keep in mind that our information on this issue might be incomplete). Languages which became extinct include Assan, Arin, Kot, Pumpokol (Yenisei language family); Mator (Samoyed); Chuvan, Omok (genetically related to Yukagir); East and South Itelmen. Some speakers of these languages died during the great epidemics of measles and smallpox brought to Siberia and the Far East by Russians, while others shifted to languages of their autochthonous neighbours or to Russian.
However, by the beginning of the 20th century very few members of indigenous minority groups on the territory of the Russian Empire were bilingual in Russian as their second language.4 Most indigenous minorities still led their traditional way of life (semi-nomadic in Siberia and in the Far East and sedentary high up in the mountains of the Caucasus and of the Pamirs). They extensively used their ethnic languages and quite often also knew one or more of the languages of their neighbours, sometimes a regional lingua franca, which as a rule was not Russian. The overwhelming majority of the indigenous people were illiterate. Schools were scarce in the areas where they lived. But even if some of them, by chance, attended school, they were taught in Russian in Siberia and in the Far East, in Arabic in the Northern Caucasus, and in Tajik in the Pamirs. During the 14th century a few attempts were made to teach indigenous minority children in their mother tongues but most of those attempts came to nothing.5
After the October revolution, in the 1920s, the new government decided to make the entire population of the country literate. At first, adults and children were taught to read and write depending on the situation in each region, district, or even settlement and, of course, on the language competence of the teachers. For instance, at the beginning of the 1920s, Azerbaijani (or as it was called then, Turkic) was chosen as the language of education in Daghestan since it was a lingua franca for numerous ethnic groups of the area. The Selkups of the Tomsk region were taught in Russian as many of them could speak Russian, while in the Turukhansk district a young headmaster of a newly-opened boarding school for Northern minorities learned Selkup to be able to teach his pupils in their mother tongue since no children at his school were able to speak Russian. Since the latter was a typical situation for those years, no wonder that the best way to general literacy was thought to be through literacy in the mother tongue. However, most of the indigenous minority languages of the country did not have any written tradition, and this demanded special work aimed at creating writing systems for at least some of them. At the beginning of the 1930s writing systems had been developed for 20 minor-

Language Endangerment in the CIS 235
ity languages; primers, readers, and textbooks in these languages were compiled and published, and the languages began to be used at primary school both as the medium of instruction and as a subject.6 At that time, very few members of indigenous minorities were school teachers; so teachers of the so called “ethnic” schools had no competence in the mother tongue of their pupils and were obliged to learn the language of the children they taught. For this purpose summer courses were organised. It was during this time that the state policy of “indigenization” of schools was underway. The instructions for inspectors of Northern ethnic schools issued in 1935 contained the following recommendations: “Among the teachers of every Northern school there must be no less than two specialists who have been working at a Northern school for no less than two years and who are able to speak the mother tongue of the pupils”, and “An ‘indigenised’ school should use the mother tongues of the pupils in the preparatory classes, in the first and also in the second grade if textbooks for the second grade in this language have already been published and sent to the school”. Meanwhile, special teacher training colleges for representatives of minority ethnic groups were founded in various parts of the country. Starting from grade one, children were also taught Russian, and in the second grade they gradually switched to Russian as the main teaching medium. The school policy of “indigenization” changed abruptly in 1936-37 and so did the newly created writing systems: the Latin script was changed to Cyrillic.7 It is worth mentioning that in the process of changing the writing systems from Latin to Cyrillic some languages just lost their writing systems and went back to being unwritten.8
These facts are well known and it would be no use repeating them here, but for one important issue not properly analysed up to now. At the dawn of the development of the language policy of the USSR, it was taken for granted that if a certain dialect of a language was chosen as the basis for a newly created written variety of the language and proclaimed as the standard, and if textbooks in the chosen dialect were issued, this standard and these textbooks were to be immediately accepted and employed by speakers of all the other dialects of that language.9 Moreover, it was expected that speakers of some minor languages could be taught at school not in their vernaculars but in some related languages for which writing systems had already been produced.10 In reality this solution did not work: not all indigenous communities were happy for their children to be taught in the language varieties suggested to them in the textbooks provided. This, together with the change in the state educational policy at the end of the 1930s, led to the rapid decay in the use of indigenous minority

236 Olga Kazakevich and Aleksandr Kibrik
languages at school. Since then, school education has played and still plays a crucial role in the process of language shift. The state’s teaching policy formed in the 1950s favoured the assimilation of native people: Russian became the main and, for most of minorities, the only language of teaching11 on the territory of the Russian Federation. In Georgia the minorities were taught in Georgian, in Azerbaijan in Azerbaijani, in Tajikistan in Tajik, and in Uzbekistan in Uzbek. Though some minority languages (Nenets, Khanty, Evenki, Even, Chukchee, Nanai) have been continuously used at school since the beginning of the early 1930s, their role there was steadily decreasing. They gradually stopped being the medium of instruction and started being taught only as a subject. As more Russian-speaking bilinguals appeared among the indigenous minority population, less and less attention was paid to minority languages at school. The situation slowly began to change by the end of the 1970s and in the 1980s some indigenous minority languages returned to school. Alphabets were created for some previously unwritten languages and these languages began to be taught at school.12 The beginning of the 1990s was a time of great expectations with respect to the development and possible protection of endangered languages. We will see what came of it by considering each separate area of language endangerment in the CIS. We will finish this introductory part with a list of languages which disappeared in the 20th century within the territory of the CIS: Kamas (Samoyed), Ubykh (Abkhazo-Adyghean), Sirenik (Eskimo-Aleut), Yug (Yenisei), Ainu, Wanji (Pamir).13 It should be mentioned that many of the speakers of these languages shifted to neighbouring languages rather than to Russian.
2. Central Asia
All endangered languages in this area – with one exception – belong to the East Iranian language group and are concentrated in Tajikistan (see Table 1, Maps 14, 16). Most of them are spoken in the Gorno-Badakhshan autonomous region and are known as Pamir languages (Yazgulami, Rushani, Khufi, Roshorvi, Bartangi from the Northern Pamir group, Vakhi and Ishkashimi).14 In the 1950s some groups of speakers of Pamir languages (Vakhis, Bartangis, Yazgulamis) were forcefully removed to the cotton-cultivating Khalton (Kurgan-Tube) region of Tajikistan.15 The endangered Pamir languages are used as family and as community languages in rural communities – from one or two villages (Ishkashimi, Roshorvi) to over a dozen (Vakhi, Rushani). They are transmitted from parents to children.

Language Endangerment in the CIS 237
These languages have from 1,000 to 20,000 speakers, and can be considered stable;16 however, this stability is fragile. The very status of the Pamir languages has been problematic since 1937. In the period between 1937 and 1989, the Pamir languages were officially classified as dialects of Tajik. In 1989, the newly introduced Law on Languages of Tajikistan recognised the Pamir vernaculars as distinct languages. The law explicitly stated the necessity of providing favourable conditions for the “free development and use” of the Pamir languages. But in actual fact nothing (or almost nothing) has changed since then. Different versions of alphabets for all the Pamir languages (on the basis of the Cyrillic) are currently in preparation17 and the introduction of the Pamir vernaculars into the school curriculum (both as the medium of instruction and as a subject) is under discussion. However, in present-day Tajikistan, Tajik remains the only language of education at all levels – from primary school to the university. Yazgulami is the only endangered Pamir language which is presently reported to be taught in primary schools as a subject (Edelman 2000). All the mother tongue speakers of the vernaculars are bi- or multilingual. Standard Tajik; the national language of Tajikistan; is the obligatory second language. For the entire population Tajik is the language of administration, legislature, courts, press and mass media. It is prestigious and is associated with good education and high social status. Russian is much less widespread, but it is still being taught as a subject in secondary schools, and one of the few TV programmes transmitted in the Gorno-Badakhshan autonomous region is a Russian-language programme from Moscow. The Pamir languages also differ in their status with respect to each other. Shugnani is the language of inter-ethnic communication in the regional centre Khorog, and may be called a lingua franca of the region. In the contact area of Roshorvi and Bartangi the latter is used as the language of inter-ethnic communication, and in the contact zone of Ishkashimi and Vakhi, Vakhi is spoken by the Ishkashimians and not the other way round. So, for instance, Roshorvi with its 2,000 speakers is currently under pressure not only from Tajik but also from Shugnani and Bartangi. Along similar lines, Ishkashimi with its 1,000 speakers is under pressure from both Tajik and Vakhi. According to Zarifa Nazarova, a linguist of Ishkashim origin, Ishkashimi might quite soon lose many speakers: in situations of economic crisis; rather many young people, especially men, leave the community in search for jobs. As a rule they get married outside the community, and their children almost always appear to be lost for the language.18
Two further languages in the area deserve mention. One of them is Yagnobi, a descendant of one of the Eastern dialects of Sogdian, the language

238 Olga Kazakevich and Aleksandr Kibrik
of the Great Sogdian Empire. It has been spoken for centuries in the highlands in the valley of the Yagnob river. Small groups of Yagnobi speakers who migrated from the valley in the 16th – 17th centuries now inhabit settlements on the Southern slopes of the Guissar mountain ridge. They have kept their language. Before 1970, the number of Yagnobi speakers was about 2,500 people. In 1970 the Yagnobis were forcefully removed from the Yagnob valley to the cotton-cultivating districts of the Leninobad region. This turned out to be detrimental for the language. Presently Yagnobi should be classified as instable. Today all Yagnobis are bilingual (their second language is Tajik). Though Yagnobi seems still to be transmitted within families (Vinogradova 2000) Tajik, the language of school education, dominates in practically all communicative spheres.19 Recently, Yagnobi has been introduced as a subject in primary schools. The Cyrillic alphabet is used in the published school textbooks.
The only Indo-Aryan endangered language of the area, Parya is spoken in Tajikistan and in Uzbekistan. This language was first discovered by the academic community in the mid-1950s. The first and only book-length description of it was published in 1977 (Oransky 1977; this also includes texts and a dictionary). The size of the Parya community is presently estimated at about 3,000 people. Their traditional occupation is agriculture (cotton cultivation), and they usually live closely together in villages and towns. According to experts (Oranskaya 2001), all Paryas are bi- or multilingual; in addition to their mother tongue, they speak a dialect of Tajik brought from Afghanistan, along with standard Tajik in Tajikistan and standard Uzbek in Uzbekistan (these are the languages of school education); some also speak Russian. Until recently Parya was the language of the family even in mixed marriages. Now the situation is quickly changing: young people tend to get assimilated into the surrounding majority, and as a result, they abandon their ethnic language and switch to the majority language, even with their siblings and parents. It is not clear whether the language is still transmitted to children. The most pessimistic predictions (Oranskaya 2001) give Parya no more than 30 years. Even if this estimate is exaggerated, Parya appears to be the most endangered language of the area – definitively endangered. Urgent documentation of it is badly needed.
3. The Caucasus
The Caucasus is well known as one of the most multilingual regions of the world and it is often called ‘the mountain of languages’. The number of

Language Endangerment in the CIS 239
endangered languages in this area is equally high. At least 24 languages spoken in the Caucasus should be classified as endangered. The majority of these (23) are so called autochthonous Caucasian languages from three language families: Kartvelian (South-Caucasian), Abkhazo-Adyghean (West-Caucasian), and Nakh-Daghestanian (North-East Caucasian).20
The only endangered Indo-European language in the Caucasus is Tat, from the Iranian branch. Tat is spoken in Daghestan (Russian Federation) where it is one of the national languages (this status was accorded to 10 autochthonous languages of the Daghestan Republic and to Russian by the Constitution of the Republic); it is also spoken in KabardinoBalkaria (Russian Federation) and in Azerbaijan. The Tats live mostly in towns, where urban life does not contribute to preservation of minor languages. In Azerbaijan Tats are shifting to Azerbaijani (more than half of the Azerbaijan Tats are unable to speak their ethnic language), while in Daghestan and in Kabardino-Balkaria the Tats are tending to shift to Russian. In these two republics, the Tat language has been written down since 1925. In Daghestan it is taught in primary schools as a subject, it is used in radio and in TV broadcasting, and there is a weekly newspaper in Tat. In spite of all this, Tat tends to be less used in family and everyday communication; it should be classified as instable.
One of the Abkhazo-Adyghean languages, Ubykh, has recently become extinct. All the other languages of this group, spoken on the Caucasian coast of the Black sea and in the Northern part of the West Caucasus, can be regarded as safe, and so are beyond the scope of this paper.
Of the Kartvelian languages spoken in Georgia, only Svan is endangered. It is spoken by about 20,000 people in Georgia. The language has no official status. It is unwritten and has never been taught at school.
The North-East Caucasian languages are the most numerous. They are divided into two branches, Daghestanian and Nakh. The Nakh branch includes three languages of which two (Chechen and Ingush) are safe, whereas the third, Bats, spoken only in the village Zemo-Alvani in Georgia by no more than 1,500 people, is endangered. Bats does not have a writing system, and is predominantly used in family communication. The language of school education is Georgian. All Bats speakers know Georgian as their second language. Educated Batsbis can also speak Russian. Bats is to be classified as instable as the sphere of its use is steadily diminishing.
The Daghestanian branch is believed to comprise 26 languages, only five of which can be called safe with the remaining 21 endangered.
The Daghestanian languages fall into the following groups:

240 Olga Kazakevich and Aleksandr Kibrik

Avaric group:

Avar (the only safe language in the group);

Andic subgroup: Axvax, Karata, Andi, Botlikh,

Godoberi, Bagvalal, Tindi, Chamalal

(all endangered);

Tsezic subgroup: Khvarshi, Tsez, Hinukh, Bezhta, Hunzib

(all endangered);

Lakic-Dargic group: Lak, Dargwa (both safe);21

Lezgic group:

Lezgian, Tabasaran (the two safe languages in the group),

Agul, Rutul, Tsakhur, Budukh, Kryz, Khinalug, Udi, Archi

(all endangered).

The Daghestanian languages are spoken in the highlands of the Daghestan Republic in the Russian Federation; Bezhta and Hunzib are also spoken in Georgia; and Axvax, Agul, Rutul and Tsakhur in Azerbaijan. Budukh, Kryz, and Khinalug are spoken only in Azerdajan, and Udi speakers reside in two villages and one in Georgia one in Azerbaijan.
Many endangered Daghestanian languages are spoken in very restricted territories, some in only one village (e. g. Archi, Tindi, Godoberi, Hinukh, Khinalug, Budukh). These places are remote from centres of civilization, and the people preserve their traditional lifestyles, which contributes to the preservation of these languages. They are used as family and community languages in everyday life and are ideal to work on.22 These languages could be characterised as stable, but the rather intense migration of the population to the lowland villages and towns (as well as sometimes to neighbouring countries) that has been observed during the last decade has created a real danger for language survival. For example, sociolinguistic research conducted by the North Eurasian Group of SIL International among the indigenous minority population of Azerbaijan in 1998–2002 showed low vitality of Budukh (Clifton et al. 2002a) and a shift to Azerbaijani of the Kryz population of some lowland villages (Clifton et al. 2002b).
Most of the Daghestanian languages are unwritten. Only six have writing systems: Agul, Rutul, Tsakhur, Tsez, Khinalug, and Udi. The writing system of Udi is based on the Latin alphabet (Clifton et al. 2002d); the rest are based on the Cyrillic alphabet. Agul, Rutul, Tsakhur, Tsez, and Udi are taught at school.23 Khinalug was taught at school from 1993-1999, and then the Khinalug classes in the local school of the only Khinalug village were discontinued (Clifton et al. 2002c). Agul, Rutul and Tsakhur are taught at Makhachkala Teacher Training Institute. These three languages have the status of national languages of Daghestan. Outside the traditional communicative spheres (family life and communication within the villages), they are sporadically used in TV and radio broadcasts; some books

Language Endangerment in the CIS 241
have been published in these languages during the 1990s (school textbooks, poetry, and fiction) (Kolesnik 2000).
4. Siberia, the Far East and the North of European Russia
In this area no less than 35 endangered languages24 are still in use, though the number of spheres of their usage and the frequency of use is steadily and irrevocably diminishing. Indigenous languages of the area belong to six language families (Uralic, Turkic, Manchu-Tungus, Yenisei, ChukotkoKamchatkan, and Eskimo-Aleut); in addition there are three isolates (Itelmen, Nivkh, and Yukagir) (see Table 1, Map 14). The sizes of the corresponding ethnic groups range from 34,000 to 100, while the number of actual speakers of the languages ranges from 25,000 (Tundra Nenets) to just one to three people (Kerek). Some ethnic groups (such as the Nenets, Evenkis, Khantys, Mansis, Chukchees, Koryaks, and Dolgans) have autonomous territories of their own: Nenets, Yamalo-Nenets, Taimyr (DolganoNenets), Evenki, Khanty-Mansi, Chukot, and Koryak. All these areas were established in 1929–32 when indigenous minorities constituted the bulk of the population there. As time went on, the industrial development of the Northern territories and exploration of natural resources demanded a larger labour force. This was the reason for an extensive migration from the central regions of Russia, and also from other republics of the former USSR. Now indigenous peoples are the minority of the population on the territory of their own autonomous areas (for instance, there are just 16% Koryak in the Koryak autonomous area and less than 1% Khanty and under 0.5% Mansi in the Khanty-Mansi autonomous area). Nevertheless, the languages of the autonomous areas appear to be in a better situation compared to languages in the regions which have no special status.
Practically all the speakers of endangered languages of the area also speak Russian. People unable to speak Russian are only in the oldest generation or among pre-school children (under 7) in comparatively large ethnic groups (Nenets, Chukchee) and within some small groups still preserving their traditional nomadic lifestyle (forest Nenets). It should be mentioned that old people who do not know any Russian are hardly ever monolingual. As a rule, they speak one or more of the languages of their neighbours, as well as their mother tongue. Most ethnic groups of this area were traditionally bi- or multilingual, due to long-term, intense contact with their indigenous neighbours, long before they had come in contact with Russian. Inter-ethnic marriages were typical, especially for smaller groups.

242 Olga Kazakevich and Aleksandr Kibrik
No endangered language in this area can be called stable. The languages still transmitted within the family and thus spoken by children in at least some places of residence of the ethnic group are few. These include Tundra Nenets, Chukchee, Koriak, Dolgan, Forest Nenets, Evenki, Even, and Khanty. There are also some children (though rather few) speaking their ethnic language among Mansis, Nganasans, Selkups, and possibly Shors. All these languages, at least for some regions or settlements, can be called instable. But at the same time most of them are definitively endangered or even severely endangered in the other regions where they are still spoken.25 All the other endangered languages of the area are no longer passed on to the next generation. Only a few have young speakers and thus can be ranked as definitively endangered at least in some areas where they are spoken (Saami, Vepsian, Orok, Central Siberian Yupic, and Nivkh). For many languages the age of the younger speakers ranges from 35 and 50, so they should be classified somewhere between definitively and severely endangered (Ket, Orok, Enets, Chulym, Tofalar, Ulci), or just as severely endangered (Ingrien, Nanai, Negidal, Udihe, Oroch, Alutor, Naukan, Yukagir, Itelmen). Some languages, such as Kerek, Votic, or Aleut, are at the brink of extinction26 with the youngest speakers well over 60 years old (critically endangered).
The least threatened of the endangered languages of the area is Tundra Nenets (about 25,000 speakers). This is due partly to the relatively large size of the ethnic group (over 32,000) and partly to the fact that the majority of the Nenets still keep to their traditional occupation – reindeer herding – and hence lead a nomadic or semi-nomadic life. The fact that they live very far away from district centres and cannot easily be reached has also contributed to the preservation of the language. The only comparable situation is that of the Chukchee. The Dolgans preserve their language in the family and have been quite active in trying to broaden its spheres of use since it was officially acknowledged as a language some thirty years ago – it had previously been considered to be a dialect of Yakut. But the Dolgans are less numerous than the Nenets or the Chukchees – only about 7,000 with over 5,500 speakers.
The situation of Evenki, whose speakers (no more than 9,000 of the 30,000 strong ethnic group) are spread all over Siberia and the Far East, varies greatly from territory to territory and even from settlement to settlement.27 Most of the Evenkis of Yakutia abandoned their ethnic language and shifted to Yakut or to Russian, whereas the Evenkis of the Amur and Chita regions and of the tiny village Sovetskaya Rechka, situated on the Western border of the Krasnoyarsk territory, use Evenki as a family and a community lan-

Language Endangerment in the CIS 243
guage and still transmit it to their children.28 Thus, this language represents almost the whole spectrum of language endangerment, from merely ‘instable’ to ‘critically endangered’. Dialect differentiation creates difficulties in teaching what is called ‘standard Evenki’ at school in regions where the local vernaculars differ radically from the adopted standard.
Unfortunately, the situation of Ket (the only still surviving member of the once rather large Yenisei language family) is much more typical. Ket is spoken in several villages of the Turukhansk district of the Krasnoyarsk territory and in one village of the Evenki autonomous area by no more than 200 people (the ethnic group numbers 1,100 people) A sociolinguistic survey carried out in seven Ket villages (in 1993, 1999, 2003 and 2004)29 showed that speaking Ket has become most unusual and is now perceived as rather “unnatural” by the members of the Ket communities. The youngest speakers of Ket are over 35–40, but even those who are still competent in their ethnic language use Ket very seldom. No Ket parents speak Ket with their children; the natural intergenerational transmission of the language has stopped since the 1970s–1980s. Today, young Ket parents are simply unable to speak Ket themselves. In some families parents (or grandparents) try to teach their children (grandchildren) some Ket, but all they teach is a limited set of everyday words (e. g. nouns for body parts, animals, instruments, etc.). Ket speech recorded during the survey shows constant code switching with Russian. The attitude towards the ethnic language among the Kets is ambivalent: about 70% of our informants expressed a positive attitude towards their ethnic language, saying they need it when they live in their native village, whereas 30% said that Ket was absolutely useless. Most of those who proclaimed the uselessness of Ket were born in the 1950s and are to some extent competent in Ket. The economic situation in the Ket villages visited during the survey is most deplorable; most of the Kets live in poverty and are frustrated since they can see prospects neither for themselves nor for their children. Unfortunately for the Ket communities, the most active members of the Ket population just try to leave their villages and to settle down in the district centre where language shift and assimilation processes are much more rapid. In the Turukhansk district practically nothing is being done to preserve (or to revitalise) Ket. Teaching Ket as a subject started enthusiastically at the beginning of the 1990s at the local schools of some villages. By now in some schools it has stopped, partly because of the lack of encouragement from the regional and district education authorities, and partly because of the lack of language competence in Ket among local teachers as weel as the poor results achieved by the Ket classes.

244 Olga Kazakevich and Aleksandr Kibrik
In almost every Ket community surveyed, elderly people told us about the settlements of their youth. Surrounded by abundant hunting and fishing sites, there the community had led a happy life until they were “invited” to resettle “in a more comfortable place” and partly persuaded, partly forced to do so. The resettlements mostly took place in the 1970s. This was a period of liquidation of small villages all over the country, initiated by the central authorities. In the Turukhansk district this seems, however, to have had an additional pragmatic reason. During the Second World War, this district – along with some other districts of West and Central Siberia – was a place to which thousands of people were deported. Volga Germans, Armenians, Greeks, and Letts were brought to the banks of the Yenisey and its tributaries and forced to live and work there. At the beginning of the 1950s, they constituted the bulk of the population of some villages of the district. They did all sorts of work: fishing, hunting, cattle breeding, growing vegetables. They worked hard and the kolkhoses / sovkhoses (collective and then soviet farms) where they worked grew prosperous. By the beginning of the 1970s, the deported were at last allowed to leave the places of their banishment. Many of them left, and now the farms they had worked on were lacking labour force. It seems that the resettlement of the indigenous minorities from their small remote villages to the half-emptied villages at the banks of the Yenisey was sometimes aimed at supplying labour to those farms. The resettled people were torn out of their usual environment and found themselves in multiethnic, Russian-speaking surroundings, far away from their hunting and fishing sites. All this strongly affected the traditional ways of life and the minority languages of the indigenous population of the district and speeded up the process of their destruction.
When one gets to know the life of the small indigenous communities of Siberia and the Far East in the 20th century it is surprising that some of these communities still have the courage to keep to their traditions and their languages. Just to mention one example: the history of a small Selkup community of the village of Pur Tolka, situated in the Pur District of the Yamalo-Nenets autonomous area. The district is famous for its rich oil and gas fields discovered in the 1960s and intensively developed since the 1970s. Presently, the indigenous population of the district – Forest and Tundra Nenets, Khantys and Selkups – make up only 5% of the total population, the majority of which consists of migrants from Central Russia and the former Republics of the USSR working for petrol companies.
The community of Pur Tolka is the only Selkup community of the district. It currently has about 100 people, only four of whom are newcomers

Language Endangerment in the CIS 245
whereas all the rest are native-born. During the 20th century, the community was twice forced to move away from its traditional territory, and twice people returned. The first “Babylonian captivity” happened at the beginning of the 1940s. It followed the “final liquidation of the shamans”, in the district when about a dozen members of the community were accused of practising shaman rites, arrested and executed. The other inhabitants of the upper flow of the river Tolka were removed 500 km to the south, nearer to the district centre, so that the authorities could keep an eye on the relatives of the shamans. They were resettled in the basin of the river Sabun (the right tributary of the river Vakh) and organised into a collective farm. In their original place, they had had reindeer and they brought them to the new site. But neither the people nor the reindeer could get used to the new place: hunting and fishing sites and pastures were now far away. The children were taken to a boarding school where they soon began to suffer from scurvy and to die of unsuitable food (mostly bread, pasta and porridge instead of habitual fish and meat). Their parents couldn’t hunt or fish properly and began to die of hunger. Reindeer could not find their way in the unknown surroundings and could not get enough food; many of them ran away and perished. During the Second World War, the men were drafted into the army. Many were killed; some came back crippled. After the war, the remainder of the community was allowed to return to the Tolka river basin. In 1947 on the right high bank of the Tolka people began to build a village with a school and a club. The river was full of fish and the forest full of game. They still had reindeer. Gradually life began to return to normal. In 1957, the village changed its administrative status: the territory passed from the Khanty-Mansi autonomous area to the Yamalo-Nenets autonomous area and became a part of the Pur district. By the early 1980s, the village appeared to be in the centre of an oil and gas prospecting area and the district authorities decided to clear the way for progress by removing the village population. This time, the community members were offered a choice: at a meeting they were told that a better life was waiting for them in the tiny fishing village Bystrinka, in the village Khaliasovaya or in the district centre Tarko-Sale. Still three families refused to leave and stayed in the deserted village, saying they had to take care of their reindeer. The early 1990s was a time of great expectations in the country, and for indigenous minorities it was a time of revival and strengthening of their ethnic and cultural consciousness and identity. The Selkups of Rur Tolka spread over the district decided to revitalise their native village. The idea was supported by the district authorities, and people began to return to the Upper Tolka banks.

246 Olga Kazakevich and Aleksandr Kibrik
“We were drawn here as if by a magnet”, one of the community members told us. They are happy to be living in their native village, though their life here is hard and they are far from being prosperous. Currently the Selkup language is preserved and used in the community. It is spoken by all members over 35 years old and by about half of the young people (16-30).30 Pre-school children do not speak Selkup.
Two demographic features of the community are typical of many other small indigenous communities of the area: among its members there are very few old people (over 60) and many unmarried men between 18 and 50. The life is hard in the north and people don’t live too long in the north – these accounts for the first phenomenon. The second phenomenon may be explained by the fact that, currently, many indigenous women who face the choice between living in the traditional way and living in the modern world (with better living conditions) opt for the latter, that is, they prefer to live in district centres whenever possible, and quite often they marry newcomers. Among the descendants of the Pur Tolka community living in the district centre Tarko-Sale, women are the overwhelming majority.31 In Pur Tolka, young families are rare, and children of preschool age are few. In addition, there is no school in the village, so the children study in a boarding school in the district centre. Many of those who are in the boarding school still understand Selkup, some are even able to speak it, but will they remember their ethnic language after they graduate? Nobody knows if they will return to their village or will prefer to stay in the district centre. Will they one day speak Selkup with their children? There seems to be no reason for optimism.
Language loss in indigenous minority communities of the area was speeded up during the last two or three decades by the arrival of television in all corners of the taiga and tundra. Once we asked a young, 25 year old Selkup with a very high degree of competence in his ethnic language why the young generation in his small, practically monoethnic village, abandons Selkup and shifts to Russian. The young man pointed to the TV set in the corner of the only room of his house and replied, “It’s because of that box!” He was right. Currently, mass media together with the educational system represent the two most powerful instruments working against minority languages.
There is a contradiction between what people say about their attitude to their ethnic language and what they actually do in practice as far as language use is concerned. The majority of the indigenous minority population of the area express a positive attitude to their ethnic languages. A series of sociolinguistic surveys carried out in the late 1990s32 showed that

Language Endangerment in the CIS 247
most parents want their children to speak the language of their ancestors. At the same time the language actually spoken with children, even in most monoethnic families,33 is Russian. If the ancestral language is regarded as desirable for children, it is Russian that is considered obligatory:34 parents want their children to feel at ease at school.35
Thus we return to the role of school in language endangerment and language shift. As already mentioned, school is one of the most powerful instruments in language shift. Can it become an instrument of language preservation? In the early 1990s, it was believed that teaching indigenous minority languages at school could help to preserve them. Since then, there has been some positive – and quite a lot of negative – experience. The fact that a certain language is taught at school does not automatically contribute to its status in the community and to its preservation. A lot depends on the attitude of school authorities, on the personality of the teacher, on the quality of teaching materials, and, last but not least, on the language variety that is taught. The right choice of the language variety is crucial for a successful result. We argue that if teaching endangered minority languages at school is to be taken seriously as an instrument of language preservation, it is the language variety of each particular community that the children of that community should be taught. Only in this case will the children be aided by community members still competent in the language. All efforts to (artificially) construct a kind of inter-dialect (or perhaps “a mixed-dialect”) norm or to use a chosen dialect in communities speaking other dialects have produced and are doomed to produce either no or negative results.
Producing teaching materials in various dialects is not as insurmountable as it would appear at first glance. Nowadays, practically all endangered languages on the territory of the CIS are documented to some extent: for each of them there exists at least a sketch of the grammar, and for many there is also a dictionary, as well as a collection of texts.36 However, in view of the possibility of losing some of these languages within the next decade and of a large portion of the rest in no more than half a century, a systematic documentation of local varieties of every endangered language is most desirable. The internal processes in these languages, variously speeded up by external circumstances make them a perfect linguistic laboratory for typological studies of language development and language change. These studies would also allow for better understanding the past history of ‘big’ and ‘absolutely safe’ languages. Teaching materials for every documented local variety of a certain language should become an obligatory by-product of any language documentation programme.

248 Olga Kazakevich and Aleksandr Kibrik

Table 1. Endangered languages of the CIS

Family: Branch Language

Speakers Mother Population School** Status tongue*

European part of Russia

Uralic: Baltic-Finnic and Saami

Saami

500

Vepsian

5,000

Ingrian

200

Votic

20

Siberia and the Far East

797 6,355 302 n.d.

1,890 12,501 820 200

Yes b, c Yes a–, b, c No c No d

Uralic: Ugrian Khanty Mansi Uralic: Samoyed Tundra Nenets Forest Nenets Enets Nganasan Selkup Turkic Dolgan Shor Tofalar Chulim Manchu-Tungus Even Evenki Neghidal Nanai Orok (Ulta) Ulchi Udihe Oroch Yenisei Ket

10,000 2,000

13,615 22,521 3,140 8,474

25,000 1,600 50 500 600

26,730
95 1,063 1,721

32,665 2,000 209 1,278 3,612

5,000 1,000 200 400

5,676 9,446 314 n.d.

6,945 16,652 731 500

7,000 9,000 100 2,000 35 300 100 50

7,543 9,175 176 5,298 124 995 528 113

17,199 30,163 622 12,023 402 3,233 2,011 703

200

538

1,113

Yes a–, b, c, d Yes a–, b, c, d
Yes a–, b Yes a–, b No b–, c Yes a–, b Yes a–,b, c, d
Yes a– Yes a–, b, c Yes b No b
Yes a–, b Yes a–, b, c, d Yes c Yes c Yes b–, c Yes b–, c Yes c No c
Yes b–, c

Language Endangerment in the CIS 249

Table 1. cont.

Family: Branch Language

Speakers Mother Population School** Status tongue*

Siberia and the Far East (cont.)

Chukotko-Kamchatkan

Chukchee Kerek Koryak

10,000 10,677 15,184

Yes

1–3

n. d. 100

No

2,500 4847 9,242

Yes

Alutor

100–200 n. d. 2,000

Yes

Eskimo-Aleut

Central Siberian Yupik 300

887

1,319

Yes

Naukan

70

400

Aleut

5

187

602

Copper Is. Creol

10

100

No Yes (?)
No

Isolates Itelmen Nivkh

100

487

2,481

Yes

500

1,089 4,673

Yes

Yukagir

100

375

1,142

Yes

The Caucasus (Russia – R, Georgia – G and Azerbaijan – A)

a–, b da–, b c
b c d d
c–, d b, c c, d

Ibero-Caucasian: Tsezic

Tsez R

8,000 n. d.

Khvarshi R

1,500 n. d.

Bezhta R, G

7,000 n. d.

Hinukh R

700

n. d.

Hunzib Hunzib R Hunzib G

2,000 n. d. 1,660 340

Ibero-Caucasian: Andic

Andi R

20,000 n. d.

Karata R

6,400 n. d.

Tindi R

5,000 n. d.

Axvax R, A

3,500 n. d.

Chamalal R

7,000 n. d.

Bagvalal R

7,000 n. d.

Botlikh R

5,000 n. d.

Godoberi R

2,500 n. d.

8,000 1,500 7,000 700 2,000 1,660 340
20,000 6,400 5,000 3,500 7,000 7,000 5,000 2,500

Yes a No a No a No a No a
No a No a No a No a No a No a No a No a

250 Olga Kazakevich and Aleksandr Kibrik

Table 1. cont.

Family: Branch Language

Speakers Mother Population School** Status tongue*

The Caucasus (Russia – R, Georgia – G and Azerbaijan – A) (cont.)

Ibero-Caucasian: Lesgic

Agul R, A Rutul R, A Tsakhur Tsakhur R Tsakhur A Archi A

18,000 19,300 19,000 6,000 12,700 1,000

17,777 19,329 19,007 6,165 12,744 n. d.

Khinalug A Kryz A Budukh A

3,000 n. d. 8,000 n. d. 5,000 n. d.

Udi Udi A Udi G Udi R

6,500 n. d.

Ibero-Caucasian: Nakh

Bats G

1,500 n. d.

Ibero-Caucasian: Cartvelian

Svan G

20,000 n. d.

Indo-European: Southern West Iranian

Tat Tat R Tat A

22,000 16,000 5,000

22,041 16,208 5,266

18,740 20,388 19,972 6,492 13,316 1,000 3,000 8,000 15,000 7,971 4,971 1,500 1,500
3,000
30,000
30,669 19,420 10,239

Yes a Yes a Yes a
No a No a No a–, b No a–, b Yes a–, b
No a–
No a–
Yes a–

Central Asia (Tajikistan – T, Uzbekistan – U)

Indo-European: East Iranian

Yagnobi T

2,000 n. d.

Indo-European: East Iranian: Pamir

Vakhi T

20,000 n. d.

Ishkashimi T

1,000 n. d.

Rushani T

18,000 n. d.

Bartangi T

2,425 n. d.

Khufi T

2,380 n. d.

Roshorvi T

1,950 n. d.

Yazghulami T

3,000 n. d.

2,500
20,000 1,000 18,000 2,425 2,380 1,950 3,000

Yes a–, b
No a No a No a No a No a No a Yes a

Language Endangerment in the CIS 251

Table 1. cont.

Family: Branch Language

Speakers Mother Population School** Status tongue*

Central Asia (Tajikistan – T, Uzbekistan – U) (cont.)

Indo-European: Indo-Aryan

Parya T, U

2,000 (?) n. d.

3,000

The Crimea (Ukraine – Uk, Lithuania – Lt, R – Russia)

Turkic

Karaim Karaim R Karaim Uk Karaim Lt

300 (?) 502

2,602 680 1,404 289

No b No c

* Census 1989; ** Taught at School.

252 Olga Kazakevich and Aleksandr Kibrik

Arctic

Ocean

4

1

22

Minsk

2

3

21

BELARUS

14 14

14

19

Kiev MD

Moscow

14 15

20

Ob ena

Lena Jenisseij

UKRAINE
5 GE T’bilisi

R

14 11

18

U

12

Volge

S

13

S

I A N

16

N

O

18 17

I T

FEDERA

11

18

AR Yerewan

10

L

18

Map 2

AZ

Astana

Baki

8

KAZAKHSTAN

9

TU

Irtysch

24 23
25

21

27 28

26

29

30 31
32 33 35
34
36

UZBEKISTAN RKMENISTAN

Ashkhabad
Map 14. CIS

Tashkent
7 6 Dushanbe
TJ Map 3

Bishkek KYRGYSTAN

Map 14

1

Votic

2

Ingrian

3

Vepsian

4

Saami

5

Svan

6

Parya

7

Yaghnobi

8

Shor

9

Tofalar

10

Chulim

11

Selkup

12

Mansi

13

Khanty

14

Nenets

15

Enets

16

Keti

17

Yug

18

Evenki

19

Nganasan

20

Dolgan

21

Even

22

Yukagir

23

Chukchee

24

Siberian Yupik

25

Kerek

26

Koryak

27

Alutor

28

Aleut

29

Itelmen

30

Nivkh

31

Orok

32

Ulchi

33

Negidal

34

Nanai

35

Oroch

36

Udihe

Language Endangerment in the CIS 253

Map 15

37

Batz

38

Andi

39

Botlikh

40

Godoberi

41

Axvax

42

Karata

43

Bagvalal

44

Tindi

45

Chamalal

46

Tsez

47

Khvarshi

48

Inkhokvari

49

Hinukh

50

Bezhta

51

Hunzib

52

Agul

53

Rutul

54

Tsakhur

55

Archi

56

Kryz

57

Budukh

58

Udi

59

Khinalug

60

Tat

Map 16

61

Ishkashimi

62

Shughni

63

Yazgulami

64

Vakhi

65

Rushani

66

Khufi

67

Bartangi

68

Roshorvi

254 Olga Kazakevich and Aleksandr Kibrik
Sea Caspian
Al

Makhachkala

Kaspiysk

CHECHNYA 40

Andi
38
39 Botlikh 42

Mekhelta Andiyskoe Koysu

Buynaksk

Nishnij

Karabudachkent

Dshengutay

45

Karata

43 Agvali

Khunzakh

Izerbash

44

44

N.Khvarshini

Khebda 41

Levashi

Sergokala

48

Aknada

47

Ratlub

Gunib Tsudakhar

Novokavkent

Duisi 37

Pshaveli

46 Khutrakh 49
Kidero
50

Bezhta

51

Tl’arota

Megeb

DAGESTAN

Tsurib

60

Kumukh

Urkarakh

Shalib Archib

Khosrekh

Kubachi

60 Madzhalis

Zemo-Alvani

55

Itsari

Dagestanskie Ogni
60 Derbent
60 60

Telawi

Oktomberi 58

GEORGIA

Lagodekhi

Sagarejo

Gurjaani

azani

Iormuganlo

Tsnori

Balakon
54
54 54

Zemo K’edi

54

54

Zaqatala

54

54

54 Qax

Kirki

Yersi

Chirag

54

Mikhrek

Mishlesh

53

Gel’mets

54

53 Rutul

53

53

Khnov

52 Tpig
52
Samur

60 Syrtych Khiv Kurkent 60

Kurakh

Kasumkent Magaramkent 60

Samur
Yalama Samur
Xudat 56 56

Akhty Usukhchay

Mujux Anyx

Qusar 60 60 Quba

Xaçmaz Charkhi

Qazax

^
Agstafa

Tovuz

S. äki
^
Oguz 60 58

Kyryz

59

57

60

Budug

60

60

57

AZERBAIJAN

Siyäzän

Map 15. CIS, Caucasus

Language Endangerment in the CIS 255
Oqsu

Rovand

Bulungkol

Kevron Vod Ab

Panj Bar

Vanch
65 65

63 68

63

67

Bartang

tang Barchadiv

67

68

Lake Sarezskoye
68

Murgab

67

Khuf

66

62

Badzhuv

TADJIKISTAN 62

62

Vankala

62

Dzhilyandy

62

62

Khorugh

Rubat

Khargush

Arakht

Rosht-Kala

AFGHANISTAN

62

62

Pamir
64

64

Rang-Kul’

Murghob
62,64,67,68

Toktomush

CHINA
Taxkorgan

Dzharty-Gumbez Kyzylrabot

Shaymak

64

64 64

64

Panj 64

Ishkashim
Ashkasham 61

61 64
Zibak

Dung Gushten

Lon

Chitral

Maroi

Ab Gach

64

Lasht

Baroghil

64
Buattar

Morich

64 64 Darkot

Brep
PAKISTAN

Chatorkhand

Gupis

Bubur

Nomal

64

64

Piddakesh

Khudabad

64

Shimshal Pasu
64
GILGIT & BALTISTAN

Baltit

Hope

Map 16. CIS, Central Asia

256 Olga Kazakevich and Aleksandr Kibrik
Notes
1. Including publications of the authors of the present article, e. g. (Kibrik 1991a; 1991b; Kazakevich 1996a; Kazakevich 1998a; 2002).
2. We are especially grateful to our colleague Leila Dodykhudoeva who provided us with firsthand information on Pamir languages of Tadjikistan obtained during her fieldwork in the Gorno-Badakhshan autonomous region in the 1990s.
3. The bulk of the data base information has been published in (Sotsiolingvisticheskaya entsiklopedia 2000; 2003). Some information on the earlier stages of the Database development can be found in (Anoshkina and Kazakevich 1995; Mikhalchenko 1998). The Russian pilot version of the Database is accessible on the Internet: http://socioling.narod.ru.
4. The exceptions were a number of ethnic groups which had frequent contacts with the Russian population; these include the Vot and the Veps in the European part of Russia, the Southern Mansi and Southern Selkups in Western Siberia, and the Aleut and Itelmen in the Far East. Some representatives of these groups began to shift to Russian abandoning their mother tongue. At the same time in the early 20th century some groups of the Udihe and the Nanai in the Primorsky territory shifted to Chinese.
5. The Unalashka Aleut school education should be mentioned as a positive exception (see Golovko 1994).
6. The list of the languages used at school in the 1930s is as follows: Chukchee, Even, Evenki, Ingrian, Itelmen, Khanty, Koryak, Mansi, Nanai, Nenets, Nivkh, Saami, Selkup, Shor, Siberian Yupik, Tat, Tsakhur, Udi, Udihe, and Vepsian.
7. While in the early 1930s numerous articles were published arguing in favour of the Latin writing as most suitable for the newly created alphabets, after 1936 it was Cyrillic that began to be praised as the best means for reflecting specific features of newly written languages and the easiest script for children to learn at school.
8. Among them were Ingrian, Itelmen, Saami, Tsakhur, Udihe, and Vepsian. 9. The background for such an assumption was formed by standard languages
with a long literary tradition. It was not taken into account that this long tradition had been formed under specific economic and political circumstances and that these factors must have influenced the choice of one variety as the standard. 10. Thus, it was expected that Nanai would be used as a teaching medium not only for the Nanais but also for the Ulcis and Oroks, and Nenets not only for all the Nenets but also for the Nganasans and Enets (see Yazyki i pismennost’ 1937: 232). 11. The languages removed from school programmes in the 1950s are Central Siberian Yupic, Koryak, Selkup, Shor, and Udi. 12. The languages for which writing systems were developed (or whose writing systems were renewed) in the 1970s–1990s are Agul, Dolgan, Itelmen, Ngana-

Language Endangerment in the CIS 257
san, Negidal, Ket, Orok, Rutul, Selkup, Tofalar, Tsakhur, Tsez, Ulchi, Yukagir, see details in e. g. (Kazakevich 1996a; 1996b; 2002). 13. Some dialects of living languages could be added to this list, e. g. Southern and Eastern Mansi. 14. The list does not include the strongesr Pamir language – Shugnani spoken by more than 50,000 people as the mother tongue and by many of speakers of the other Pamir languages as their second or the third language. Shugnani is the language of inter-ethnic communication in some districts of the Gorno-Badakhshan autonomous region and in the regional centre Khorog. 15. Some of the Pamir languages spoken in Tajikistan are also spoken outside the CIS: Vakhi, the strongest among them, is spoken in Afganistan, Pakistan and China, Rushani – in Afganistan, Ishkashimi – in one village in Afganistan. 16. We use here the schema for classifying languages according to degree of viability suggested by Michael Krauss (chapter one, this volume). 17. In the 1930s an alphabet was developed for Shugnani and Vakhi, and for some years (until the end of the 1930s) Shugnani was used at school, textbooks for primary school were published in it, and some books were translated into it. As for Vakhi, no information on its use at school is available. 18. The current language situation in the Gorno-Badakhshan autonomous region is described in Dodykhudoeva 1997. 19. See (Vinogradova 2000). 20. According to the Nostratic theory (Starostin 1999: 75), Kartvelian languages are regarded as members of the Nostratic family, while Abkhazo-Adyghean and Nacho-Daghestanian languages are united into the North-Caucasian family. The disintegration of the North-Caucasian family is supposed to date back into the 3rd – 4th millennium BC, and the split of the Proto-North-East Caucasian language is supposed to have taken place at the end of 3rd millennium BC (Alekseyev 1999a: 156). 21. Dargwa is represented by several dialects, four of which – Kubachi, Kaitag, Chirag, and Urakhi – are sometimes regarded as separate languages. Some argumentation concerning Kubachi is given in (Alekseev and Perekhvalskaya 2000). 22. During the last decades substantial work has been done by linguists of Makhachkala, Tbilisi, and Moscow, as well as by Western linguists. For some minority Caucasian languages there are detailed reference grammars, see, e. g., the grammars of Khinalug, Archi, Godoberi, Tsakhur, Bagvalal, prepared by Kibrik and his colleagues (Kibrik et al 1972; 1977; Kibrik 1996; 1999; 2001), and bibliography in (Alekseyev 1999a). 23. It should also be mentioned that within the borders of the Russian Federation, school education is based predominantly on Russian, and most of Daghestanians 20–50 years old speak Russian perfectly. Speakers of the languages of the Avaric group also speak Avar as for them Avar is the language of instruction in primary school; in secondary school the Avar language and literature are taught as subjects.

258 Olga Kazakevich and Aleksandr Kibrik
24. It is difficult to give the exact number of endangered languages in the area since many of these languages are split into dialects and some of these dialects are sometimes considered languages (see e. g. Salminen 1997; Krauss 1997). Compiling our list of languages we mostly followed the Russian linguistic nomenclature as it is represented in the publications of the last decade (e. g. Yazyki Rossiyskoy Federatsii 1997; Yazyki mira 1993–2000).
25. E. g. the Northern dialect of Selkup is instable in the village of Ratta, somewhat between instable and definitively endangered in the village of Pur Tolka, definitively endangered in the village of Tolka and Farkovo, severely endangered in the village of Krasnoselkup; all the Southern dialects of Selkup are critically endangered.
26. See (Volodin 1994; Agranat and Shoshiashvili 2000; Golovko 1994. The survival of Kerek now depends on the life of the last three speakers of this language who were elderly persons in 1991 (Volodin 1997). In the summer of 2000 at least one of them, a woman of about 80 years old, was still alive (information received from Michael Dunn), and (consequently) so was language.
27. Only 11.6% of the Evenkis of Russia live in the Evenki autonomous area whereas 48.3% of them live on the territory of Yakutia.
28. See (Bulatova 1994; Kazakevich and Parfenova 2000b). 29. See (Kazakevich 1994). The results of the survey of 1999 carried out as part of
the project “Bi- and multilingualism and code-switching among indigenous population of the Turukhansk district” supported by the “Open Society” Reseach Support Scheme (grant N 801/1998), as well as the results of the latest surveys 2004 have not been published yet. 30. The ethnic language is considered a valuable heritage by many community members. A forty-year-old man told us how he used to talk and sing Selkup to himself during two years of military service for fear he might forget his mother tongue without practice. In his childhood, after having stayed two years first in the hospital and then in a sanatorium far away from his native village, he returned home and felt he couldn’t speak Selkup. It took him some time to learn to speak it again, so he didn’t want to lose his mother tongue once more. 31. In all indigenous minority ethnic groups of Siberia and the Far East, the educational level of women is much higher than that of men. Among those who received special secondary or tertiary education, women are an overwhelming majority. 32. See e. g. (Kazakevich 1997; 1998a; 1998b; Kazakevich and Parfenova 2000a; 2000b). 33. Over 50% of the marriages of the indigenous minority population in the area are inter-ethnic with one of the spouses being a newcomer (Russian, Ukrainian, Azerbaijani, Tatar, Mordvinian, Moldavian, etc.). The language of such families is usually Russian. 34. Since the mid-1990s, some parents say they also want their children to speak English or some other European language.

Language Endangerment in the CIS 259
35. Some of them still remember their negative experience when they themselves went to school being incompetent in Russian.
36. See e. g. (Yazyki mira 1993–2000; Yazyki Rossiiskoy Federatsii 1997, 2001).
References
Agranat, Tatiana B. and Igor Shoshiashvili 1997 Vodskiy yazyk: v kontse puti. In Kuznetsova, A. I.; Rayevskaya, O. V. and S. S. Skorvid (eds.) Malyie yazyki Yevrazii: Sotsiolingvisticheskii aspect. Moskva: Filologicheskiy fakul’tet MGU. 75–77.
Alekseyev, Mikhail E.; Klimov, G. A.; Starostin, S. A. and J. G. Testelets (eds.) 1999 Yazyki mira: Kavkazskiye yazyki. Moskva: Academia.
Alekseyev, Mikhail E. 1999 Nacho-Daghestanskiye yazyki. In Alekseyev, Klimov, Starostin and Testelets (eds.) 156–166.
Alekseyev, Mikhail E. and Elena A. Perekhvalskaya. 2000 Kubachintsy i kubachinskiy (urbugskiy) yazyk. In Mikhalchenko, V. Yu.; Kriuchkova, T. B.; Kazakevich, O. A. and N. G. Kolesnik (eds.) Yazyki Rossiyskoy Federatsii i novogo zarubezhya: status i funktsii. Moskva: Editorial URSS. 211–218.
Anoshkina, Janna G. and Olga A. Kazakevich. 1995 Bank sotsiolingvisticheskikh dannykh “Yazyki malochislennykh narodov Rossii (YAMAL)”. In Mikhalchenko, V. Yu.; Bakhnian, K. V.; Kolesnik, N. G.; Kondrashkina, E. A. and L. P. Krysin (eds.) Metody sotsiolingvisticheskikh issledovaniy. Moskva: Institut Yazykoznaniya RAN. 7–26.
Bulatova, Nadezhda Ya. 1994 Evenkiiskiy yazyk. In Neroznak (ed.) 68–70.
Clifton, John M. (ed.) 2002 Studies in Languages of Azerbaijan. Vol. 1. Grand Rapids.
Clifton, John M.; Deckinga, G.; Lucht, L.; Mac, J.and C. Tiessen. 2002a The sociolinguistic Situation of the Budukh in Azerbaijan. In Clifton (ed.) 47–56. 2002b The sociolinguistic Situation of the Kryz in Azerbaijan. In Clifton (ed.) 57–70. 2002c The sociolinguistic Situation of the Khinalug in Azerbaijan. In Clifton (ed.) 77–98. 2002d The sociolinguistic Situation of the Udi in Azerbaijan. In Clifton (ed.) 107–123.
Golovko, Evgeniy V. 1994 Aleutskiy yazyk. In Neroznak (ed.) 13–15.
Dodykhudoeva, Leila R. 1997 Sotsiolingvisticheskaya situatsiya Gornogo Badakhshana. In Kuznetsova, Rayevskaya and Skorvid (eds.) 78–89.

260 Olga Kazakevich and Aleksandr Kibrik
Edelman, Joy I. 2000 Yazghulamiskii yazyk. In Rastorguyeva, Edelman and Moshkalo (eds.) 274–289.
Kazakevich, Olga A. 1994 Yazykovaya situatsiya u korennykh malochislennykh narodov Turukhanskogo rayona: kety i sel’kupy. In Solncev, V. M.; Mikhalchenko V. Yu. and T. B. Kriuchkova (eds.) Yazyk v kontekste obshiestvennogo razvitiya. Moskva: Institut Yazykoznaniya RAN. 110–123. 1996a Yazyki malochislennykh narodov Rossii. Chelovek (Moskva) 4: 149– 161. 1996b The Education of the Selkups in Russia: Teaching the mothertongue as a foreign language. International review of education 42,4: 388–391. 1997 Yazykovaya situatsiya u korennykh narodov Severa v YamaloNenetskom avtonomnom okruge. In Kuznetsova, Rayevskaya and Skorvid (eds.) 64–74. 1998a Minor aboriginal peoples of Russia: Language and ethnic self-identification. In Bombi, R and G. Graffi (eds.) Proceedings of the international congress “Ethnicity and language community: an interdisciplinary and methodological comparison”. Udine: Forum. 307–323. 1998b Northern Selkups, their language and identity. In V. Yu-Mikhalchenko (ed.) Social linguistics in the Russian Federation. Moskva: Institut Yazykoznaniya RAN. 111–113. 2002 Education of indigenous minorities of Russia in the 1930s and in the 1990s: mother tongue at school. In Matsumura, K. (ed.) Lectures on Language Situation – Russia, Estonia, Finland. Tokyo. 1–34.
Kazakevich, Olga A. and Olga S. Parfenova 2000a Yazykovaya i etnokul’turnaya situatsiya v Krasnosel’kupskom rayone Yamalo-Nenetskogo avtonomnogo okruga. In Mikhalchenko, Kriuchkova, Kazakevich and Kolesnik (eds.) 270–303. 2000b Etnicheskiye i yazykovyie obshchnosti poselka Sovetskaya Rechka Turukhanskogo raiona. In Mikhalchenko, Kriuchkova, Kazakevich and Kolesnik (eds.) 304–308.
Kibrik, Aleksandr E. 1991a Les langues en voie de disparition en U.R.S.S. Diogenes 153: 72–90. 1991b The problem of endangered languages in the USSR. In Robins, R. and E. Uhlenbeck (eds.) Endangered languages. Oxford; New-York. 257 – 273.
Kibrik, Aleksandr E. (ed.) 1996 Godoberi. München: Lincom Europa. 1999 Elementy tsakhurskogo yazyka v tipologicheskom osveshchenii. Moskva: Naslediye. 2001 Bagvalinskiy yazyk. Moskva: Nasledie.
Kibrik, Aleksandr E. and Sandro V. Kodzasov 1972 Fragmenty grammatiki khinalugskogo yazyka. Moskva: Izd. MGU.

Language Endangerment in the CIS 261
Kibrik, Aleksandr E.; Kodzasov, Sandro V. and Irina P. Oloviannikova. 1977 Opyt stukturnogo opisaniya archinskogo yazyka, Vol. 1–3. Moskva: Izd. MGU.
Kibrik, Aleksandr E.; Kodzasov, Sandro V. and Irina A. Muraviova 2000 Yazyk i folklor alutortsev. Moskva: Nasledie.
Kolesnik, Natalia G. 2000 Funktsionirovaniye gosudarstvennykh yazykov v Daghestane. In Mikhalchenko, Kriuchkova, Kazakevich and Kolesnik (eds.) 219–241.
Krauss, Michael 1997 The indigenous languages of the North: a report on their present state. In Shoji and Janhunen (eds.) 1–34.
Kuznetsova, A. I.; Rayevskaya, O. V. and S. S. Skorvid (eds.) 1997 Malyie yazyki Yevrazii: Sotsiolingvisticheskii aspect. Moskva: Filologicheskiy fakul’tet MGU.
Mikhalchenko, Vida Yu 1998 Endangered languages of Russia: an Informational database. In Matsumura, K. (ed.) Studies in endangered languages. Tokyo: Hituzi Syobo. 115–142.
Mikhalchenko, Vida Yu; Kriuchkova, T. B.; Kazakevich, O. A. and N. G. Kolesnik (eds.) 2000 Yazyki Rossiyskoy Federatsii i novogo zarubezhya: status i funktsii. Moskva: Editorial URSS.
Neroznak, V. P. (ed.) 1994 Krasnaya kniga yazykov narodov Rossii: Entsiklopedicheskiy slovar’spravochnik. Moskva: Academia.
Oransky, I. M. 1977 Folklor i yazyk guissarskikh parya (Sredniaya Aziya) / Vvedeniye, teksty, slovar’. Moskva: Nauka.
Oranskaya, T. I. 2001 Parya. In Vinogradov, V. A.; Tenishev, E. R.; Solncev, V. M.; Shakhnarovich, A. M.; Potseluyevskii, E. A. and G. A. Davydova (eds.) Yazyki Rossiyskoy Federatsii i sopredel’nykh territoriy. Entsiklopediya. Vol. 2. Moskva: Nauka. 413–426.
Prokofiev, G. N. (ed.) 1937 Yazyki i pismennost’ narodov Severa. Chast’ 1. Moscow/Leningrad: Uchpedgiz.
Rastorguyeva, V. S.; Moshkalo, V. V. and J. I. Edelman (eds.) 1997 Yazyki mira Iranskiye yazyki. I. Yugo-zapadnyie iranskiye yazyki. Moskva: Indrik.
Rastorguyeva, V. S.; Yefimov, V. A. and V. V. Moshkalo (eds.) 1999 Yazyki mira: Iranskiye yazyki. II. Severo-zapadnyie iranskiye yazyki. Moskva: Indrik.
Rastorguyeva, V. S.; Edelman, J. I. and V. V. Moshkalo (eds.) 2000 Yazyki mira: Iranskiye yazyki. III. Vostochnoiranskiye yazyki. Moskva: Indrik.

262 Olga Kazakevich and Aleksandr Kibrik
Salminen, Tapani 1997 Ecology and ethnic survival among the Nenets. In Shoji and Janhunen (eds.) 93–107.
Shoji, H. and J. Janhunen (eds.) 1997 Northern minority languages: problems of survival. Osaka: National museum of ethnology.
Simonov Mikhail D. 2000 Yazykovaya situatsiya u khorskikh udegeitsev. In Mikhalchenko, Kriuchkova, Kazakevich and Kolesnik (eds.) 315–317.
Solncev, V. M.; Mikhalchenko, V. Yu.; Kazakevich, O. A.; Kolesnik, N. G.; Kriuchkova, T. B. and I. V. Samarina (eds.)
2000, 2003 Pismennyie yazyki mira: Yazyki Rossiiskoi Federatsii. Sotsiolingvisticheskaya entsiklopedia. Vol. 1, 2. Moskva: Academia.
Starostin, Sergej A. 1999 Severokavkazskiye yazyki. In Alekseev, M. E.; Klimov, G. A.; Starostin, S. A. and J. G. Testelets (eds.) Yazyki mira: Kavkazskiye yazyki. Moskva: Academia. 75–79.
Tenishev, E. R.; Potseluyevskii, E. A.; Kormushin, I. V. and A. A. Kibrik (eds.) 1997 Yazyki mira Tiurkskiye yazyki. Moskva: Indrik.
Vinogradova, S. P. 2000 Yaghnobi. In Rastorguyeva, Edelman and Moshkalo (eds.) 290–310.
Vinogradov, V. A.; Tenishev, E. R.; Solncev, V. M.; Shakhnarovich, A. M.; Potseluyevskii, E. A.; Davydova, G. A. (eds.)
2001 Yazyki Rossiiskoy Federatsii i sosednikh territoriy. Entsiklopedia. Vol. 2. Moskva: Nauka.
Volodin, Aleksandr P. 1994 Kerekskiy yazyk. In Neroznak (ed.) 30–31. 1997 Kerek. In Volodin, A. P.; Vakhtin, N. B. and A. A. Kibrik (eds.) Yazyki mira: Paleoaziatskiye yazyki. Moskva: Indrik. 53–60.
Volodin, A. P.; Vakhtin, N. B. and A. A. Kibrik (eds.) 1997 Yazyki mira Paleoaziatskiye yazyki. Moskva: Indrik.
Yartseva, V. A.; Vinogradov, V. A.; Solncev, V. M.; Tenishev, E. R.; Shakhnarovich, A. M. and G. A. Davydova (eds.)
1999 Yazyki Rossiiskoy Federatsii i sosednikh territoriy. Entsiklopedia. Vol. 1. Moskva: Nauka.
Yeliseyev, Yu. S.; Maitinskaya, K. E. and O. I. Romanova (eds.) 1993 Yazyki mira Ural’skiye yazyki. Moskva: Nauka.

Chapter 12 Endangered Languages of the Middle East1
Jonathan Owens
The present chapter deals with endangered languages in the following countries: Afghanistan, Iran, Syria, Lebanon, Iraq, Saudi Arabia, Israel, Yemen and the various Gulf states, including Oman. The languages which are represented in this survey come from the Afroasiatic, Indo-European and Altaic language families.
The paper is divided into two main sections. In section 1 I summarize the languages which are endangered by a narrow definition of the term, while in section 2 are mentioned languages which, though falling outside the narrower definition, are either potentially endangered, or represent endangered dialects of otherwise larger languages.
The criteria defining endangerment are those suggested by Brenzinger in the organizational guidelines to the conference (p. x, this volume), supplemented by those of Krauss (pp. 1–8, this volume):
Number of speakers, minimally less than 10,000 Degree of transmission
These criteria are open to criticism from two perspectives. On the one hand, simply in terms of basic facts, recent, detailed information from one or both of these categories is often lacking, so effectively what is presented here frequently amounts to a call to conduct effective research on the languages presented. On the other hand, as was made clear during the presentations at the conference, the evaluation of endangerment ultimately is dependent not only on mechanistic criteria such as number of speakers, but crucially on social, cultural, economic, and political factors which exert differential effects on each individual language. A language with 15,000 speakers in one part of the world may be more threatened with disappearance than one with 500 speakers in another (see Section 2). Ultimately a detailed case by case inventory is needed to give an adequate regional profile.2
I would note that I do not include functional extension of use among the criteria. In today’s global world, by definition endangered languages

264 Jonathan Owens
are Languages of Restricted Communication (LRC’s, opposed by terminological analogy to LWC’s, languages of wider communication), largely banned from usage in public places and official functions. For most of the languages summarized in this chapter, more detailed knowledge is lacking, beyond the fact of restricted functional extension.3
1. Endangered languages
In comparison with the situation in other parts of the world, the total number of languages in this geographical region is relatively small, as is, correspondingly, the number of endangered languages:
Afghanistan: 11 Iran: ? (see below) Syria: 1 Oman: 3 Yemen: (1)
These countries will be considered in turn.
1.1. Afghanistan
In terms of language diversity, the most interesting country in this region is Afghanistan; in it are found nearly as many languages as are spoken in the rest of the entire region, and it contains languages from 3 distinct language families, Indo-European, Afroasiatic (see discussion below), and Turkic (see Section 2). Moreover, within the Indo-European family it straddles the Indic and Iranic borderline, and contains yet a third major Indo-Iranian sub-family, the Nuristani (Kafiri).
It is all the more unfortunate, therefore, that detailed studies on many of these languages are lacking. In particular, for most of the languages spoken along the Afghan-Pakistan border there are only a handful of works, more notably those published by the Norwegian linguist Georg Morgenstierne on the basis of various research expeditions he carried out from 1921 to 1960. There are nine endangered languages spoken in this area: Sanglechi-Ishkashimi, Munji, Gawar-Bati, Prasuni, Tirahi (probably extinct), Wot (= Wotapuri-Katarqalai likely extinct) Ashkun, Waigali, and Tregami.
°
It is equally notable that for various logistical and political reasons, almost none of the research done in this area was conducted in situ.4 This is doubt-

Endangered Languages of the Middle East 265
lessly one of the reasons that detailed grammars of these languages are lacking. Another reason has to do with the essentially comparativistic aims of the researchers themselves. By modern standards many of the descriptions are very thin indeed. As early as 1972 Fussman (p. 4), who summarized the the language geography of the area on the basis of secondary sources, aptly remarked that, “Pour un linguiste de l’école moderne, les renseignements recueilles et publiées par Morgenstierne peuvent sembler dans bien des cas inutilisables. Pour qui a été forme á l’école de la linguistique historique, ils sont proprement irremplacables.”
Two of the languages on the above list are probably extinct, namely Tirahi,5 and Wot (Wotapuri-Katarqalai). Of the latter we can witness how the
°
process of extinction has moved on inexorably in the course of the twentieth century. In the 1940’s Morgenstierne reported that Wot was spoken in
°
two villages in the Katar valley, one at Wotapuri at the confluence of the °
Pech river with the streams coming from the valley, one further up the valley in Katarqalai. 15 years later Budruss (1960) visited both villages, found
°
no speakers of the language in the lower village, Pashto having completely replaced it, and in the upper one only a few passive speakers who remember having spoken the language in their earlier years.
Four of these languages belong to what is generally accepted as a third branch of the Indo-Iranian group, namely the Nuristani or Kafiri. The classificatory status of this group is not without its problems, and Morgenstierne himself presciently sketched theoretical issues relating to their classification in summarizing the status of Dameli, spoken just across the Afghanistan border in the Chitral area of Pakistan. “It is evident that there is a strong Kafir (Nuristani) element in Dameli, but we do not know whether an originally “Dardic” dialect has been influenced by Kafir or vice versa, nor is is possible to decide whether borrowing or mixture of languages would be the most adequate term for what has happened” (Morgenstierne 1945: 114). It is furthermore necessary to define the dialect situation among these languages, as it is reported (Morgenstierne 1954), for instance, that Ashkun and Waigali are very similar to one another.
Thanks to the work of Kieffer, among the better documented languages are Ormuri and Parachi. The latter, spoken in three valleys north of Kabul, is interesting in that in two of the valleys it serves as a LRC in the face of Persian, but in the third valley forms the middle link in a three-valued hierarchy, Persian, Parachi, Pashai. Persian is the LWC, Pashai, a larger Dardic language, the lowest member of the hierarchy, while Parachi holds a place in the middle inasfar as Prasun speakers may also learn Parachi, though not vice versa. This state of affairs (in the 1970’s) was due to the rel-

266 Jonathan Owens
atively better economic status of the Parachi-speaking farmers (Kieffer 1986: 146). Ormuri is spoken in two villages separated by some 200 kilometers, BarakÌ-Barak in Afghanistan and Kaaniigraam in Pakistan.
The final endangered language in Afghanistan is what I term “Central Asian Mixed Arabic”. In the 7th and 8th centuries Arab armies conquered eastern Iran (Khorasan), and much of what today is Afghanistan, Uzbekistan and Tadjekistan. Descendants of these speakers became largely cut off from the rest of the Arabic-speaking world by the 11th century. What developed thereafter is a mixed variety of Arabic whose phonology and morphology are basically Arabic, but whose syntax has been influenced by adstratal languages, particularly Persian, to such a degree that in important respects it no longer has the syntax of Arabic. Instead of the universal SVO word order of Arabic dialects, for instance, it has a consistent SOV sequence, like Persian (see Owens 1999).
I would note that I include this variety as an endangered language, not as an endangered dialect of Arabic. That is, its fundamentally mixed character provides prima facie linguistic reasons for considering it a separate language.6
1.2. Iran
Languages of Iran present two sorts of problems for present purposes. The first is a fundamental one, beyond resolution by an outside observer such as myself. It relates to the question of how many languages are to be recognized at all in Iran. On the one hand Windfuhr (1989: 251) notes that “The New West Iranian languages [including Iran, J. O.] exhibit a diversity on all linguistic levels as great as that of Eastern Iranian”. The Eastern Iranian languages include those summarized above for Afghanistan. On the other hand, Redard (1970: 10) writing about Central Persian dialects (roughly, spoken north of Isfahan) remarks that “The actual dialects are close to varieties of Persian, and the distinction is not always easy to establish”. Similarly, Yarshater (1969: 17) characterizes Tati as “Iranian dialects spoken in northwestern Persia…” Krahnke (1976: 47) notes the close linguistic resemblances between the Central dialects, Tati, Semnani, Sivandi and Xuri, to the extent that some of these (e. g. Sivandi, Xuri) are sometimes even classed among the Central dialects. The apparent lack of clarity regarding the boundaries between linguistic entities is reflected in terminological ambiguity as well. The “New West Iranian languages” spoken of by Windfuhr in the quote above become, on the same page (1989: 251, at

Endangered Languages of the Middle East 267
bottom), “the West Iranian ‘dialects’ [my emphasis, J. O.]”.7 Voegelin (1965: 196) speaks in terms of an intelligibility chain stretching across Iran. It would, in any case, appear that many of those varieties which possibly qualify as independent languages (e. g. Central Persian dialects, Fars or SW dialects, Semnani) have a population of speakers above that of the danger line used here, as do a number of other languages of the Western Iranian family, such as Gilaki and Tati. The second problem awaits resolution of the first; should a decision regarding the language/dialect divide be possible, assigning endangered status would have to be carried out on a case by case basis. I leave this problem to specialists on the Iranian languages.
1.3. Syria
The remaining languages all belong to the Semitic family. In Syria there are three villages where modern Western Neo-Aramaic is spoken, Maʕlula, Baxʕa and Jubbʕadin. The population of speakers of this language appears to actually have increased during the course of the 20th century, due to natural population growth in the villages coupled with reduced emigration to the USA and Damascus (Werner Arnold p. c.). Arnold (see e. g. 1990, 2000) estimates the increase to have been in the range from 1,500 in 1900 to 10,000 today.
1.4. Oman and Yemen
In Oman and Yemen are found the six modern South Arabic languages. Three of these fall under the endangered rubric in the sense defined above. Two of the languages are spoken in Oman, which in recent years has been relatively inaccessible to research. The least is known about Bat ari, estimated to be spoken by about 300 speakers along the southern
°
coast of Oman in an area hardly accessible except by boat. Harsusi (Har°
suusi) is spoken by about 600 individuals in the Jiddat al Haraasiis area in °
south-central Oman. Simeone-Senelle (1997b: 8) reports that about 15 years ago Sultan Qaboos of Oman designated the Harsuusi’s as the guardians of a nature park established in the area, a situation which has encouraged Harsuusis to remain in the area and effectively acting as a language maintenance program. Estimates for Habyot (Habyoot), spoken on both sides of the Yemen-Oman border, run between 100 (Simeone-Senelle 1997a: 379) and 2,000 the latter figure one given to Werner Arnold (Arnold p. c.) by a native Habyot. Simeone-Senelle (p. c.) reports

268 Jonathan Owens
that there is some mutual intelligibility between Habyot and the larger Mehri language, particularly on the Yemen side of the Oman-Yemen border, which is at one and the same time a LWC adstrate for Habyot and a relative within the South Arabic sub-family of languages.
2. Further languages
Three further languages or language clusters may be mentioned which, though not falling within the criteria set here for endangered, nonetheless face a potentially perilous future in the region.
2.1. Eastern Neo-Aramaic
Eastern Aramaic is spoken in eastern Turkey, Azerbaidjan, NW Iran, Iraq and NE Syria. It is spoken by a people who identify themselves variously as Assyrians, Syrians, Chaldeans or Chaldeans (Athuuraye, Suryaye, Kaldanaye), and its varieties may be known by its various dialect names: Urmi, Tkhumi, Turoyo, Jilu, Baz, Mandaic, etc. There also has developed
°
a pan-Eastern Aramaic koine.8 It is not mutually intelligible with Western Neo-Aramaic, from which it
is separated historically by well over 1,000 years. While the number of present-day speakers may be fairly large,9 and in some areas, e. g. the Tkhumi dialects spoken in NE Syria, fairly well protected in their isolation, the twentieth century witnessed a rapid decimation of their numbers. It represents, perhaps, a textbook illustration of how a language can quickly move towards the endangered zone in reaction to unfavorable socio-political upheavals. It was the fate of eastern Aramaic speakers to choose the losing Russian side in their occupation of eastern Turkey during WW I, to be socially allied to the English during their occupation of Iraq, and to be Christians in a dominantly Islamic region of the world. These attributes brought ideological distrust upon this minority group, resulting in various forced exoduses at different times in the twentieth century. The ultimate exodus is that out of the region entirely, to Israel, the US (Chicago in particular) and Central Europe. Jastrow (1992: 1) estimates that there may be as many as 40,000 people of Turoyo (Anatolia)
°
descent in Germany and Sweden, as opposed to a few hundred still in Turkey. As Odisho (1993, 1999) has shown, residence in the West spells the certain demise of the language there within three or four generations. While there are still enclaves in the Middle East where the language is

Endangered Languages of the Middle East 269

stable, should political events again turn against them, the number of Eastern Neo-Aramaic speakers could quickly sink to the danger zone.

2.2. Mogholi
Mogholi is basically Mongol, spoken by descendants of the Mongol invasions of the 13th century in a few villages south of Herat in Afghanistan. While Weiers (1972: 156) suggests that this variety of Mongol constitutes a mixed language (see above for Central Asian Mixed Arabic), he does not make a solid linguistic case for this judgment, and lacking such evidence the variety would not count as an endangered dialect of an otherwise non-endangered language (as with Cypriot Arabic, see n. 4). Already in the 1970’s Weiers foresaw the imminent demise of the variety.

2.3. Languages with multiple lives
The Middle East is the repository of a rich variety of dead languages, attested through pergament, paper, cuneiform and stone inscriptions (see e.g Robin 1992). Lacking a living constituency, the survival of their documentation in all its forms is dependent on the benign and supportive policies of the countries where they are found.10

3. Tables

I divide the languages into two tables, the first geographically defined, Afghanistan, the second linguistically, all languages members of the Semitic family, with the problematic case of Central Asian Mixed Arabic included here.

Table 1. Afghanistan, Phase I

Language 1. Oormuri
°

Other names
Baraki (= autoname)

2. Paraachii

3. SanglechiIshkashimi

LWC Family

Speakers Trans- Status mission

Persian11 IE\I-Ir\Ir\ I (Afghan.) I eastern\ SE (1986)12

a–, b

Pashto

III (Pak.) III

a–

Persian IE\I-Ir\Ir\ IV (1986) IV

a–

eastern\ SE

Persian IE\I-Ir\Ir\ III (c. 1932,

a–

eastern\NE\ 1986)

Pamir

270 Jonathan Owens

Table 1. cont., Phase I

Language
4. MunjiYidgha

Other names Munjani

LWC Persian

5. Gawar-Bati, Gavaar-

with dialects baatii-

Shumasti Gabari

and Grangali

6. Tirahi

Tiro

Pashto Pashto

7. Wot °

Wotapuri- Pashto Kat°arqalai

8. Ashkun

Pashto

9. Prasun 10. Tregami

Veron (= Pashto autoname), Wasi-weri Gambiri Pashto

11. Waigali

Kalasaalaa °

Pashto

Family

Speakers Trans- Status

mission

IE\I-Ir\Ir\ III (c. 1938,

a–

eastern\NE\ 1986)

Pamir

IE\I-Ir\

III (?)

a– (?)

Indic\north-

ern\ Dardic\

Kunar

IE\I-Ir\

I (prob-

e

Indic\north- ably e)

ern\ Dardic\

Kunar

IE\I-I\

I (if not e) I

d, e

Indic\north-

ern\ Dardic\

Kunar

IE\I-Ir\

III (1932)

a– (?)

Nuristani

IE\I-Ir\

III (1973)

a– (?)

Nuristani

IE\I-Ir\ Nuristani IE\I-Ir\ Nuristani

III III (1932)

a– (?) a– (?)

Table 1. Phase II
Language
1. Oormuri °
2. Parachi 3. Sanglechi-
Ishkashimi 4. Munji-Yidgha 5. Gawar-Bati 6. Tirahi 7. Wot
°
8. Ashkun 9. Prasun 10. Tregami 11. Waigalii

Endangerment II (?) III (?) III (?)

Documentation
B B A-B

Feasibility
A A A

III (?)

A-B

A

III (?)

A-B

A

I

A

?

I

A-B

?

III

A-B

A

III

A-B

A

III

A-B

A

III

A-B

A

Conditions (Afghan./Pak.)
X/? X/? X/?
X/? X/? X/? X/? X/? X/? X/? X/?

Endangered Languages of the Middle East 271

Table 2. Semitic, Phase I

Language

Other LWC Language

names

family

Speakers

Trans- Status mission

1. Central

Persian, ? AA\Semitic\ III (Uzbek.) III

a

Asian

Uzbek West\Central

Mixed

+ IE\I-Ir\Ir

Arabic

III (Afghan.) ?

?

? (Tadj./Iran) III

?

2. Habyoot

Habyoot Arabic, AA\Semitic\ Mahra Mehri West\South\
Eastern

II/III

III (?) a

3. Harsuusi

Arabic AA\Semitic\ III (1977)

a

°

West\South\

Eastern

4. Bat ari

Arabic AA\Semitic\ II (1983)

a

°

West\South\

Eastern

5. Neo-West Aramaic

Arabic AA\Semitic\ IV West\Central\ Northwest

IV

a

Table 2. Phase II

Language
1. Central Asian Arabic
2. Habyoot 3. Harsuusi
°
4. Bat ari °
5. Neo-West Aramaic

Endangerment III
? ?
II III
II
IV

Documentation
B
B A A A-B A-B
A-B
X

Feasibility
A (Uzbek.)
? (Afghan.) A (Iran) ? (Tadj.) A A
A
A

Conditions
A
X A ? A X (Oman) A (Yemen) X (Oman) A (Yemen) A

272 Jonathan Owens

2

UZBEKISTAN

Kelifsk TURKMENISTAN

iy Uzboy

2 2 22 Mazar-e Sharif

Syrdar’ya

KYRGYSTAN

TA J I K I S T A N Dushanbe
Pyandz
Feyzabad

CHINA

1 Mogholi

8 Ashkun

2 Central Asian Mixed Arabic

9 Gawarbati

3 Parachi

10 Waigali

4 Ormuri

11 Tregami

5 Sanglechi-Ishkashimi 12 Wotapuri

6 Munji-Yidgha

13 Shumasti/Grangali

7 Prasuni

14 Tiro

h Indus Alingar River Bashgal River

Herat 1111 1

Jalalabad Kabul

Peshawar

Islamabad 5
AFGHANISTAN

IRAN

Qandahar

Map 17. Afghanistan and Neighbouring Countries

6 AFGHANISTAN

PAKISTAN

7

3 3 3

Katar 10

9

10 11 9

8

12

13 Pech River 10

Alishang River

Kabul

Kabul River

13 Kunar River

PAKISTAN

Jalalabad

14

4 Baraki

SAUDI ARABIA 15

OMAN

J

i

dd H

a a

t r

a

a s

l i

s

17

Thamud #

15

15

Haberut # 18

16

15

Jadib # #

Hawf

Wadi Masilah

t
w a

al-Ghayda #

m a r d Ha

15 a h r a h

M

#

l

Qishn

A

18

#

#

Salalah Mirbat

YE M E N

#
Mukalla

of Gulf

n e d A

QHaadduibbo

‘Abd al Kuri

Qalansiya

Samha

#

##

20

#

Noged

Darsa

Soqotra

19
Kuria Muria

15 Mahri 16 Habyot 17 Harsusi 18 Jibbali 19 Bathari 20 Soqotri
Map 18. Yemen and Oman

Endangered Languages of the Middle East 273

274 Jonathan Owens
Abbreviations
AA = Afroasiatic, IE = Indo-European, I-Ir = Indo-Iranian, Ir = Iranian, Pak = Pakistan, Afghan. = Afghanistan, LRC = language of restricted communication, LWC = language of wider communication
Notes
1. I would like to thank Dr. Marie-Claude Simeone-Senelle, Dr. Edward Odisho, and Prof. Dr. Werner Arnold for advice on various questions which emerged in the preparation of this article.
2. I should note that I have excluded from the study languages introduced into the region by relatively recent immigration.
3. Functional restrictedness is a fact of life for nearly all languages (English may be the only exception) and need not necessarily be construed as a sign of impoverishment, neglect, or discrimination. Functionally restricted languages may exhibit the vitality of less restricted ones in various ways (e. g. show dialectal and socially-based differentiation, and have distinct, institutionalized registers and para-varieties (e. g. secret languages).
4. Morgenstierne himself found most of his informants either in Kabul, or along the Pakistan side of the border in Chitral. Grierson (1925), a study of Tirahi carried out by a third party in Peshawar in Pakistan, confirms the difficulty of conducting research in the area. Budruss (1960) is one of the few exceptions.
5. Kieffer specifically searched out speakers of the language in the 1970’s but found that it was remembered only in phrases by older speakers (Kieffer 1986: 106).
6. This case can be opposed to one such as Cypriot (Kormakiti) Arabic, a small and endangered variety strongly influenced by Greek, but not to the extent that its basic linguistic structure (phonology, morphology, syntax) has been ‘de-arabicized’. I would not include Cypriot Arabic among endangered languages in the sense of this volume, as what is endangered is a dialect of a much larger, non-endangered entity.
7. Windfuhr 1989: 251 “Some recent studies towards the better understanding of the West Iranian dialects…” [my italics, J. O.].
8. Odisho (p.c.) distinguishes Central Neo-Aramaic, associated with SE Turkey (e. g. Turoyo), from Eastern Neo-Aramaic, which includes the other varieties. I follow° Jastrow (1997: 347), who opposes Western to Eastern Neo-Aramaic as the primary genetic split, while leaving open the possibility that Eastern NeoAramaic may include a number of distinct languages within it.

Endangered Languages of the Middle East 275
9. Odisho (p. c.) puts the number at 500,000, with 100,000 in the Chicago area alone.
10. Since my writing this article, Matras (1999) has appeared, which describes Domari, an Indic language related to Romani spoken mainly in urban areas in Israel, Syria, Lebanon, Palestine and Jordan. In Jerusalem, which Matras describes, it is spoken mainly by those over 50, so that of the 600–700 estimated ethnic Dom, only about 20% actively use the language.
11. Here, as elsewhere when reference is made to Afghanistan, Persian means the Afghan variety, known as Daari.
12. The years set in brackets are those for which the number of speakers cited was reported.

References

NJL = Norwegian Journal of Linguistics JAOS = Journal of the American Oriental Society

Arnold, Werner

1990 Das Neuwestaramäische: Grammatik. Erlangen.

2000 The Arabic dialects in the Turkish province of Hatay and the Arama-

ic dialects in the Syrian Mountains of Qalamun: Two minority lan-

guages compared. In Owens (ed.) 347–370.

Budruss, Georg

1960

Die Sprache von Wotapuur und Kataarqalaa: Linguistische Studien

°

°

im afghanistanischen Hindukusch. Bonn: Orientalisches Seminar der

Universität Bonn.

Fussman, Gerard

1972 Atlas Linguistique des Parlers Dardes et Kafirs. Paris: Ecoles

Francaise d’Extreme-Orient.

Grierson, George

1925 On the Tirahi language. Journal of the royal Asiatic society 405–416.

Hetzron, Robert (ed.)

1997 The Semitic languages. London: Routledge.

Jastrow, Otto

1992 1997

Lehrbuch der Turoyo-Sprache. Wiesbaden: Harrassowitz. The Neo-Aram° aic languages. In Hetzron (ed.) 334–377.

Krahnke, John

1976 Linguistic relationships in Central Iran. PhD Thesis, Univ. of Michi-

gan.

Krauss, Michael

2006 Classification and terminology for degrees of language endanger-

ment. (Chapter 1, this volume).

276 Jonathan Owens
Matras, Yaron 1999 The state of present-day Domari in Jerusalem. Mediterranean language review 1–58.
Morgenstierne, Georg 1932 Report on a linguistic mission to North-western India. Oslo: Instituttet for Sammenlignende Kulturforskning. (Journey in 1924). 1938 Indo-Iranian frontier languages. Oslo: H. Aschehoug. 1942 Notes on Dameli: a Kafir-Dardic language of Chitral. NJL 12: 115– 197. 1945 Notes on Shumashti: A Dardic dialect of the Gawar-bati type. NJL 13: 239–281. 1950 Notes on Gawar-Bati. Skrifter utgitt av Det Norske Videnskaps-Akademi i Oslo. Oslo: I Kommisjon Hos Jacob Dybwad, 1–62. 1952 Linguistic Gleanings from Nuristan. NJL 16: 117–135. 1954 The Waigali language. NJL 17: 146–324. 1974 Languages of Nuristan and surrounding regions. In Jettmar, Karl (ed.). Cultures of the Hindukush. Wiesbaden: Steiner. 1–11.
Kieffer, Charles 1985 Afghanistan V, Languages. In Yarshater, Ehsan (ed.). Encyclopedia Iranica. London: Routledge and Kegan Paul. 501–16. 1986 La maintenance de l’identite ethnique chez les Arabes arabophones, les Oormur et les Parachi en Afghanistan. In Orywal (ed.) 101–164.
°
2000 The Arabic speech of Bactria (Afghanistan). In Owens (ed.) 181–198. Odisho, Edward
1988 The sound system of modern Assyrian. Wiesbaden: Harrassowitz. 1993 Bilingualism and multilingualism among Assyrians: A case of lan-
guage erosion and demise. In Continiu, R.; F. Pennacchietti and M. Tosco (eds.). Semitica. Torino: Silvio Zamorani Editore, 189–200. 1999 Assyrian language maintenance and erosion in U. S.: a World War I immigrant family case study. Journal of Assyrian academic studies XIII: 3–14. Orywal, Erwin (ed.) 1986 Die ethnischen Gruppen Afghanistans. Wiesbaden: Reichert. 1986 Erläuterungen zur Verbreitungskarten. In Orywal (ed.) 11–72. Owens, Jonathan 1999 Creole Arabic: the orphan of all orphans. Paper presented at the IX Colloque International des Etudes Créoles, Aix en Provence. Owens, Jonathan (ed.) 2000 Arabic as a minority language. Berlin: Mouton de Gruyter. Redard, Georges 1970 Other Iranian languages. In Sebeok, Thomas (ed.) Current trends in linguistics, Vol. 6, Linguistics in South West Asia and North Africa. The Hague: Mouton. 97–138

Endangered Languages of the Middle East 277
Robin, Christian (ed.) 1992 L’arabie antique de Karib’il a Mahomet. Aix en Provence: Editions Edisud.
Ruhlen, Merrit 1987 A guide to the world’s languages Vol. 1. Stanford: Stanford Univ. Press.
Schmitt, Rüdiger 1989 Compendium Linguarum Iranicarum. Wiesbaden: Reichert.
Simeone-Senelle, Marie-Claude 1997a The modern South Arabic languages. In Hetzron (ed.) 378–423. 1997b Les langues sudarabiques modernes, des langues sémitiques menacées? In Caron, B. (ed.) Proceedings of the 16th international congress of linguists, Paper No. 0449. Oxford: Pergamon.
Strand, Richard 1973 Notes on the Nuristaani and Dardic languages. JAOS 93: 297–305.
Voegelin, C. and F. Voegelin 1965 The Iranian sub-branch of the Indo-European branch of Indo-European. Anthropological linguistics 7: 190–209.
Weiers, Michael 1972 Die Sprache der Moghol der Provinz Herat in Afghanistan. Opladen: Westdeutscher Verlag.
Windfuhr, Gernot 1989 New West Iranian. In Schmitt (ed.) 251–262.
Yarshater, Ehsan 1969 A grammar of southern Tati dialects. The Hague: Mouton.

Chapter 13 Language Endangerment in China and Mainland Southeast Asia1
David Bradley

1. Introduction

In this chapter the discussion follows genetic classifications, starting with Mon-Khmer (hereafter MK) languages of the Austroasiatic family, then Austro-Thai languages: the few endangered Austronesian on the mainland, Thai-Kadai, and Miao-Yao (or Hmong-Mien). Following this are the Sino-Tibetan languages, including Sinitic and Tibeto-Burman (hereafter TB) with many branches. Finally the ‘Altaic’ groups Manchu-Tungus, Mongolic and Turkic of northern and western China are discussed, with brief notes on Indo-European creoles and Ainu.
In China, Vietnam, Laos and Burma there is a rigid classification of all citizens into ethnic groups: a majority group speaking the national language and a number of minorities. In addition to the majority groups, China has 55 national minorities; in Laos there are 46, in Vietnam 53, and in Burma 134. All official statistics use these categories. In China closely related groups are usually lumped into one nationality; in Vietnam, Laos and Burma, the official categories tend to follow more localised ethnic categories. However, in Laos and Vietnam the ethnic groups most closely related to the majority group are lumped into one category: in Vietnam, the Mu’o’ng; and in Laos, the Phu Tai. Thus, ethnic groups speaking distinct languages may be classified within one nationality in China but as two or more ethnic groups in Vietnam, Laos or Burma.

Table 1. Ethnic Categories

China Vietnam Laos Burma Thailand Cambodia

Ethnic groups
56 54 47 135 17+ –

Percent majority
92 87 50.1 63? over 95 over 95

Minority categories
lumped partly split partly split split split none

Language Endangerment in China and Mainland Southeast Asia 279
Perhaps the most interesting category in China is the ‘other – unclassified’ national minority. This comprises small groups who have not (yet) been reclassified as members of some larger national minority. Since the 1950s the only additional nationality is the Jinuo, recognised in 1978. Most small groups who applied for nationality status since the 1970s have instead been amalgamated into an existing nationality; for example the Laomian and Kucong into the Lahu. The authorities now say that very small groups cannot get the status of a separate national minority, even though seven nationalities recognised in the 1950s now have fewer than 10,000 members. The Gaoshan nationality with 764 members in China is a special case; this is the nationality of the various Austronesian minority groups autochthonous to Taiwan.
The Thai list of Chaw Khaw ‘hill tribes’ has grown from 9 to 16 over the last thirty years; these are identified groups in the north and west of the country who get special assistance from the Public Welfare Department. In addition to these, there are many small scattered groups speaking MK languages in the northeast, a patchwork of speakers of different Thai languages scattered across the central plain as a result of transportation of war captives from Laos and points north up to about a hundred years ago, also three groups speaking Austronesian languages and two groups speaking MK languages in the south.
Cambodia has no official list of minorities; in any case these are relatively small and mainly confined to peripheral areas, especially the northeast of the country. There is also a scattering of endangered MK languages of the Pearic subgroup with extremely small speaker populations in the western half of the country.
In Peninsular Malaysia the endangered languages are spoken by members of three categories of minority, the Orang Laut ‘sea people’ who speak various endangered Austronesian languages closely related to Malay; the Orang Asli ‘original people’, the indigenous negrito groups with various endangered to extinct MK languages; and the creole Portuguese Kristang speakers of Melaka. A related creole is also spoken in Macao.
For more details, fuller references and exact locations of the languages cited below, see my contributions in Wurm and Hattori (1981), Wurm et al. (1987), Moseley and Asher (1994) and particularly Moseley (2006).
2. Austroasiatic languages
Apart from Vietnamese, Cambodian and Khasi of northeast India, all MK languages are endangered to some degree; only the more endangered among them are discussed here.

280 David Bradley
Of the Monic languages, although Mon is the state language of the Mon State in southeastern Burma and is said to be spoken by about 800,000 people, mainly in Burma, it has been receding under Burmese pressure for nearly 800 years and is now in decline.
Earlier Dvaravati kingdom Mon dominance in what is now central Thailand was broken more than a millenium ago. Vestiges of Dvaravati Mon are spoken by the Nyahkur in northeastern Thailand; fewer than 10,000 speakers of three dialects remain, but younger speakers are fewer and less fluent, and most young people have only passive or no knowledge.
The Palaungic subbranch of the Northern branch of MK includes many subgroups of the Bulang nationality in China and other tiny groups which have not achieved nationality status and whose languages are endangered, such as Hu, Buxia, Buguo, Paijiao and so on. In northeastern Burma are some 2,000 Tai Loi, with a few in northwest Laos and nearby in China. Burma also has various additional groups including the Danau (endangered). Palaungic languages of Thailand include Phalok (moribund or extinct) and Lavua (about 10,000 but decreasing). In Laos are the Pasing (1,530); there is also one Pasing village in China with 202 people. In Laos they are called Bit officially and Khamit locally, and Kami in China; the language is quite endangered.
Within the Khmuic subbranch, in the jungles between Thailand and Laos, there is a tiny hunter-gatherer group known as Mlabri; 125 in Thailand and 24 in Laos, probably underenumerated; the language is now severely endangered as the group settles down, being replaced by Hmong, Thai or Lao.
Iduh2 is a recently located moribund Khmuic language of the border between central Laos and north central Vietnam; of 200 in the group, fewer than 30 can speak the language.
Mang is a highly important group-level isolate within MK with about 2,200 people near the southern border of Yunnan and another 2,300 on the Vietnamese side of the border; in each country about 500 Mang still speak their language, which is severely endangered and poorly known. They are recognised as an ethnic group in Vietnam, but not in China.
Lai or Paliu is the northeasternmost MK language, spoken by under 500 of an ethnic group of 1,771 in northwestern Guangxi and southeastern Yunnan in China. It is very important for MK reconstruction. Some members of the group speak Yi rather than Lai, and all are multilingual, speaking Zhuang, Miao and Chinese as well. A third small endangered language of this subgroup, Pakan, was recently found in southwestern Guizhou.

Language Endangerment in China and Mainland Southeast Asia 281
In the Viet-Mu’o’ng branch of MK, all of the small groups speaking Mu’o’ng languages in Vietnam are lumped into the single Mu’o’ng ethnic group or in the smaller Nguon group. All other Mu’o’ng languages are spoken by tiny groups along the border between south central Laos and north central Vietnam, some in areas which are being inundated by dams, and nearly all are endangered. This includes Sac (about 1,000 in Vietnam), May (about 1,500 in Laos and Vietnam) and Ruc (about 500 in Laos and Vietnam), which are close to each other; another group comprising Phong (20,000: 18,165 in Laos and the rest in Vietnam), Hung (1,000 in Vietnam) and Tum (the last is an ethnic group of 2,042 in Laos); and a third cluster of Arem (1,000 in Laos and Vietnam), Pakatan (500 in Laos), Bo (2,500 in Laos), Phonsung (500 in Laos) and Thavung3 (500 in Laos, 1,000 in Thailand). Thavung is spoken by about 200 adults in one village in Thailand, where it is known as So, a name usually used for a Katuic language also widespread in central Laos and across the river in northeastern Thailand. Apart from Mu’o’ng and Nguon, all these languages are very severely endangered.
Among the Katuic-Bahnaric4 group languages, even groups with substantial populations are becoming endangered; but those with fewer speakers are particularly so. A severely endangered Katuic language recently located in Xekong Province of Laos by Theraphan Luangthongkum is Chatong, with 580 people in four villages, some of them fluent. She also located the Dakkang and Triw languages in the same area, with 1,198 and 1,328 people respectively, also with some fluent speakers; all three are undescribed apart from her work and endangered.
South Bahnaric Chrau is endangered because its traditional territory is near Saigon. The most endangered languages in this subbranch are Kaco’, about 1,000 people in northeastern Cambodia, located by Diffloth some years ago; also Juk (autonym) or Suai (exonym), 1,500 and Swoeng (autonym) or Lavi (exonym), 492 (or 584 according to the Lao census), both recently located and briefly described by Theraphan Luangthongkum in Xekong Province of Laos.
Pearic5 group languages are widely distributed in tiny populations across western Cambodia and in very limited numbers across the border in Thailand. They are closely related to but distinct from Khmer. Some extremely small communities have maintained their languages, though the speaker populations were further reduced during the Khmer Rouge period. All are now endangered to moribund.
The largest population is speakers of Chong in Thailand along the western border of Cambodia; about 2,000 people and 500 speakers with the youngest now 22. Song or Kasong, usually also known to outsiders as

282 David Bradley
Chong, has a population of about 200 in eastern Thailand, with 40 speakers, the youngest of whom is now 30.
Samre has a population of about 100 displaced in Pursat Province of Cambodia and another 100 in eastern Thailand, of whom fewer than 20 speak it, the youngest now 45.
A Pear group – autonym unknown – in 3 or 4 villages near Kompong Thom has about 250 people, language status unknown but group size reduced from about 1,000 since 1975. The last two speakers of Samrai were in a refugee camp in Thailand in the 1980s; their present whereabouts is unknown. All the rest of their village was killed by the Khmer Rouge. At least one other Pearic language became extinct during the Khmer Rouge period.
Finally, the group usually called Saoch (which is the Khmer word for a kind of skin disease) and who call themselves Su-ung have an interesting history. Nearly the entire group was transported to western Thailand in 1833, leaving behind a small remnant. Of the remnant in Cambodia, 3 families comprising 17 speakers including children remained in 1993. Of the transported population, now called Chu’ung, Sa-ong or Khamen Padong ‘Padong Khmer’, 150 remain in the village, with 20 speakers of whom about ten are fluent, with the youngest semispeakers now 35.
The Orang Asli languages of Peninsular Malaysia in the Aslian group of MK are all endangered, mostly severely; some others are already extinct, and some dialects of the surviving languages are also extinct. Northern Aslian includes Tonga’ or Mos in southern Thailand, closely related to Kensiu on the Thai/Malaysian border; also Jehai, Batek, and Che Wong. Central Aslian includes Lanoh, Temiar, Semai and Jah Het. Temiar and Semai are the least endangered of these. Southern Aslian includes Semaq Beri, Semelai and Besisi. Majority community attitudes are very negative.
3. Austro-Thai languages
The mainland Austronesian languages which are endangered fall into two genetic subgroups: the Chamic languages, mainly in southern Vietnam and northeastern Cambodia and one endangered language on the south central coast of Hainan in China, and the Malay languages.
The most endangered Chamic language is Huihui or Tsat, spoken by about 4,000 members of a group of 5,000 with Hui (Moslem) nationality in southern Hainan. This is also typologically interesting because it has become fully tonal, unlike other Chamic languages, due presumably to contact with tonal languages like Chinese which is replacing it.

Language Endangerment in China and Mainland Southeast Asia 283
There are four Malay group languages which are endangered in this area. Moken (2,000) further north and Moklen (4,000) further south are spoken by dwindling groups of seafarers along the coasts of southern Burma and the west coast of southern Thailand as far south as Phuket. Urak Lawoi is spoken by similar groups of about 3,000 ranging southwards from Phuket to beyond the Malaysian border. There are also about 2,000 Duano, Desin Dola, or Orang Kuala along the Malaysian coast just northwest of Singapore. All are endangered as these groups settle down; the Duano are gradually assimilating their speech back into local Malay.
Of the Thai-Kadai languages, the only Thai subgroup language which is very severely endangered is Saek, spoken in China by a few members of the Zhuang nationality, in Laos (2,459 by ethnicity, not all speak), and in Thailand. The total group population is about 20,000, but it is now divided into three communities out of contact with each other and the language is disappearing, at least in Thailand and in Laos, by being absorbed into local Lao.
Also in Laos is the Phu Tai group. This is an amalgamation which includes various southwestern Thai languages very close to Lao, some widely spoken such as Thai Dam ‘black Thai’ but also more or less endangered Tai Daeng ‘red Tai’, Tai Neua ‘northern Tai’ (from Samneua Province of Laos) among others. Each of these has an original territory in northeastern Laos, and they are also found in the south where they were moved as war captives some time ago and are losing their original languages. The languages of several groups within the Phu Tai category are undescribed and potentially endangered.
The Kam-Sui or Dong subgroup of Thai-Kadai includes the Dong, Li, Shui, Maonan and Mulao nationalities in China. Endangered languages spoken by groups included within other nationalities include Rau, Ten or Yanghuang, about 20,000 speakers who are of Buyi nationality in southeastern Guizhou, somewhat endangered but not severely so; Lajia, also known as Lakkia in the western literature, about 9,000 speakers who are members of the Yao nationality in eastern Guizhou; moderately endangered; Mak (autonym) or Mo (Mandarin pronunciation of the same), about 5,000 speakers who are members of the Buyi nationality in southeastern Guizhou; quite endangered.
Unlike the Thai and Kam-Sui subgroups, all languages of the Kadai subgroup6 are endangered, some very severely so. The only recognised Kadai nationality in China is the Gelao (438,192), two of whose four very distinct languages are moribund and two endangered; the total speaker population in the traditional area in western Guizhou is about 3,000 and

284 David Bradley
rapidly decreasing, and descriptive work is urgent. There are also some communities to the south in Guangxi, Yunnan and Vietnam where some of the languages are also still spoken by another 2,400 people. The languages are:
1) Hakhi [ha33 khiʔ55], Green Gelao, about 2,000 speakers around Guanling in west central Guizhou; other members of this ethnic subgroup are as far south as Vietnam, but do not speak the language. 2) Tolo [to33 luoʔ55], White Gelao, under 1,000 speakers around Liupanshui in west central Guizhou; also over 2,000 further south in China (but of Yi, Yao or Zhuang nationality, not Gelao) and Vietnam. 3) A-uo [ʔa33 ʔuo55], Red Gelao; very few speakers but nearly 275,000 ethnic group members west of Zunyi in north central Guizhou; research is urgent! About 30 semispeakers calling themselves [va nto] including some children are in a Gelao community of over 400 people in northern Vietnam. 4) Aqao [ʔa33 qaw13], spoken only by a few aged individuals near Puding, west central Guizhou. Aqao is the best described variety of Gelao, but more work is still needed.
There are also 1,500 group members enumerated in Vietnam, where they are also a separate nationality, the Co’lao. Between the 1982 and 1990 censuses in China, nearly 380,000 people formerly identified as Han Chinese reclaimed their former Gelao identity; but none of them speaks the language.
Gelao living further south include one village of White Gelao in Longlin, northwestern Guangxi who call themselves [tə33 ʔlu53]; the language is spoken there even by children; and another village with two elderly speakers of Green Gelao in the same area. In Malipo, southeastern Yunnan there are another 1,500 White Gelao speakers who call themselves [tə21 ʔlɯ33], and in Vietnam nearly 400 more. A village of over 400 Red Gelao in Vietnam has about 30 semispeakers, but most Red and Green Gelao in Vietnam and other White Gelao in southeastern Yunnan do not speak their traditional languages.
The northernmost Kadai language is Qaw, known locally as Yi; this should not be confused with the Aqao subvariety of Gelao, nor with the TB Yi nationality. Of about 3,000 Qaw in Gulin, Sichuan and in Bijie, Guizhou, it is believed that few if any speakers remain. All are members of the Gelao nationality.
There are six additional southern Kadai languages in China and Vietnam: 1) Yerong, over 300 people of Yao nationality in Napo County in Guangxi; 2) Buyang [puo11 ʔjaŋ42], about 3,000 people of Zhuang nation-

Language Endangerment in China and Mainland Southeast Asia 285
ality in southeastern Yunnan; 3) Pubiao (Chinese name), Pupeo (Vietnamese name), Laqua in Benedict (1942) or [qa biaw33] (own name), about 50 speakers in a group of 307 in Malipo County in Yunnan, and most of a group of 382 nearby in Vietnam. In China they are classified as Yi nationality, but in Vietnam they are a separate nationality. 4) Lachi (Vietnamese), Laji (Chinese) or Lati in Benedict (1942) is spoken by about 200 of the group of over 1,600 who call themselves [li13 pu33 lio33] in Maguan County in China where they are included in the Yi nationality, and by about 5,000 of 8,000 Lachi in Vietnam. 5) Nung Ven or Ainh with a viable speech community of 200 in far northern Vietnam, recently located by Edmondson; 6) Laha or Khlaphlao of Vietnam, 2,100, moribund in one village in Son La Province but spoken by all including children at villages in Lao Cai Province.
Within Miao-Yao, of some 18 languages in the Miao, Yao, Bunu and She clusters, three Bunu languages, Ngnai [hm nai], Jiongnai [kjɔŋ nai] and Younuo [ju nɔ] with as few as 1,000 speakers, are potentially endangered. The She nationality of eastern Guangxi and Guangdong in China has 634,700 members, of whom only about 1,000 still use the [huo nte] language near Huizhou in eastern Guangdong; the rest mainly speak Hakka Chinese.
4. Sino-Tibetan languages
As a result of the spread of standard northern Mandarin and major regional varieties of provincial capitals since 1950, many of the smaller local Sinitic (Chinese) varieties are disappearing by being absorbed into a larger regional Sinitic language, whether Mandarin or something else.
Within TB there are well over fifty endangered languages in this area, with many more still to be located, especially in southwestern China.
Of languages in the Qiangic branch of TB in western Sichuan, there are various small localised groups, all included within the Tibetan nationality, whose languages are endangered to various degrees. From south to north, they are the Namuyi, Shixing, Ersu (Tosu or Lüzi), Muya, Ergong, Choyo, Zaba and Guichong; also the Baima in southern Gansu.
In the Central TB branch there are five endangered languages. These include two small groups in southeastern Tibet, 800 [ta31 uaŋ55], known in the Chinese literature as Darang Deng, and 200 [kɯ31 mɑn35], known in the Chinese literature as Geman Deng. There is one Taruang village in Burma where they are called Taraung, and a larger group of Taraon, Tay-

286 David Bradley
in or Tain, or formerly Digaru Mishmi in India. While endangered in China, it is less so in India. The Geman are also known as Kaman or Miju Mishmi in India; likewise endangered in China. There used to be more speakers in China, but many have gone to India.
Among the Nu and Dulong nationalities in China and the Rawang group in northern Burma, there are nine languages, eight of them Nungish with three endangered. The most affected of these is Anung (Anong or sometimes, Along in the Chinese literature), 6,000 people but only about 600 speakers, mostly over 40, in China; there are also several thousand speakers in Burma. Among the Rawang the Lungmi and Dvngsar languages are also becoming endangered.
The Tujia languages form a separate branch of TB, spoken by fewer than 60,000 of the 5,725,049 Tujia nationality of northwestern Hunan, southwestern Hubei and eastern Sichuan in south central China. They were concealed within the Han Chinese nationality until being identified and recognised in the 1950s. All speakers are bilingual in Chinese, and the language is increasingly endangered. It is also very interesting historically because it has so much Chinese contact material superposed on its TB core.
Within the large and complex Burmic branch of TB, Burmese itself contains a number of distinct regional sublanguages which are being submerged by influence from standard Burmese. These include Tavoyan and Beik or Myeik in the south; Danu, Intha and Taungyo in the northeast; and Yaw in the west.
Hpun is a nearly extinct language along the upper Irrawaddy. Survey work in the early 1960s found that the only fluent speakers of the two dialects of Hpun were in their 60s, with some younger semispeakers. Recent attempts to find fluent speakers have failed; only some very old semispeakers remain.
Within the Kachin culture complex, there are two severely endangered Burmish languages spoken in China: 400 Bola and 100 Chintao (Xiandao in Chinese) who are members of the Achang nationality. Due to language exogamy there are no monolingual speakers.
The Gong language was formerly spoken over a wide area of western central Thailand, along the branches of the River Kwai. It has disappeared from the original area, with the last speakers only recently deceased; but two communities which migrated to Suphanburi and Uthai Thani provinces to the northeast still maintain distinct dialects of the language; they are classified in the composite Lua ‘hill tribe’ of Thailand. Of 500 people in these two villages, about 80 still speak Gong: about 20 fluent speakers over 50 and additional semispeakers of varying ability as young

Language Endangerment in China and Mainland Southeast Asia 287
as 30. Thai colleagues and I are working on this language, which is crucial for the understanding of Burmic.
Results of our recent surveys in some areas of Yunnan suggest that there may be fifty or more additional unreported endangered languages within the Loloish or Yi subbranch in Yunnan and Sichuan provinces of China, especially Northern Loloish languages. Further survey and descriptive work is extremely urgent!
Northern Loloish includes the 25,000 Samei of Guandu, east of Kunming, and the nearly 30,000 Sanyie of Xishan and surrounding areas just west of Kunming. Their languages, which have major internal dialect differences, are extinct or moribund in some villages, severely endangered in others, and endangered elsewhere. Another related language is Samataw, about 100 speakers and a larger number of semispeakers in a single large village of 2,500 on the southeastern outskirts of Kunming, where all fluent speakers are over 60 and even semispeakers are over 40; nevertheless the village primary school is trying to teach the language. Another similar language is Ayizi, a bit further east of Kunming; this language is moribund in nearly all locations; salvage work may still be possible, but as many villages now identify as Han Chinese, it is impossible to know the original size of the group. About ten villages have been identified, but in most no speech remains. For more details on these languages which we located around Kunming in the last few years, see Bradley and Bradley (2000).
The 5,391 Gazhuo of Xingmeng township in central Tonghai County are classified as Mongol nationality, but speak a Northern Loloish language. They are descendants of a Mongol army which settled about 700 years ago and married local women. There are no identfiable vestiges of Mongol in their speech. This language is also at risk as many young people do not speak it.
Eight known endangered Central Loloish languages are listed below; there are certainly others. One group is the Micha, with at least 50,000 very widely scattered across western Yunnan, intermingling with the Lalo and Lahu to the southwest, with the Lisu in the northwest, with the Lipo in the northeast, and overlapping with the Lolo over most of their range. While Micha is moribund or severely endangered in many villages, it is better-preserved in some; there are very substantial internal linguistic differences.
Overlapping with the Lisu in northwestern Yunnan are about 15,000 Laemae [lε21 mε21], in Chinese Leimai or Leimo, who traditionally spoke a distinctive variety of Bai, but now mainly speak only Lisu. Laemae is becoming endangered in the last small areas where it is spoken; there are no monolinguals.

288 David Bradley
A bit further east with seven villages in Lanping County and two in Lushui County are about 2,500 [zɑw55 zo33], in Chinese Raorou, who are members of the Nu nationality; about 1,000 of them still speak another endangered Central Loloish language.
The Tanglang language is spoken in one township in southwestern Lijiang County of Yunnan by all adults and some children; they are classified as Yi nationality.
The Lamo language is spoken by about 100 people, all also first language speakers of Lipo, in a cluster of villages further east still, in the northeastern part of Binchuan County. They are classified as members of the Lahu nationality, but their language is more similar to Lisu and Lipo than to Lahu. Few children are learning this language; we located it in 1999.
About 600,000 Lalo live in western central Yunnan, especially in Wenshan and Nanjian counties, but also in surrounding areas; however only about half speak the language, which is moribund in many peripheral areas and well-preserved only in some areas of concentration.
In addition to the Lahu nationality whose language is not now at risk, there is a distinct group of about 35,000 in south central Yunnan and 5,400 in northwestern Yunnan known as Kucong (Chinese) or Lahu (autonym). What they speak is closer to Lahu than to anything else, so when their application for status as a separate Kucong nationality in China was rejected in 1989, they were merged into the Lahu nationality. In Vietnam, which does not have the majority kind of Lahu, they used to be known as Cosung, but are now usually called Lahu.
In northeastern Jinghong County are the Jinuo, who were recognised as a separate nationality in China in 1978. Fewer than half speak the language; I have never met a young Jinuo who can speak the language, despite years of trying. It has at least two dialects and is very interesting, both for its complex tone sandhi and for its conservatism with initial consonants.
The following seventeen endangered languages are in the Southern Loloish group; there are almost certainly others in China. Mpi is spoken in one large village near Phrae in northern Thailand; they were transported there from China as war captives about 200 years ago. Mpi is still spoken by most of the 1,200 people in the village, but all are now trilingual, speaking Northern Thai as a Low and standard Thai as a High; use of Mpi is declining.
There are some smaller languages which fall within the Akha cultural orbit and are being absorbed into it. One example is Akeu [a55 kə55], spoken by over 10,000 people classified as Akha in Thailand, Burma and northwestern Laos, and as Hani in the southwestern tip of Yunnan in China. Their language is not intelligible to other Akha though it is quite closely re-

Language Endangerment in China and Mainland Southeast Asia 289
lated, and is being replaced by Akha. Another such is Chepya [t e11 pjas11] of northeastern Laos, a small group of unknown size. A third is Muda [mu31 tɑ31], a group of about 2,000 in Jinghong county, Yunnan, China.
All languages within the Bisoid branch are endangered: in China, Laomian of central Lancang County has about 5,000 group members and 4,000 speakers; Laopin of Menglian County has about 1,300 group members and fewer than 1,000 speakers; the knowledge of younger speakers is more restricted. The Laomian were amalgamated into the Lahu nationality in 1990; many others had doubtless already quietly integrated into the Lahu nationality, which calls them Lawmeh and includes them in their origin myth, suggesting longstanding contact. Hpyin in Burma was already reported as moribund in 1900, and has been replaced by Lahu in many domains. Bisu in Thailand (about 500 acknowledged group members, but far fewer speakers; two dialects have died in the last 20 years, but two villages speaking slightly different dialects remain), where the language is being replaced by Northern Thai, and a cluster of five languages within the Sinsali (formerly Phunoi) group in Laos. Bisu, Hpyin, Laomian, Laopin and the [law33 pan11] dialect of Phunoi are quite closely related, but the other four Sinsali languages, the main variety and the other three known as [phɔŋ33 ku55], [law21 sεŋ21] and [pi33 su44], differ from them and from each other. Sangkong is a further Bisoid language with about 2,000 speakers of Hani nationality nearby in Jinghong County. A further Bisoid language is Cong of northwestern Vietnam, with only 500 speakers in four villages, but said to be fairly well preserved and used by many children.
There are two severely endangered languages of another branch of the Southern Loloish group which are almost completely undescribed: Bana in northern Laos and Sila in northeastern Laos and northwestern Vietnam. The few hundred Bana or Bala in Laos are included within the Kaw (Akha) ethnic group; in one village of northeastern Laos their language is being replaced by Akha, and in one village in northwestern Laos it is being replaced by Lahu. The 2,100 Sila or Sida are recognised as an ethnic group in Laos and in Vietnam, but their language is weakening.
All the Southeastern or ‘Tonkin’ Loloish groups speak endangered languages; four are listed here, but others may also be found in China. The [phu a] or Pula of China are part of the Yi nationality; the Phula in Vietnam are a separate nationality. This language is in decline in both areas.
Widely scattered in far south central Yunnan are the Muji people of Yi nationality, who speak a potentially endangered and virtually undescribed language which they call [ a31 γə55] or [mu31 di33]; the rest of the township

290 David Bradley
speaks Pula. Fairly similar is Laghuu, spoken by 300 people in one village in far northern Vietnam. It is known in Vietnamese as Xapho but also classified as part of the Phula nationality.
In Funing County of southeastern Yunnan, about 5,000 people of Yi nationality speak [mɯaŋ51], or in Chinese Mo’ang, another endangered language. In Guangnan County nearby, about 5,000 Yi people speak [kA33 θu31], reported in Chinese as Gasu, also endangered.
Most languages in the Baric branch of TB are in northeastern India; those found in Burma are some of the so-called Luish (from Manipuri lui ‘slave’) languages of western Burma. The only such language not on its last legs is Sak, autonym [atsaʔ], Burmese name Thet, with nearly 3,000 speakers in Bangladesh and about a thousand speakers of an ethnic population of 1,602 in Arakan State of Burma; but even Sak is declining and endangered. Kadu was the language of a pre-Burman kingdom in the north of Burma, and is still spoken there by a couple of thousand from an ethnic group of about 20,000. Closely related and in the same area is Ganan, with about 500 speakers of an ethnic population of 7,000. Both languages are moribund but fieldwork is at present impossible. Other Luish languages of Burma such as Taman and Malin, may already be extinct, as are some in Manipur.
5. ‘Altaic’ languages
In China as in Russia, every Manchu-Tungus language is at least endangered, and most are moribund. The Jurchen language of the rulers of the Jin Dynasty (1115–1234) is thought to be the precursor of the Manchu language of the rulers of the Qing Dynasty (1644–1911), but despite official support up to 1911, massive literature and a 1990 population of 9,846,776, the language in its homeland of Manchuria is extinct apart from three locations in northwestern Heilongjiang Province with a few remaining speakers, all over 50.
Manchu survives much better in Xinjiang, where the Xibo nationality is the remainder of Manchu armies left there during the Qing Dynasty. Of the 1990 population of 72,392, approximately 26,760 were estimated to speak the language, including some children, in the late 1980s (Wurm et al. 1987: C-5).
The Nanai language, formerly known as Goldi, is known as Hezhe in China. Of 4,254 Hezhe south of the Amur River in northeast Heilongjiang Province in 1990, about 40, all over 50, still spoke the language.

Language Endangerment in China and Mainland Southeast Asia 291
The Ewenki and Oroqen nationalities also form part of the cluster of Tungus languages that includes Evenki in Russia and Mongolia. Janhunen (1997) equates Ewenki with Solon in Russia and indicates that Ewenki and Oroqen are part of the same language cluster, but Whaley et al. (1999) suggest that they are distinct languages, and say that there are about 10,000 speakers, mainly over 50, in China and Russia. Of the 7,004 Oroqen in China in 1990, about 2,240 concentrated in Alihe Oroqen Banner were said to speak it then, but Whaley et al. (1999) report fewer now, also mainly over 50. Janhunen (1997) reports on the dialects of Oroqen: Kumarchen still spoken by a few children, Orochen and Selpechen with speakers mainly over 40, and Birarchen only a few old speakers.
The most endangered Mongolic language in China is Kangjia, with about 2,000 speakers who are members of the Hui (Moslem) nationality in Qinghai Province. Eastern Yugur and Bao’an are also beginning to be endangered.
In China, Turkic nationalities are primarily in the Xinjiang Uighur Autonomous Region. Western Yugur or Yellow Uighur with about 4,600 speakers is the most endangered of these languages.
6. Indo-European7
In this area there are two severely endangered Portuguese creoles, Papia Kristang of Melaka in Malaysia and Patua of Macao. Kristang is spoken among a group of former fishermen concentrated in one neighbourhood; the group population is about 10,000 people of whom about 2,150 speak it – most people now over 40, a third of those under 40, and some children; the language is being replaced by Malaysian English. Patua is spoken by fewer than fifty speakers over 70 years old among a group of about 10,000 to 15,000, of whom only about 5,000 are still in Macao; it has undergone extensive decreolization and will soon be extinct.
7. Ainu8
Ainu was formerly spoken in southern Sakhalin and the Kurile Islands, now part of Russia, and on the northern part of Honshu Island in Japan, but is now confined to Hokkaido Island in northern Japan and is moribund even there.

292 David Bradley
Ainu leaders claim up to 100,000 Ainu in Hokkaido; but official census statistics suggest only 23,830. Many people with Ainu background conceal it because of strongly negative attitudes among the Japanese majority community. Sawai (1998) discusses the current situation and attitudes among the Ainu from an insider’s perspective. Of the four original dialects of Ainu, the Sakhalin and Kurile dialects are extinct, the Northeastern Hokkaido dialect is probably extinct and the Southwestern Hokkaido dialects are moribund despite recent revival efforts. In the Hidaka region which officially has 9,299 Ainu or 39 per cent of the total, the least moribund local variety is the Saru dialect of Hiratori town, with four relatively fluent female speakers in their 70s or older, and probably some slightly younger semispeakers who will acknowledge their Ainu ability after these speakers die. The Shizunai dialect is also in this area. The Chitose and Horobetsu dialects come from the area about 30km north of Hiratori, officially having another 7,330 Ainu or nearly 31 per cent of the total. The youngest speakers of any dialect of Ainu who learned it as children are at least 60, but revival efforts are underway.
8. Conclusion
In summary, in China, Japan and mainland Southeast Asia there are 145 identified endangered languages including 51 Mon-Khmer, 26 AustroThai including 5 mainland Austronesian, 17 Thai-Kadai and 4 Miao-Yao, 56 Tibeto-Burman, 9 ‘Altaic’ including 5 Manchu-Tungus, 3 Mongol and 1 Turkic; 2 Indo-European creoles and Ainu. Long-extinct languages such as Manchu-Tungus Jurchen and TB ‘Nam’, Pyu and Xixia are not included in these totals. In addition, a large number of Sinitic and Burmese local speech varieties are endangered and need further work.
The following table summarises the degree of endangerment of these 145 languages and the urgency and feasibility of research using the categories defined by Krauss (chapter 1, this volume). It should be noted that if field research becomes possible in Burma, there are at least eight further languages there which urgently need research. Furthermore, there is certainly a large number of unknown endangered TB languages in southwestern China, especially Loloish languages, so further work there is extremely urgent. However, as these languages have not yet been found, they are not included in tables.

Language Endangerment in China and Mainland Southeast Asia 293

Table 2. Languages of China and Mainland Southeast Asia: Degree of endangerment and urgency of research

Level of endangerment
a– b c d d–

Total Done

23

8

63

18

39

11

9

4

11

5

Not doing
– 1 4 – 3

Urgent feasible
15 44 24 5 3

Table 3 below shows endangered languages classified as as discussed above, with their endangerment status (a to d–), Set A factors (proportion of group population, child learners, domains and attitude), Set B factors (descriptions of related languages and of this language and feasibility of fieldwork), all on 1 to 4 scales. The Set B figures are followed by an asterisk where a language is currently under study and the status of documentation can be expected to improve. Numbering corresponds to the locations given on the map.

Table 3. Endangered languages of the region

Language

Mon-Khmer

1

Mon

2

Nyahkur

3/4

Hu, Buxia

5/6

Buguo, Paijiao

7

Tai Loi

8

Danau

9

Phalok

10

Lavua

11

Pasing/Bit

12

Mlabri

13

Iduh

14

Mang

15

Lai

Set A factors
3,2,2,2 2,2,2,2 3,2,2,2 3,2,2,2 3,2,2,2 1,1,1,2 1,1,1,2 3,3,2,2 3,2,2,2 3,2,1,2 1,2,1,3 2,2,1,2 2,2,1,3

Set B factors
1,1,2* 1,1,4 1,4,3 1,4,3 2,4,1 2,3,1 2,1,4 1,2,4 2,4,2 1,1,4* 2,3,2 3,4,3 3,3,4

Status
a– c b b b c d– b b b c c c

294 David Bradley

Table 3. cont. Language

Mon-Khmer (cont.)

16

Pakan

17/18

Sach, May

19

Ruc

20

Phong

21/22

Hung, Tum

23/24

Arem, Pakatan

25

Phonsung

26

Thavung

27

Chatong

28/29

Dakkang, Triw

30

Chrau

31

Kaco’

32/33

Juk, Swoeng

34

Chong

35/36

Kasong, Pear

37

Samre

38

Samrai

39A

Su-ung (C)

39B

Sa-ong (T)

40

Tonga’

41/42

Kensiu, Jehai

43

Batek

44

Che Wong

45

Lanoh

46

Temiar

47

Semai

48

Jah Het

49

Semaq Beri

50/51

Semelai, Besisi

Austronesian

52

Huihui

53

Moken

Set A factors
2,2,1,3 3,2,1,3 3,2,1,3 3,2,2,3 3,2,1,3 3,2,1,3 3,2,1,3 2,2,1,3 3,3,2,3 3,3,2,3 2,2,2,2 3,3,2,3 3,3,2,3 2,1,1,2 2,2,1,3 2,1,1,2 1,1,1,2 4,4,1,1 1,1,1,2 1,1,1,1 2,2,1,1 2,2,1,1 2,2,1,1 2,2,1,1 3,3,2,2 3,3,1,1 2,2,1,1 2,2,1,1 2,2,1,1
3,3,1,2 3,3,2,3

Set B factors
3,2,4 1,3,2 1,1,3 1,3,3 1,3,2 1,3,2 1,3,2 1,3,4* 1,3,2 1,3,2 1,1,3 1,3,2 1,3,2 2,3,3* 2,4,2 2,4,2 2,4,2 2,4,2* 2,4,4* 1,3,4 1,2,3 1,3,4 1,3,4 1,3,4 1,2,4* 1,3,4 1,3,4 1,3,4 1,3,4
2,3,3 2,3,1*

Status
c b b a– b b b c c b c b b c c c d– a– d d c c c c b b c c c
b b

Language Endangerment in China and Mainland Southeast Asia 295

Table 3. cont. Language

Austronesian (cont.)

54

Moklen

55

Urak Lawoi

56

Duano

Thai-Kadai

57

Saek

58

Tai Daeng

59

Tai Neua

60

Rau/Ten

61

Lajia

62

Mak

63

Hakhi Gelao

64

Toluo Gelao

65

A’uo Gelao

66

Aqao Gelao

67

Qaw

68

Yerong

69

Buyang

70

Pubiaw

71

Lachi

72

Nung Ven

73

Laha

Miao-Yao

74

Ngnai

75

Jiongnai

76

Younuo

77

She

Tibeto-Burman

78

Namuyi

79

Shixing

80

Ersu

81/82

Muya, Ergong

83

Choyo

Set A factors
3,3,2,3 3,3,2,3 2,2,1,2
2,2,1,2 3,3,2,2 3,3,2,2 3,3,2,2 3,3,1,2 3,3,1,2 1,1,2,2 1,1,2,2 1,1,1,2 1,1,1,2 1,1,1,2 3,2,2,2 3,3,2,2 3,2,2,2 3,3,2,2 3,3,2,2 3,3,2,2
3,3,2,2 3,3,2,2 3,3,2,2 1,1,2,2
3,3,2,2 3,3,2,2 3,3,2,2 3,3,2,2 3,3,2,2

Set B factors
2,3,4* 1,3,4* 1,3,4
1,2,4 1,4,2 1,4,2 1,4,4 1,2,4 1,3,4 2,3,4 2,3,4 2,3,4 2,2,4 2,3,4 2,4,4 2,4,4 2,4,4 2,3,4 2,4,2* 1,1,2
1,3,4 1,3,4* 1,3,4 1,2,4*
2,3,4* 2,3,4 2,2,4 2,3,4 2,3,4

Status
b b c
b a– a– b b b c c d d– d– c b c c a– b
a– a– a– d–
a– b b a– b

296 David Bradley

Table 3. cont. Language

Tibeto-Burman (cont.)

84

Zaba

85

Guichong

86

Baima

87

Taruang

88

Kaman

89

Anung

90

Tujia

91

Hpun

92/93

Chintaw, Bola

94

Gong

95

Samei

96

Sanyi

97

Samataw

98

Ayizi

99

Gazhuo

100

Micha

101

Laemae

102

Raorou

103

Tanglang

104

Lamo

105

Lalo

106

Cosung

107

Jinuo

108

Mpi

109

Akeu

110

Chepya

111

Muda

112

Laomian

113

Laopin

114

Hpyin

115

Bisu

116

Sinsali

Set A factors
3,3,2,2 3,3,2,2 2,2,2,2 3,3,2,2 3,3,2,2 2,2,3,2 1,2,2,2 1,1,1,1 3,2,2,2 1,1,2,2 2,2,2,2 2,2,2,2 1,1,2,2 1,1,1,2 3,2,2,2 3,2,2,2 2,2,2,2 2,2,2,2 3,3,2,2 2,2,1,2 3,222 3,2,2,2 3,2,1,2 3,3,1,2 3,3,2,1 3,3,2,2 3,3,2,2 3,3,2,2 3,2,2,2 2,2,2,2 2,2,2,3 4,4,3,2

Set B factors
2,3,4 2,3,4 2,2,4 3,3,2 3,3,2 1,3,2* 3,2,3 2,3,1 1,3,3 3,3,4* 2,1,4 2,4,4 2,4,4 2,4,4 3,3,4 2,4,4 2,4,4 2,3,4 2,4,4 2,4,4 2,2,4* 1,3,3 2,2,4* 2,2,4 1,4,4 1,4,4 1,4,4 1,2,4* 1,3,4 1,4,1 1,2,4* 1,2,2*

Status
a– b c a– a– c d db d c c d d b c b b a– c b b b b b b b b b c c a–

Language Endangerment in China and Mainland Southeast Asia 297

Table 3. cont. Language

Tibeto-Burman (cont.)

117

Lawpan

118

Phongku

119

Lawseng

120

Pisu

121

Cong

122

Sangkong

123

Bana

124

Sila

125

Pula

126

Laghuu

127

Mo’ang

128

Gasu

129 130/131

Sak Kadu, Ganan

132/133

Taman, Malin

Manchu-Tungus (in China)

134

Manchu

135

Xibo

136

Ewenki

137

Oroqen

138

Hezhe (Nanai)

Mongol (in China)

139

Bao’an

140

E. Yugur

141

Kangjia

Turkic (in China)

142

W. Yugur

Indo-European (creole)

143

Kristang

144

Patua

Isolate

145

Ainu

Set A factors
3,3,3,2 3,3,3,2 3,3,3,2 3,3,3,2 2,2,2,2 3,3,3,2 1,1,2,2 2,2,2,2 3,2,3,2 3,3,3,2 3,3,3,2 3,3,3,2 3,2,2,2 1,1,1,2 1,1,1,1
1,1,1,2 2,2,2,2 1,2,2,2 2,2,2,2 1,1,1,2
3,2,2,2 3,2,2,2 3,2,2,2
3,2,2,2
2,2,2,3 1,1,2,2
1,1,1,1

Set B factors
1,3,2 1,3,2 1,3,2 1,3,2 1,3,2 1,4,3 2,4,3 2,4,3 2,4,3 2,3,4* 2,4,4 2,3,4 3,3,2 3,4,1 3,4,1
1,1,3* 1,2,3 1,1,3* 1,1,3* 1,1,3*
1,2,4 1,2,4 2,4,4
2,2,2
1,1,3* 1,3,4*
4,1,3*

Status
b b b b a– b c b b b a– a– b c d–
d– b c c d
a– a– b
a–
b d–
d–

298 David Bradley

RUSSIA
Irkutsk

Lake Baykal

Astana UZBEKISTAN
Lake Balkhash

Tashkent UZ

Bishkek KG

Dushanbe TD

AFGHANISTAN

Kabul

Islamabad

135 Ürümqi
CHINA

PAKISTAN

Delhi

NEPAL Kathmandu

BT

Ulaanbaatar
MONGOLIA

142 140
141 139 Lanzhou
86
Chengdu

Yellow Yangtze

Beijing Tianjin

138 134

137

136

Harbin

Changchun

Shenyang

Pyongyang KOREA
Seoul

Hangzhou

Shanghai

INDIA
Bombay

BD Calcutta

Madras

MYANMAR Rangoon

LAOS Hanoi Mekong
Vientiane

THAILAND Bangkok
CAMBODIA Phnum Penh

Guangzhou Hong Kong

Taipei TA I W A N

Map 2 Map 3
VIETNAM

Manila

THE PHILIPPINES

145
Tokyo Osaka
JAPAN

Colombo

SRI LANKA

MALAYSIA Kuala Lumpur

Singapore
INDONESIA

Map 19. China and Mainland Southeast Asia

84 83

85
82 81 80

CHINA
Chengdu

87 88

79 78

65 67

Brahmaputra
INDIA
129

wad

133 132 131
130 91
dy Irra
MYANMAR

89 101102

103 104

64

66 63

100

93 92

105

96 95 98 97 99

16 15 128 127

126 125

69

8 Salween

112

113

3-68111021111107109

116120 11

124

114

123

7

106 14
122

70 7172 73
VIETNAM
Hanoi 59

115

Mekong

LAOS

58

60 62 68

76 75

Rangoon

9 10

12 108

Vientiane

THAILAND

13 21 222420225623118719 57

Yangtze 90 74
61
52

Map 20. Southern China and Northern Southeast Asia

Language Endangerment in China and Mainland Southeast Asia 299
Xun Jiang

Guangzhou 77 144 Hong Kong

300 David Bradley
Mekong

1 94
39b
53 54

2 THAILAND

3323282279

Bangkok

37

36

34 35 38

CAMBODIA
Phnum Penh

39a

31
VIETNAM 30

40

55

41 42

45 46

43 49

44

47

48

Kuala Lumpur 50 51
MALAYSIA

143 56

Singapore

INDONESIA

Map 21. Southern Mainland Southeast Asia

Language Endangerment in China and Mainland Southeast Asia 301
Notes
1. It is a pleasure to acknowledge the support of the UNESCO Endangered Languages programme and of the Australian Research Council (A59803475, Language maintenance for endangered languages, an active approach) and assistance from various institutions in China and Thailand. Data from a number of colleagues is included here, with specific acknowledgment in notes; I thank them all for their help! Of course all remaining shortcomings and errors are solely my responsibility.
2. I am grateful to Suwilai Premsrirat for this information. 3. The facts about Thavung are also from Suwilai Premsrirat. 4. Many thanks to Theraphan Luangthongkum for information on the 13 Katuic
and Bahnaric languages of Xekong Province in southern Laos. 5. Suwilai Premsrirat and Gerard Diffloth have provided information on Pearic
languages which I gladly acknowledge. 6. My sincere thanks to Jerry Edmondson for some of the information on the Ka-
dai languages. 7. My grateful thanks to Alan Baxter for information on these two Portuguese
creoles. 8. I am very pleased to thank Theresa Savage for much of the information on
Ainu presented here.
References
Benedict, Paul K. 1942 Thai, Kadai and Indonesian: a new alignment in Southeastern Asia. American anthropologist 44: 576–601.
Bradley, David and Maya Bradley 2000 Language policy and language maintenance: Yi in China. In Bradley and Bradley (eds.) 74–96.
Bradley, David and Maya Bradley (eds.) 2000 Language maintenance for endangered languages: an active approach. London: RoutledgeCurzon.
Janhunen, Juha 1997 The languages of Manchuria in today’s China. In Shoji and Janhunen (eds.) 123–146
Matsumura, Kazuto (ed.) 1998 Studies in endangered languages. Tokyo: Hituzi Syobo.
Moseley, Christopher and Ronald E. Asher (eds.) 1994 Atlas of the world’s languages. London: Routledge.
Moseley, Christopher (ed.) 2006 Encyclopedia of endangered languages. London: Curzon Press.

302 David Bradley
Sawai, Harumi 1998 The present situation of the Ainu language. In Matsumura (ed.) 177– 189.
Shoji, Hiroshi and Juha Janhunen (eds.) 1997 Northern minority languages, problems of survival. (Senri Ethnological Studies, 44). Osaka: National Museum of Ethnology.
Whaley, Lindsay J.; Lenore A. Grenoble and Fengxiang Li 1999 Revisiting Tungusic classification from the bottom up: a comparison of Ewenki and Oroqen. Language 75,2: 286–321.
Wurm, Stephen A. and Shiro Hattori (eds.) 1981 Language atlas of the Pacific area. (Pacific linguistics C-66). Canberra: Australian Academy of Humanities.
Wurm, Stephen A.; K. T’sou, Benjamin; Bradley, David; Li Rong, Xiong Zhenghui, Zhang Zhenxing, Fu Maoji, Wang Jun and Dob (eds.)
1987 Language Atlas of China. Hong Kong: Longman.

Chapter 14 Endangered Languages of South Asia
George van Driem
1. Introduction
Not only can ideas and memes go extinct, entire conceptualizations of reality are wiped off the map when languages go extinct. South Asia is an area with the greatest linguistic diversity in the Old World, with the possible exception of Papua New Guinea. Many languages in the area have gone extinct in documented history. For example, Pyu is an extinct TibetoBurman language of the Irrawaddy basin in what today is Burma. The language had an epigraphic tradition which endured well into the 12th century. Numerous languages have gone the way of Pyu. Rangkas was recorded in the Western Himalayas as recently as the beginning of the 20th century, but is now extinct. August Schleicher wrongly believed that the survival and extinction of languages was characterised by ‘die Erhaltung der höher entwickelten Organismen im Kampfe ums Dasein’ (1863: 28). However, the survival of individual languages is primarily determined by factors which have nothing to do with their intrinsic worth as a system for the articulation of human thought, but by economic, ecological and demographic factors affecting the individual language communities. The success of one language in outcompeting another has little or, in some cases, nothing to do with its grammatical propensities or lexical richness and refinement. Instead, the extinction of a language is a function of the histories of peoples, regions and language communities.
In addition to the socio-economic and demographic changes which cause language communities to assimilate to larger, often more exploitative groups, there are also trends and fashions within the linguistic establishment that impede the documentation of endangered languages. The most obvious has been the detrimental influence of Chomskyite formalism on the field of linguistics as a whole since the 1960s, leading to vast amounts of public and private funding and human resources being channeled away from research on languages. More recently, some funding bodies have undertaken to prescribe codes of conduct or research regimens. Linguists have been working on endagered languages for many de-

304 George van Driem
cades, but now that ‘endangered languages’ has become a buzz phrase, there is also suddenly no shortage of people who would tell these linguists how precisely to go about conducting their work.
Where linguists have previously been working effectively, ethically and constructively with native language communities, now they will have to conduct their work with the meddlesome prompting of people sitting on the sideline. The codes of conduct currently being drafted have generally been inspired by the extreme situation which exists in North America and Australia, where colonial European populations have on a grand scale wiped out native peoples along with the languages they once spoke, and in their place set up modern Western societies with litigious Anglo-Saxon legal customs. The situation on the ground is already utterly different from one Asian country to the next. Therefore, codes of conduct inspired by the situation in North America and Australia are singularly inappropriate in other parts of the world. In practice, codes of conduct are more than superfluous, for they can actually hamper sound and ethical field research.
In a similar vein, in addition to conventional grammatical analysis and lexical documentation, it is helpful to document a language in the form of an audio recording. In fact, I have never met a field linguist who did not do this as a matter of course. Yet it serves no purpose to prescribe a format of audiovisual documentation to which the fieldworker must adhere in order to be eligible for funding. Recruiting a capable field linguist willing to document endangered languages is already a big challenge. Most people trained in linguistics are either not up to the task or unwilling to suffer the discomfort or brave the dangers involved. Putting extra hurdles in place, however well-intentioned, merely obstructs the documentation of what remains of mankind’s endangered linguistic heritage.
2. Endangered language isolates of the Indian subcontinent
Each of the languages endangered with extinction discussed in this section represent so-called language isolates, i. e. languages which have not been demonstrated to belong to any other major language family or linguistic phylum. There is a theory connecting the Nahali language to Austroasiatic, although even this theory recognises that Nahali, if Austroasiatic, would constitute the only representative of its own distinct major branch of this large linguistic phylum. The Karasuk theory, advanced by myself on the basis of specific morphological evidence, holds that Burushaski forms a language family together with the Yenisseian languages.

Endangered Languages of South Asia 305
Andamanese languages: All native languages spoken by the indigenous negrito peoples of the Andaman Islands are either extinct or threatened with imminent extinction. As a result of British colonial policies, just three of over a dozen native languages of the Andamans were driven extinct, along with the people who spoke them. The three surviving Andamanese languages are Ônge, spoken on Little Andaman, Sentinelese, spoken on North Sentinel Island, and Jarawa, spoken in the interior of South Andaman. The 1981 census enumerated 31 speakers of Jarawa, 97 speakers of Ônge, and a comparably small Sentinelese language community holding out on Sentinel Island. No reliable recent data are available. Historically the Andamanese used to give outsiders visiting the islands a hostile reception, but in view of their tragic history the prompt slaying of outsiders was in retrospect the best policy that the Andamanese could have had. Since the beginning of the 20th century, Urdu or Hindi had established itself as the dominant language because it was the lingua franca between the inmates of the penal colony established on the Andamans by the government of British India. Today Bengali, Tamil, Malayalam and Telugu are also significant minority languages spoken by the colonists who have settled the islands.
Vedda: The earliest Western account of the aboriginal Veddas of Ceylon and their language was written by Ryklof van Goens of the Dutch East India Company in 1675. Subsequently most Veddas were assimilated by the Tamil and Sinhalese speaking populations of the island, both linguistically and through acculturation and intermarriage. Policies implemented by the Ceylonese government in the 1950s and 1960s led to the displacement, fracturing and impoverishment of the last remaining Vedda language communities. The individuals who survived the devastation of their communities have been absorbed into modern Sinhalese society in terms of both lifestyle and language. It is not known whether there are still any surviving speakers of the original, albeit heavily Indo-Aryanised Vedda language, but the places to look would be at the Mahaweli Vedda Settlement Area at Hennanigala on the Kudu Oya, or in isolated households around either Dambana or Polonnaruwa. The Rodiya language, another language of Ceylon, is almost certainly extinct.
Nahali: The Nahali are mainly settled in and around the Gawilgarh Hills south of the Tapti river in Nimar and Ellichpur Districts of Madhya Pradesh, especially around the village of Tembi 40 km east of Burhanpur. The Gawilgarh Hills form part of the Vindhya and Satpu0â chain, which separates the Deccan Plateau from the Gangetic plain. There are less than 2,000 speakers of Nahali. The Nahali language – also written as Nihali or

306 George van Driem
Nehali – has been heavily influenced by the Austroasiatic language Korku. It should be possible to do fieldwork using Hindi as the contact language.
Kusunda: Kusunda is the language of an ancient aboriginal relict group of Nepal. The four remaining Kusunda clans, which designated themselves by the Indo-Aryan names of SiÞha, \Àn, \ÀhÌ and KhÀn, split up in the middle of the 20th century. Kusunda speakers could still be found in the 1960s and 1970s, but the remaining Kusunda are generally individuals which have married into a sedentary agriculturalist community. Several individuals are known to remember the language of their parents, though none speak Kusunda as the language of daily communication. Individual Kusunda are known to be found around Damaul and near GorkhÀ in central Nepal as well as further west in DÀfg and Surkhet. For those interested in finding the last speakers, more detailed clues and reports on their possible whereabouts are given in my handbook (van Driem 2001).
Burushaski: Burushaski is spoken in the high alpine valleys of HunzaNager and Yasin in northern Pakistan by about 80,000 people who call themselves Burúšo and their language Burúšaski. Some 50,000 Burúsho live in Hunza and Nager and some 30,000 live in Yasin. A considerable Burúsho population has also settled in Gilgit itself. The Burúsho area is surrounded on all sides by tracts of land where Iranian, Indo-Aryan, Turkic and Tibetan languages are spoken. The Burúsho for centuries enjoyed a high degree of local autonomy. In 1891, Hunza was conquered by the British after a bloody three-day struggle, and in 1947 the region became part of Pakistan. In 1972 President Bhutto abolished the autonomous Nager kingdom, and in 1974 the kingdom of Hunza was abolished. Between 1964 and 1968 the Karakoram highway was built, which has rendered the area easily accessible to outsiders. In addition to many older Çi¹À loans, Burushaski has become swamped with Urdu and English loan words. Bilingualism has led to the attrition of native morphosyntactic complexity in the speech of the younger generation. In 1992, Hermann Berger predicated that at the present rate of assimilation the language would be fully extinct within several decades.
3. Endangered Austroasiatic languages of the Indian subcontinent
The Austroasiatic language family is the most ancient linguistic phylum of mainland South and Southeast Asia. With the exception of the four languages Khmer, Vietnamese, Khasi and Santhali, each of the over two hun-

Endangered Languages of South Asia 307
dred Austroasiatic languages is threatened with extinction. Even the Mon language, which has an epigraphic and literary tradition dating back to the 7th century, is threatened with imminent extinction. The Austroasiatic languages of South Asia are the Nicobarese languages of the Nicobar Island and the Munda languages of the Indian Subcontinent.
Nicobarese languages: Over 20,000 people presently inhabit the Nicobar Islands, but not all of these speak a native language of the Nicobar Islands. The precise linguistic situation on the Nicobars is currently kept hidden from the scrutiny of foreign scholars by the Indian government. The names and locations of the language communities are known, however. Pû is spoken on Car Nicobar Island, Tatet on Chowra Island, Taihlong on Teressa Island, Powahat on Bompoka Island, Nancowry on the islands of Nancowry and Camorta, Lâfûl on Trinkut Island, Téhñu on Katchall Island, Lo’ong along the coast of Great Nicobar Island, Ong on Little Nicobar Island, Lâmongshé at Condul, and Miloh at Milo. The language Shompen, the most aberrant and idiosyncratic of the Nicobarese languages, constitutes a group unto itself. Shompen is spoken in the hinterland of Great Nicobar Island by the Shompen tribe. The 1981 census enumerated 223 members of the Shompen tribe.
South Munda languages: The Munda languages are divided into a southern and a northern branch. Despite the large number of speakers of a few of the Munda languages, bilingualism is widespread. At the present break-neck speed of assimilation, most Munda languages will not survive to the end of this century. All Munda language communities are under heavy demographic and socio-economic pressure to assimilate linguistically to the local Indo-Aryan majority language. We shall turn to the South Munda languages first. Juang has approximately 17,000 speakers in the Kyonjhar and DhekÀnÀl districts of Orissa. The Kha·ria dialects have over 190,000 speakers, concentrated mainly in the Cho†À NÀgpur, especially in RÀñcÌ district of Bihar, and in scattered communities in Orissa, West Bengal, Bihar, Assam and Madhya Pradesh. The language known variously as Sora, Saora or Savara has over 300,000 speakers in the KorÀpu† and GañjÀm districts of southern Orissa and in neighbouring parts of Andhra Pradesh. Pareng or Gorum is spoken by approximately 10,000 people in Nandpur and Po††angÌ tÀlukÀ in KorÀpu†. Remo or Bonda has approximately 2,500 speakers in the Jayapur hills of KorÀpu†. Gutob or Sodia (also known as Gadaba, but not to be confused with the Dravidian language also named Gadaba) has just over 40,000 speakers in KalÀhÀ¹™Ì, KorÀpu†, Vi¬ÀkhÀpa†nam and Bastar districts. The language known as Getaʔ, Gtaʔ, Dideyi or Didam has about

308 George van Driem

3,000 speakers in the hills and plains on either side of the Sileru river in

East GodÀvarÌ district of Andhra Pradesh.

North Munda languages: Santhali or Santali is the only Munda lan-

guage community with millions of speakers that may be large and resil-

ient enough to resist the forces of linguistic assimilation in the course of

the present century. Korku, the westernmost Munda language, has ap-

proximately 200,000 speakers in southwestern Madhya Pradesh and

neighbouring parts of Maharashtra, especially in the Satpu™À range and

MNaaghuÀrdi,eLv ahtiallrs.aTnhdeKdeirvaeʔrs, etoMgeutn·h0eârrhî aovreHaop·rporodxiaimlecattse,liync7l5u0d,0in0g0

Hasadaʔ, speakers

in the districts RÀñcÌ, SiÞhabhÙm, ManbhÙm, HazÀrÌbÀg and PalÀmÙ of

Bihar and in northern Madhya Pradesh and Orissa. Ho or Kol has just

over 400,000 speakers in SiÞhabhÙm district in Bihar. Bhumij may have

as many as 150,000 speakers in scattered communities in Bihar, Orissa

and Madhya Pradesh. The language of the semi-nomadic Birho·r is moribund, with less than 2,000 speakers in SiÞhabhÙm, southern PalÀmÙ,

southern HazÀrÌbÀg, and northern and northeastern RÀñcÌ. The Ko0a di-

alects, which have been utterly neglected by scholars and evangelists

alike, are spoken by about 25,000 people in scattered enclaves throughout

the Cho†À NÀgpur. Turi is spoken by several thousand people living as small

artisanal groups in West Bengal, PalÀmÙ, RÀñcÌ, SiÞhabhÙm, RÀyga™h and

ChattÌsga™h. The Asur dialects count some 7,000 speakers on the Netarha†

plateau in southern PalÀmÙ and northern RÀñcÌ as well as further south

around GumlÀ. The dialects collectively referred to as Korwa, Koroa or

Ernga together have over 35,000 speakers in the Ja¬purnagar Tahsil of

RÀyga™h district and in SargujÀ district of Madhya Pradesh and in PalÀmÙ

and HazÀrÌbÀg districts of Bihar.

4. Endangered Dravidian languages of the Indian subcontinent
Other than the four major Dravidian languages Kanarese, Tamil, Malayalam and Telugu, most minor Dravidian languages are spoken by small tribes and have not been systematically committed to writing. Kanarese, Tamil and Malayalam are South Dravidian languages. Telugu is the only Central Dravidian language not threatened with extinction.
South Dravidian languages: Iru·la, Toda, Kota and Badaga are minor South Dravidian languages spoken in the Nilgiri Hills in the west of Tamil Nadu. Of these Iru·la, Toda and Kota are most closely related to

Endangered Languages of South Asia 309
Tamil and Malayalam, whereas Badaga can be said to be a major variant of Kannada. Iru·la has only about 5,000 speakers. Kota and Toda are each spoken by about 1,000 people, Kota in the KÒttagiri portion of the Nilgiris, and Toda in the vicinity of Udagama¹™alam or ‘Ootacamund’, affectionately known as ‘Ooty’. Although a close relative of Kota, Toda is aberrant and is said to have non-Dravidian features. Badaga has over 100,000 speakers. Another relative of Tamil and Malayalam is the Ko0agu language, spoken by about 100,000 speakers in the ‘Coorg’ or Ko™agu district of Karnataka in the vicinity of ‘Mercara’ city or Ma™keri. Tu·lu is a totally distinct South Dravidian language with over a million speakers around the coastal city of Mangalore or MafgalÙru and along the coast from KÀsargo™u in Kerala up as far as North KanarÀ district in Karnataka. Tu·lu is written in an adapted form of the Grantha script, like Malayalam, and schoolbooks and Bible translations have been printed in Tu·lu since 1842. The Kuruba language is spoken by the thousand or so members of the Betta-Kuruba tribe in the hilly parts of Coorg. The Betta-Kuruba tribe constitute merely one tenth of all ethnic Kuruba, for other Kuruba tribes have adopted Kannada. The Koraga and Bellari languages each have roughly 1,000 speakers in the area around Kun™Àpura or ‘Coondapoor’ and U™upi or ‘Udipi’ in South KanarÀ district of Karnataka. The recently discovered Koraga language is spoken by untouchables who are bilingual in Kannada. Kurru (including Korava, Yerukula, Yerukala and Kaikudi) is spoken by an estimated 100,000 nomadic tribesmen in Andhra Pradesh and neighbouring portions of Karnataka and Tamil Nadu.
Central Dravidian languages: Central Dravidian comprises the minor languages of the Telugu-Kûi group (Gôn· 0i, Kon· 0a, Man· 0a, Pengo, Kûvi and Kûi) and the Kolami-Parji group (Kolami, Naikri, Naiki, Gadaba and Parji). Over two million speakers of Gôn· 0i, who call themselves either Kôi or Kôya, live in scattered communities in Madhya Pradesh, Maharashtra, Orissa and the north of Andhra Pradesh. Kon· 0a or Kûbi is spoken by the more than 15,000 members of the Konda Dora tribe in the districts of Vi¬ÀkhÀpa†¹am and \rÌkÀkulam in Andhra Pradesh and the neighbouring district of KorÀpu† in Orissa. Man· 0a and Pengo are spoken in KorÀpu† and KalÀhÀ¹™Ì districts in Orissa by an estimated 1,500 speakers. The languages Kûi or Kûʔi and Kûvi are spoken by more than half a million members of the Kondho (also Kondh, Kandh or Khond) tribes in GañjÀm, KalÀhÀ¹™Ì, Baudh-KondhamÀÅ and KorÀpu† districts in Orissa and in Vi¬ÀkhÀpa†¹am district in Andhra Pradesh. Christian missionaries have printed religious tracts in Kûi and

310 George van Driem
Kûvi using the Roman and Oriya scripts. Kolami is spoken by about 70,000 people in the hills of YavatmÀÅ and VardhÀ districts in Maharashtra and in AdilÀbÀd district in Andhra Pradesh. An estimated 1,500 Yerku tribesmen in the hills of Canda district in Maharashtra speak the related language Naiki. There are roughly 50,000 speakers of Parji in Bastar district in Madhya Pradesh in the vicinity of Jagdalpur. In neighbouring KorÀpu† district in Orissa, there are roughly 40,000 speakers of the various dialects of Gadaba, not to be confused with the Mun· 0â language of the same name, currently more usually called Gutob.
Northern Dravidian languages: The Northern Dravidian languages are all minor languages, i. e. Brahui, Malto and Kurukh. Brahui [brâ?ûî] is spoken in Pakistan, mainly in Kalat and the adjacent districts of Hyderabad, Karachi and Khairpur, and in small communities in adjacent portions of Afghanistan and Iran. The language is spoken by about half a million members of the so-called indigenous Brahui tribes of the Kalat, the Sarawan tribes north of the Kalat and the Jhalawan tribes south of the Kalat. Brahui has been a written language for over three centuries, but a truly flourishing literary tradition has never developed. Brahui, like the Indo-Aryan language Urdu, is written in an adapted form of the Persian script. Traditionally, Brahui is considered to be either a separate branch of Dravidian or a member of North Dravidian alongside Malto and Kurukh. More than 100,000 people speak the Dravidian language of Malto, mainly in the RÀjmahal Hills of central Bihar.
Kurukh, also written Ku·rux, and also known as Oraon or Uraon is spoken by roughly 1.5 million speakers, mainly in the hill tracts of the Cho†À NÀgpur in the states of Bihar, Madhya Pradesh, Orissa and West Bengal but also in scattered communities elsewhere in these states and even as far east as Assam and as far north as the foot of the Himalayas in the eastern Nepalese Terai, where about 15,000 people speak the Dhangar and Jhangar dialect. There are also a few scattered Uraon settlements on the Indian side of the Indo-Bhutanese border at intervals from the area south of Samtsi in the west to the area south of Samdrup Jongkhar in the east. Moreover, scattered Uraon communities are found throughout Assam, where they are referred to as ‘Adibasis’, and so lumped together with the various linguistically unrelated Austroasiatic Mun· 0â groups with whom they share their geographical provenance and their dark, at times nearly negroid appearance. The term “ÃdivÀsÌ” used in northeastern India literally means ‘aborginal’, but, ironically and confusingly, the groups thus designated are, in fact, not aboriginal to northeastern Indian, but aboriginal to the Cho†À NÀgpur.

Endangered Languages of South Asia 311
5. Endangered languages of Bhutan and Sikkim
The contrast between Bhutan and Sikkim in terms of the language endangerment situation could not be greater. With the possible exception of Singapore, Bhutan is the most anglophone country in all of Asia. The position of English in education, government and daily life is such that even Dzongkha itself, the national language which is actively propagated by the Royal Government of Bhutan, occupies a precarious position alongside English. On the other hand, the Royal Government of Bhutan fosters a policy of studying, documenting and preserving the native languages of the country as part of the national cultural heritage. Sikkim, on the other hand, has been swamped by colonists from Nepal and lost sovereignty in 1975 when it was annexed by India. The indigenous population groups of Sikkim, the Lepcha and the DrÀnjop, have been reduced to a minority of less than 10% in their own native homeland. Nepali, an allochthonous language, has expanded in Sikkim to the detriment of all native languages, and Nepali has also made inroads into Bhutan. In comparison with Sikkim and Nepal, the sociolinguistic situation in Bhutan is characterised by far greater stability. In Bhutan, languages under threat are faced with encroaching endangerment and gradual extinction, but not with the cataclysmic upheaval and immediate endangerment which threatens almost all of the native language communities of Nepal. The only exception is Lhokpu, the most endangered language in Bhutan, which is threatened by linguistic assimilation to the surrounding communities of Nepali colonists in southwestern Bhutan. Here too Nepali is spreading at the expense of a native language. The least endangered language in Bhutan is the Tshangla or Shâchop language. Tshangla is a Tibeto-Burman tongue which constitutes a subgroup in its own right, spoken by a highly robust language community native to the eastern part of the kingdom. A Tshangla dialect is also spoken in an enclave around PemakÒ, further east on the Indo-Tibetan border.
South Bodish languages: The four South Bodish languages are Dzongkha, Drânjoke, J’umowa and Cho-ca-nga-ca-kha. Dzongkha is the national language of the kingdom of Bhutan, but is actually native to just 8 out of 20 districts, all located in western Bhutan. Propagation of a standard form of the language highly influenced by the Classical Tibetan liturgical language or ‘Chôke’. The preeminent role of English in Bhutan threatens Dzongkha even though there are an estimated 160,000 native speakers of the language. The normative influence of Chôke threatens authentic grass roots forms of Dzongkha.

312 George van Driem
The sister language of Dzongkha, Drânjoke, used to be the national language of the Kingdom of Sikkim. However, since Sikkim was annexed by India in 1975, the land has been overwhelmed by a Nepali-speaking immigrant population which now constitutes over 90% of the populace. As a result, young DrÀnjop are almost all raised in Nepali, and Drânjoke is now moribund.
J’umowa is spoken in the southernmost portion of the Chumbi valley, a sliver of former Sikkimese territory which was ceded to Tibet and is now wedged in between Sikkim and Bhutan. The Chumbi valley is known in Tibetan as Gro-mo or ‘Dr’omo’ and in Dzongkha as Gyu-mo or ‘J’umo’. The English name for the Chumbi Valley is derived from the genitive adjectival form J’umbi ‘of or pertaining to the Chumbi valley’. Based on the Tibetan pronunciation of the valley, the language is also known as ‘Tromowa’ or ‘Dr’omowa’. This language, only spoken in the lower portion of the valley, is now moribund. Cho-ca-nga-ca-kha is spoken by approximately 20,000 speakers in Monggar and Lhntsi districts on both banks of the Kurichu. This language is under threat from Tshangla and Dzongkha. The closeness of Cho-ca-nga-ca-kha to Dzongkha means that assimilation to the Bhutanese national language is an easy process which involves the language being shorn of all its most interesting features, some of which are Kurichu linguistic substrate traits.
East Bodish languages: The East Bodish languages are the most archaic branch of Bodish, more conservative in some respects than Old Tibetan. East Bodish comprises Dakpa, Black Mountain, Bumthang, Kurtôp, Kheng, Nupbikha, ‘Nyenkha, Dzala and Chali. Of these languages, four can be seen as dialects of a single Greater Bumthang language, i. e. Bumthang, Nupbikha, Kheng and Kurtôp. Yet all the other East Bodish languages are quite distinct, and their diversity reflects a great time depth. The particular language endangerment situation of Bhutan has already been discussed above in light of the country’s relative sociolinguistic stability.
Bumthang is the native language of Bumthang district in central Bhutan, where four dialects of the language are spoken by an estimated 30,000 people. The dialect spoken in Trongsa is called Nupbikha ‘language of the west’, i. e. west of Bumthang. Kheng is the language of an estimated 40,000 people in Kheng district, now also known as Zh’Àmgang, south of Bumthang in central Bhutan. Kurtôp is spoken by approximately 10,000 people in Lhntsi district, to the west of the Kurichu all the way north to the Tibetan border. The Kurtôp area is therefore east of the Bumthang area, whilst the Kurichu separates the Kurtôp area from the Dzala language area of northeastern Bhutan.

Endangered Languages of South Asia 313
The other East Bodish languages are all quite distinct languages. ‘Nyenkha is also known as Henkha, but the most popular name is probably Mangdebi-kha because this highly divergent East Bodish language is spoken by an estimated 10,000 people in the Mangde river valley. Chali is spoken by about a thousand people in a small enclave north of Monggar on the east bank of the Kurichu, consisting mainly of Chali itself and neighbouring Wangmakhar. Dzala is the spoken by about 15,000 people in northeastern Bhutan in Trashi’yangtse district and in Lhûntsi district east of the Kurichu. Chinese sources have reported over 40,000 speakers of the same language in the portion of Tibet just north of northeastern Bhutan and the adjacent part of Arunachal Pradesh. Dakpa is spoken by a few thousand people in Tawang, which now makes up the northwestern corner of Arunachal Pradesh, and in a few villages in eastern Bhutan abutting Tawang. The Black Mountain language is spoken by about 500 people in 6 different villages scattered throughout the southern jungle heartland of the Black Mountains in central Bhutan. This language is decidedly the most divergent and aberrant of all East Bodish languages. The language may, in fact, not be East Bodish at all, but represent another Tibeto-Burman language on its own which has been extensively relexified by East Bodish.
Lhokpu: Lhokpu constitutes a group unto itself within the Tibeto-Burman language family. The Lhokpu language is spoken in the hills of Samtsi District in southwestern Bhutan in two distinct language communities. The robust western community in the hills one day’s march to the northwest of Samtsi bazaar comprises approximately 1,340 speakers in the villages of Sanglung, Sataka and Loto Kucu and Lotok. The eastern community comprises approximately 1,270 speakers in Tâba, Dramte and several associated hamlets near Jenchu, upstream from the town of Phntsho’ling on the Indo-Bhutan border. Language retention is better in the western community because there are fewer Nepali settlements nearby. The entire Lhokpu population is effectively bilingual in Nepali, and most of the hill tracts of southwestern Bhutan as well as a portion of the western Bhutanese duars used to be Lhokpu territory. The Royal Government of Bhutan has recognised the urgent language endangerment situation of the Lhokpu due to the influx of Nepali settlers into their traditional homeland, and Lhokpu is currently being grammatically and lexicographically documented under the auspices of the Royal Government of Bhutan.
Lepcha: The Lepcha have their own indigenous script and a literary tradition which dates back to the early 18th century. Lepcha is the language of the original populace of Sikkim. The kingdom of Sikkim, once

314 George van Driem
comprised present-day Sikkim as well as most of present-day Darjeeling district. Outside of this area, Lepcha is also still spoken decreasingly within roughly 100 Lepcha households in Ilm district in eastern Nepal. The language is also spoken in Kalimpong or ‘British Bhutan’, i. e. the territory wrested from Bhutan which now forms the easternmost part of Darjeeling district. Lepcha is furthermore spoken in a few Lepcha villages in Samtsi District of southwestern Bhutan. Zongu district in Sikkim is the only remaining area where the Lepcha have not been outnumbered by Nepali colonists. The entire Lepcha area is bilingual. Despite spirited attempts to preserve the language, Lepcha has already effectively been lost everywhere in favour of Nepali. There are very few remaining households where the younger generation actively speaks the language, and these households are few and far between. The total number of fluent Lepcha speakers does not exceed a few thousand.
Gongduk: Gongduk is a previously unknown Tibeto-Burman language which was first discovered for scholarship in May 1991. The language, which has turned out to constitute a distinct and unique branch unto itself within the great Tibeto-Burman language family, is spoken by a dwindling population of just over a thousand people in a remote enclave along the Kurichu in Monggar district in east-central Bhutan. Gongduk is one of the two languages in Bhutan which has retained complex conjugations which reflect the ancient Tibeto-Burman verbal agreement system. The language community has survived intact for so long because of its remoteness and the relative general stability of language communities in Bhutan over time. Whereas some language communities are remote in the sense that they are many days on foot from a motorable road, the Gongduk speaking enclave has until recent historical times also been several days on foot from the nearest neighbouring language communities. This means that travellers had to carry their own provisions and sleep outdoors to reach the Gongduk area. This still holds true for two of the three approaches to the language community. Yet Bhutan has been transformed in recent decades by a network of narrow but motorable roads and a growing infrastructure of educational and health care facilities set up by a caring central government The Gongduk language community is opening up to the outside world, and a growing staff of civil servants who do not speak the language are now stationed there on a semi-permanent basis. Although there is still a fair number of genuine monolinguals, the situation is rapidly changing, and the future prospects for the survival of Gongduk are not good. The Royal Government of Bhutan has recognised the urgent language endangerment situation of the Gongduk, and the lan-

Endangered Languages of South Asia 315
guage is currently being grammatically and lexicographically documented under the auspices of the Royal Government of Bhutan.
6. Endangered languages of Arunachal Pradesh
The Kho-Bwa languages: The four languages of the enigmatic Kho-Bwa cluster in western Arunachal Pradesh, just east of Bhutan, are all endangered with imminent extinction. These are Khowa or Bugun, Sulung or Puroit, Lishpa and Sherdukpen. Khowa is spoken by an estimated 800 people, more than half of whom reside in the two villages of Wanghoo and Singchung near the district headquarters at Bomdila in West Kameng district. Sulung is spoken by about 4,000 people, half of whom inhabit a small area which straddles the northeastern hills of East Kameng and the northwestern hills of Lower Subansiri district. In this area, they occupy the northern and more inaccessible parts of the upper reaches of the Par river. The Sulung have been compelled to lead a semi-nomadic existence because they were lowest in the pecking order established by the perennial internecine tribal warfare traditionally waged in the region. The Sulung were often enslaved by rival groups. Therefore, their actual area of dispersal extends from the Bhareli river to the Subansiri, and small settlements of Sulung are interspersed with the villages of more numerous groups such as the Tani and Hruso. Lishpa is spoken by about 1,000 people in Kameng district who pass themselves off as ‘Monpa’. Sherdukpen is spoken by less than 2,000 people who live mainly in the villages of Rupa, Shergaon and Jigaon in the southwestern corner of Kameng district, but are also settled in the area in and around the Tenga valley south of Bomdila. Culturally the Sherdukpen are distinct from the other Kho-Bwa language communities because they have adopted a Tibetan MahÀyÀna Buddhist “Hochkultur”.
Hrusish languages: All three Hrusish languages are endangered with imminent extinction. The Hruso or ‘Aka’ population is estimated at less than 3,000 speakers. The Hruso live in the southeast of Kameng, where they are concentrated in the Bichom river valley. Like the Bhutanese to the west and the neighbouring Nishi tribes to the east, the Hruso or Aka have historically observed the practice of raiding the plains to take back slaves to the hills. Dhímmai or ‘Miji’ is still spoken by about 4,000 people. The Dhímmai inhabit about twenty-five villages and hamlets in the northeastern and north-central region of Kameng, i. e. in the Bichom river valley to the north of Hruso territory and also in the Pakesa river valley.

316 George van Driem
There are only about 1,000 speakers of Levai or ‘Bongro’, who live in Kameng and also part of Subansiri.
Tani languages: Tani languages, formerly known as ‘Abor-Miri-Dafla’ languages, are spoken by the many Adi and Nishi tribes and a few other groups such as the Milang which are not thus classified. An estimated 5,000 speakers of Milang live on the eastern fringe of the Tani area, abutting the territory of the Idu Mishmis. The Milang inhabit the three villages of Milang, Dalbing and Pekimodi in the upper Yamne valley in Mariyang subdivision of East Siang district.
Bangni, Nishi, Tagin and Apatani form a cluster. Bangni, traditionally known as Western Dafla, is spoken by roughly 23,000 people. In the north, the Bangni area straddles the Indo-Tibetan border. Nishi, formerly known as Eastern Dafla, is spoken by roughly 30,000 people. Nah is spoken in just seven villages of Taksing administrative circle in in Upper Subansiri district. Sarak or ‘Hill Miri’ is spoken just east of the Apatani area by an estimated 9,000 people. An estimated 25,000 Tagin inhabit the northeastern quadrant of Subansiri district and Subansiri and adjoining parts of West Siang, including the towns of Denekoli and Taliha. The Tagin were driven to their present abode by the bellicose Pailibo and Ramo tribes. Apatani is the most divergent member of the Nishi group and has been exposed to the most Tibetan influence. An estimated 14,000 Apatani inhabit an enclave in the fertile valley of the Apatani Plateau in lower central Subansiri district, between the Nishi and Hill Miri, midway between the Panior and Kamla rivers.
Gallong, Bokar, Pailibo and Ramo form a cluster. Gallong, one of the two Tani languages which is endangered but not threatened with immediate extinction, is spoken by approximately 40,000 people in the southern half of West Siang district as far down as where the plains of Lakhimpur District begin in Assam. The largest Gallong village is Bagra with a population exceeding 3,000 near the West Siang district headquarters at Along. Approximately 3,500 speakers of Bokar live in 40 villages in the Monigong Circle of Machukha subdivision in West Siang district just below the peaks of the Indo-Tibetan border, as well as in several villages on the Tibetan side of the ridge. Just over 1,000 speakers of Pailibo, live along the banks of the Siyom or Yomgo river, in 9 villages in the Tato Circle and two villages in the Payum circle of West Siang district. Less than 800 speak Ramo in the upper Siyom valley in Mechukha subdivision of West Siang district to the northwest of the Pailibo area. Exclusively Ramo villages are located between Machukha and Tato, whereas elsewhere Ramo are mixed with Bokar and Memba settlers.

Endangered Languages of South Asia 317
The remaining languages belong to the Minyong-Padam cluster, although nothing is in fact known about the Ashing language except its name. Its inclusion, therefore, is just a matter of geographical convenience. Whereas Padam is one of the two Tani languages which is endangered but not threatened with immediate extinction, Tangam is nearly extinct because most of the people who spoke the language became the victims of genocide. The endangerment situation therefore varies widely from language community to language community. Approximately 20,000 speakers of Minyong occupy the swathe of territory along the west bank of the lower Siang river, downstream of the Bori and Karko language communities and to the east of the Gallongs. Not much more than 2,000 speakers of Bori are settled along the Siyom and Sike rivers in an area enclosed by the Luyor hills on the east, the Piri hills on the west and on the north by the closing together of these two ranges. The totally undocumented Ashing language is spoken by less than 1,000 people who inhabit the northernmost headwaters of the Siang river near the Tibetan border, beginning from the village of Ramsing in the south and extending up as far as Tuting village in the north. Pango and Bomdo are the most numerous Ashing settlements. An estimated 2,000 speakers of Shimong remain on the left bank of the Siang in the northernmost portion of what used to be known administratively as the Siang Frontier Division. Yingkiong is the administrative centre in the Shimong area. Less than 200 speakers of Tangam remain in the northernmost portion of Siang district inhabiting the three villages of Kuging, Ngering, Mayum and a few neighbouring hamlets in the northeastern corner of the Adi tribal region of Arunachal Pradesh, along the upper reaches of the rivers Siang and Nigong. The Tangam were once numerous but were killed en masse by neighbouring tribes. Karko is spoken by a small tribe of just over 2,000 people found mainly in Karko village and surrounding hamlets, such as Ramsing and Gosang. About 600 speakers of Panggi live in the lower Yamne valley above the confluence of the Yamne and the Siang, in the villages of Geku, Sumsing, Sibum, Jeru and Pongging. Padam, formerly known as the ‘Bor Abor’ or ‘Great Abor’, is spoken by probably over 40,000 people in the tract of land between the Dibang, Siang and Yamne valleys in East Siang, from the Assam border in the south to the Sidip river in the north. Mishing or ‘Plains Miri’ is spoken by less than 4,000 Hinduised people living in scattered settlements on the plains closely skirting the hills of Arunachal Pradesh. All the language communities of Arunachal Pradesh are threatened by Hindi which has been propagated in the area by the Government of India since the 1970s.

318 George van Driem
Midz´uish languages: The Midźuish languages are referred to in older writings by the antique term ‘Northern Mishmi’. The two Midźuish languages, Kaman and Zaiwa, are both endangered. Approximately 9,000 people speak Kaman or ‘Miju Mishmi’ along the upper reaches of the Lohit on both banks of the river around Parsuram Kund in Lohit district, and across the border in Tibet. Less than 200 people of the Zakhring and Meyor clans speak the Zaiwa language in the vicinity of Walong. This ‘Zaiwa Mishmi’ is not to be confused with the utterly different Burmic language also named Zaiwa, which is spoken in parts of Yúnnán and Burma.
Digarish languages: The two Digarish languages, Idu and Taraon, are both endangered with imminent extinction. There are only an estimated 9,000 speakers of Idu, once known as Chulikata ‘cropped hair’ Mishmi. An estimated 6,000 speakers of Taraon are concentrated in the area between the Delei and Lati rivers in the east, the Kharem in the south and the Digaru in the west.
7. Endangered languages of the Brahmaputran plain and associated hill tracts
Brahmaputran is a major trunk of the Tibeto-Burman language family, comprising the three branches Konyak, Bodo-Koch and Dhimalish and may include a fourth branch Kachinic or Jinghpaw. The Kachinic languages are all endangered, not only by Mandarin, Burmese and Assamese, but also by the Jinghpaw creole which is used as a lingua franca between diverse Kachinic language communities. This form of Jinghpaw has been grammatically simplified and is shorn of the native morphosyntactic complexity which characterises the various local grass roots Jinghpaw languages. More information on the Jinghpaw languages can be found in the section on Southeast Asia. The Bodo-Koch branch of the Tibeto-Burman family consists of Chutiya, Bodo-Garo and the Koch languages. A number of Bodo-Koch languages mentioned and even scantily documented in British sources in the 19th and 20th century have since then gone extinct, e. g. Hâjong.
Deori Chutiya: There was once a large number of ethnic Chutiya, but the only group that had retained the original language at the dawn of the 20th century was the priestly Deori clan, who formerly officiated at sacrificial ceremonies for the Ahom kings. The 1971 census only counted 2,683 ethnic Deori in Arunachal Pradesh and 9,103 Chutiya in Assam. Today there are reportedly only few households in Lakhimpur and Sibsagar dis-

Endangered Languages of South Asia 319
tricts of upper Assam who still speak the language and one would have to make an effort to localise them.
Bodo-Garo languages: The Bodo-Garo cluster consists of Kokborok, Tiwa, Dimasa or ‘Hills Kachari’, Hojai, ‘Plains Kachari’, Bodo, Mech and Garo. The most divergent languages within this cluster are believed to be Dimasa, Tiwa and Kokborok. Dimasa is hardly documented and today very much under threat of extinction. The Dimasa live in the northern Cachar hills and portions of the adjacent plains, where they have largely been linguistically assimilated to their Bengali and Assamese neighbours. Dimasa is only spoken in isolated households, and local sleuthing would be required to find them. There is no description of Hojai, but old sources suggest some affiliation with the Dimasa. Dimasa and Hojai are distinct from Plains Kachari, but the speakers of all three dialects refer to themselves as ‘Bodo’. Plains Kachari or simply Kachari is the dialect spoken in Darrang district, upriver from Bodo proper and downriver from the Chutiya territory. The surviving Kachari language communities are rapidly being assimilated. The dialect spoken further downriver in areas such as Goalpara is generally referred to simply as Bodo. There is still a considerable number of Bodo speakers, but their communities are presently assimilating linguistically to Bengali and Assamese under heavy demographic and socio-economic pressure. Meche is a Bodo-Koch language often mentioned in British sources, but now perhaps extinct. If there are still households speaking Meche, they must be sought by a locally savvy linguist in Jalpaiguri district and neighbouring parts of Goalpara. The original Meche territory stretched from what today is JhÀpÀ district in the eastern Nepalese Terai all the way across the Bhutanese duars as far as modern Goalpara district.
Kokborok, formerly known as ‘Hill Tippera’ is spoken in the low rolling hills of TripurÀ. At the time that India gained its independence from Great Britain, at least 70% of the people in TripurÀ were Kokborok and merely 30% were Bengali colonists. Today the Kokborok constitute just a 30% minority in their own tribal homeland, having been swamped by Bengali immigrants, especially from the area which now constitutes the country of Bangladesh. Bengali colonists now make up over 85% of the population. There are an estimated 800,000 ethnic Kokborok, but the vast majority has abandoned their ancestral language or is in the process of doing so. Tiwa, also known as ‘Lalung’, is spoken by about 35,000 people settled in Kamrup and Marigaon districts and in the Karbi Anglong, formerly known as the Mikir Hills. Garo is the only Bodo-Koch language not threatened with imminent extinction. About 200,000 of the 250,000

320 George van Driem
people living in the western half of the MeghÀlaya, known as the Garo Hills, speak Garo. An additional 50,000 Garo speakers live in the Assamese districts of Goalpara and Kamrup and in Mymensing District of Bangladesh, which all skirt the Garo Hills. Some Garo even live further south in the Bangladeshi hinterland, e. g. about 15,000 in Modhupur.
The Koch languages: The Koch languages are Pânî Koch, A’tong, Ruga and Rabha. Koch proper is still spoken by only approximately 300 people along the western fringe of the Garo Hills near Dalu in the vicinity Garobadha. The speakers are known as Wanang or PÀnÌ Koch ‘Water Koch’. Several thousand speakers of A’tong live in the southeast of the Garo Hills reside in and around SomasvarÌ and BÀghmÀrÀ. The A’tong speak a Koch language, but identify themselves as ‘Garo’ and are already bilingual in their native A’tong and in Garo. The Ruga or Rugha are a small group in the south of the Garo Hills. No data are available on the number of Rugha speakers. The Rabhas inhabit the territory where the Brahmaputra meanders around the highlands of the MeghÀlaya and bends south towards the Bay of Bengal after flowing westward across the plains of Assam. The prehistoric Rabha ethnic area may originally have extended as far east as Guwahati. There are at least 150,000 ethnic Rabha in Assam, and in 1993 the Rabha Hasong Demand Committee even put the number of ethnic Rabha as high as 375,000. Yet there are no more than several thousand speakers of the Rabha language. Most Rabhas speak Bengali or Assamese. Rabha is only still actually spoken in a number of villages in Goalpara District between GoÀlpÀrÀ proper and PhulbÀrÌ, inc. BardÀmÀl, MÀtiÀ, Majerburi and MÀkuri. However, even here the younger generation is already fully bilingual in Assamese, and most young Rabhas have a better command of Assamese than they have of Rabha.
Dhimalish languages: Dhimalish includes the Toto and Dhimal languages. Toto is spoken by a small tribal group at the town of Êo†opÀrÀ in BaksÀ or MÀdÀrÌhÀ† subdivision of Jalpgu district in the Indian state of West Bengal nearby the Bhutanese border town of Phntsho’ling. In November 1994, there were 176 Toto families with a total number of 992 Toto speakers. Although this language of the Bhutanese duars is officially spoken on the Indian side of the border today, the Royal Government of Bhutan has recognised the precarious situation of this community and commissioned grammatical investigation of the language, which is currently being prepared for publication. On the basis of British sources, it is known that the range of Toto speaking settlements was once far larger than it is today.

Endangered Languages of South Asia 321
The Dhimal live in JhÀpÀ and Moraf districts in the eastern Nepalese Terai. There are two distinct Dhimal language communities, an eastern conglomeration of 16 villages in JhÀpÀ district to the east of the KafkÀÌmÀÌ or MÀÌ river, with an estimated 3,000 speakers, and a western tribe of over 25,000 speakers to the west of the river inhabiting about 24 villages in western JhÀpÀ and 51 villages in Moraf district. The current Dhimal population has recently been estimated as high as 35,000 people, though the 1991 census somehow only counted 16,781 Dhimal. The language is rapidly being lost in favour of Nepali, however, because the Dhimal are a 10% minority in their own native areas. The groups in the same region which are sometimes identified as JhÀn˙ ga™ DhimÀl are speakers of the Dravidian language Jhangar.
Konyak languages: The ‘Northern Naga’ or Konyak languages are spoken in Arunachal Pradesh, Nagaland and adjacent areas of Burma. Two clusters can be distinguished, the first comprising the languages Konyak, Wancho, Phom, Khiamngan and Chang, and the second comprising Tangsa and Nocte. Tangsa, Nocte and Wancho are spoken in Arunachal Pradesh, whereas Konyak, Phom and Chang are spoken to the southwest in Nagaland. There are approximately 30,000 Wanchos in approximately 41 villages grouped into eleven confederacies, known as Jan, in the southwestern tip of Tirap district between the foothills and the Patkoi range. To the south of the Wancho, in Nagaland, live approximately 70,000 speakers of Konyak. South of the Konyak live about 19,000 speakers of Phom. To the southeast of the Phom, approximately 16,000 Chang occupy the hinterland of Nagaland, stretching back into the high range which divides India from Burma. An unknown number of speakers speak Khiamngan, and the precise wherabouts of this language community is unknown. There were about 20,000 Tangsa in Changlang and Miao subdivisions of Tirap district. The Jogli, Moklum and Lunchang languages are dialects of Tangsa, divergent enough to warrant separate documentation and each spoken by well over a thousand people. The Noctes live in central Tirap to the northeast of the Wanchos and to the west of the Tangsas. There are approximately 28,000 Nocte.
Karbí: Karbí or Mikir is spoken in the Karbi Anglong or ‘Mikir Hills’ of Assam as well as in the neighbouring districts of Kamrup, Nowgong and Sibsagar. The language is not a Brahmaputran language, but a taxon unto itself within the Tibeto-Burman language family. There are over 150,000 Mikir, the vast majority of which reside in the Karbi Anglong. Half of the Karbí are bilingual in Assamese, and amongst the younger generation the ancestral language is being abandoned at an alarming rate in favour of Assamese.

322 George van Driem
8. Endangered Tibeto-Burman and Daic languages of the Indo-Burmese borderlands
Ao languages: The Ao languages are spoken in central Nagaland. These are Chungli Ao, Mongsen Ao, Sangtam, Yimchungrû, Lotha, Yacham and Tengsa. Lotha is the most robust with about 35,000 speakers. All the other Ao languages together have about 65,275 speakers. Over one third of the population of Nagaland are not indigenous Tibeto-Burmans, but IndoAryan settlers. Due to the many languages spoken in Nagaland, the increased mobility of all population groups and the use of Assamese and Nagamese, a low-status Assamese-based creole, as lingua franca, all the Ao languages are threatened with extinction.
Angami-Pochuri languages: There are two language clusters, one of consisting of Angami, Chokri, Kheza and Mao, and the other of Pochuri, Ntenyi, Maluri, Sema and Rengma. There are roughly 30,000 speakers of Angami and an estimated 65,000 speakers of Sema. The other languages are all spoken by far smaller populations. For example, ther are about 9,000 speakers of Rengma.
Zeme languages: The linguistic territory of the Zeme languages lies in the southwestern corner of Nagaland and the northwestern portion of Manipur, where the languages Zeme, Liangmai, Nruanghmei, Mzieme, Puiron, Khoirao and Maram are spoken. There are no good population counts for these language communities. There were 26 Zeme speaking villages in 1901, whereas the 1971 census returned 406 Khoirao, 19,968 Maram and 17,360 Rongmai. All Zeme languages are threatened with extinction. The direction of linguistic assimilation is generally towards Meithei, a robust Tibeto-Burman language which is the official language of Manipur, spoken by over one million people.
Tangkhul languages: Tangkhul territory covers the northeastern quadrant of Manipur. The two languages are Tangkhul in the north and Maring in the south. The 1971 census returned 58,167 ethnic Tangkhul in Ma¹ipur, and no separate data were available on Maring. Tangkhul is being lost in favour of Meithei and is nearly extinct. It is not known whether Maring is already extinct or still survives in certain households.
Mizo-Kuki-Chin languages: Some languages of this branch are not yet endangered, e. g. Mizo, also known as Lushai, spoken by 300,000 people. Precise numbers for other language communities are not available, but it is certain that all these languages are vanishing fast. Thadou, Kom, Chiru, Gangte, Lamgang, Anal and Paite are spoken by dwindling numbers of speakers in Manipur, where these communities are being linguistically as-

Endangered Languages of South Asia 323
similated to the Meithei speaking majority. The small Lakher language community in southern Mizoram is assimilating to the Mizo speaking minority. The Simte, Zo, Vaiphei, Tiddim Chin, Falam Chin, Haka Chin and various Southern Chin language communities in Burma are being linguistically assimilated by the Burmese speaking majority. The small Hrangkol, Chorei, Bawm, Kom and Hmar language communities in Tripura, southern Assam and the northern tip of Mizoram are all assimilating to the Assamese or Bengali speaking majority.
Mru: Mru is a Tibeto-Burman language in a class by itself. The estimated 40,000 speakers of Mru in the central hills of the Chittagong in southeastern Bangladesh are losing their language in favour of Bengali.
Sak languages: The Kachinic branch consists of the Sak languages and the Jinghpaw dialects. The Sak languages, formerly also known as ‘Luish’ languages, are Sak, Kadu, Andro and Sengmai. Andro and Sengmai went extinct in the course of the 20th century. The descendants in Manipur now speak Meithei. In 1911, Kadu was still spoken by at least 11,000 people in the portion of the Burmese district of Katha adjacent to Manipur. It is unknown whether there are any hamlets or households in which the language is still spoken. The Chakmas of the northern Chittagong Hill tracts have adopted Bengali, but the Chak, Cak or Sak in the southern Chittagong hill tracts still speak their ancestral Tibeto-Burman tongue. The Sak are separated from the Chakma by bands of territory inhabited by speakers of the Mru language and of the Arakanese dialect of Burmese. A mere 1,500 speakers of Sak were counted in 1981 in the area of Alaykhyong, Baichiri, Nakhali et Nakhyongchari near the Burmese border east of Cox’s Bazar.
Daic languages: Ahom is an ancient Daic language introduced into the lower Brahmaputra valley in what today is northeastern India with the incursion of a Daic tribe in 1228. A Daic élite led by prince SukÀphÀ imposed its language and culture upon a Bodo-Koch populace, but their language ultimately went extinct and all that survives are chronicles known as Buranjis. Subsequently other Daic groups migrated into northeastern India, such as the Khampti and Tai Phake or ‘PhÀkial’, who arrived in the mid 18th century. Today the Khampti predominantly inhabit the southeastern corner of Lakhimpur district in Assam and neighbouring portions of Lohit district in Arunachal Pradesh, and an unknown but dwindling number of ethnic Khampti still speak their ancestral Daic language. The roughly 2,000 Buddhist speakers of Tai Phake inhabit the six villages of Nam Phakial, Tipam Phakial, Bar Phakial, Namman, Namchai and Lang in Tinsukia and Dibrugarh districts. The Tai Phake are already all bilingual and speak Assamese in addition to their native language.

324 George van Driem
The Tai Nora are a Northern Shan group who fled to the Patkoi Hills to escape persecution by the Jinghpaw at the beginning of the 19th century, later moving to Jorhat subdivision of Sibsagar district. Most of the Tai Nora have lost their native Daic tongue, whereas the few Tai Nora who continue to speak the language usually identify themselves and their language as Khamyang. The Tai Rong or Tai Long ‘Great Tai’ are a Shan group who settled in northeastern India in 1825, likewise settling in Jorhat. The approximately 2,000 speakers of Aiton or ‘Shâm Doâniyâs’ are also a Northern Shan group who fled to avoid persecution in the 19th century and settled in small numbers in Lakhimpur and Sibsagar districts and the Naga Hills.
9. Endangered languages of Nepal
The 1971 census returned 220,000 speakers of all the Rai languages taken together. After the Nepalese Revolution did away with repressive language policies in 1990, it became popular to identify oneself as a speaker of one’s ancestral language even when one no longer spoke it. In the 1991 census, 80% of the 525,551 Rai people reportedly still spoke their native language, but this outcome is the product of collective wishful thinking. All Rai languages are moribund and will go extinct within one or two generations at the present rate, being lost in favour of Nepali. A comparable situation exists amongst the Limbu. The Kiranti languages consist of the Limbu group, Eastern Kiranti, Central Kiranti and Western Kiranti. Sometimes the Limbu and Eastern Kiranti languages are grouped together under the heading of Greater Eastern Kiranti languages.
The Limbu group: There are an estimated 300,000 ethnic Limbu in eastern Nepal and a portion of western Sikkim. It is sometimes claimed that language retention is as high as 80%, but these figures belie the dire situation of these languages. The most conservative Limbu language, Phedâppe, will probably go extinct when today’s generation of young adults takes the language to the grave with them because virtually nobody in the Phedâppe language community is currently raising their children in Limbu. The linguistic situation is comparable in the even smaller Chathare language community. The situation is slightly better in the larger Pâñcthare language community to the west of the Tamor. Yet even the prospects for Pâñcthare as well as Tamarkhole, the Limbu dialect spoken in northeastern LimbuvÀn, look bleak. Under the currently prevailing sociolinguistic conditions Limbu is likely to be completely extinct by the end of this century unless

Endangered Languages of South Asia 325
measures are taken to revitalise the language through the primary school system.
Eastern Kiranti languages: Eastern Kiranti consists of the Upper Arun· and Greater Yakkha languages. The languages of the Greater Yakkha cluster are Yakkha, Chiling and the Athpahariya dialects. Yakkha is on the verge of extinction. There are reportedly only a few isolated households where the language is still spoken on a daily basis, though there is a slightly larger number of elderly Yakkha throughout the former Yakkha territory who can remember the language, but have no fellow speakers with whom to speak it. Chiling is a Rai language spoken by about 3,000 people in the hamlets and villages of ÃfkhisallÀ in Dhanku†À district. The language has managed to survive surprisingly well amongst the approximately 600 households where it is spoken. Language retention amongst the Chiling younger generation is still relatively good, but under the present sociolinguistic conditions it is highly unlikely that the next generation of speakers will be raised in the language. The Athpahariya dialects are spoken by the indigenous people of Dhanku district, who are now vastly outnumbered by settlers from outside. There is significant dialectal diversity within the Athpahariya dialects area. For example, the Belhare variety is somewhat distinct. Comprehensive grammatical and lexical documentation of the Athpahariya dialects is a matter of great urgency. There are probably only several hundred elderly speakers, and these languages are all now on the verge of extinction.
The Upper Arun· or Yakkhaba languages are Yamphu, Lohorung and Mewahang. The Yamphu is spoken by less than 3,000 people in the upper Aru valley in the north of SafkhuvÀ SabhÀ district. Lohorung is spoken by an estimated 4,000 people in a language community in the central portion of SafkhuvÀ SabhÀ district on the left bank of the Aru¹. Mewahang is spoken by a comparable number of speakers north of the SafkhuvÀ river and to the east of the Aru¹. The southern portion of the Mewahang area is flooded with Indo-Aryan colonists as well as Newar, Ghale and other Tibeto-Burman migrants from more westerly parts of Nepal. These language communities are all bilingual in Nepali. In terms of language they have fared surprisingly well until today. Yet these communities are now being subjected to unprecedented upheaval due to the economically motivated emigration of their members to urban centres elsewhere and the likewise economically motivated influx of monied outsiders into these areas. Not only are indigenous languages of the Himalayas endangered by the construction of roads into their areas, the socio-economic detrimental effects of roads on indigenous populations are often observed, studied

326 George van Driem
and reported. In Nepal roads have generally benefitted outsiders moving in and had deleterious economic effects on local people, but this is a message which development banks, aid organizations and governments do not want to hear.
Central Kiranti: The Central Kiranti languages comprise the Khambu group and the Southern Kiranti languages. The Khambu group encompasses Kulung, Sampang, Nachiring and probably Sâm. Kulung is spoken by an estimated 15,000 people, mainly in Solukhumbu district but also in neighbouring portions of SafkhuvÀ SabhÀ district. Nachiring is spoken downstream from the Kulung area, just above the confluence of the Hofgu and the DÙdhkosÌ and in the swathe of territory which lies between Hulu and the RÀva river in Kho†Àfg district. There are only an estimated several hundred speakers of the language, all quite elderly and often isolated from other speakers. Sampang is spoken in the KhÀrtamchÀ, PhedÌ and PÀthekÀ areas of Kho†Àf district and in adjacent parts of Bhojpur district to the east. Although there may be over 1,000 speakers, increasingly fewer members of the younger generation are learning the language. The SÀm inhabit the territory which straddles both SafkhuvÀ SabhÀ and Bhojpur districts along the IrkhuvÀ River, a western tributary of the Aru¹. It is uncertain whether there are any remaining speakers of the language, but patient sleuthing in the area could uncover a remaining Sâm speaking household.
The Southern Kiranti languages are Bantawa, Chintang, Dungmali, Chamling and Puma. They are spoken in the lower hills region between the DÙdhkosÌ and the Aru¹. The SunkosÌ which runs through this area cuts through Chamling territory, but in the east, where the river has already descended onto the plains, it more or less coincides with the southern border of Bantawa territory. Two of the Southern Kiranti languages, Bantawa and Chamling, are respectively the largest and second largest Rai language in terms of numbers of speakers. Yet hardly any young people speak these languages. Bantawa is the language native to Bhojpur district. Dungmali is spoken in the northeastern quarter of Bhojpur district, north of the PikhuvÀ river, covering the territory on the right bank of the Aru across the river from Yakkha territory. Chintang is spoken in just the two villages of ChintÀf and ¤á™ÀgÀù in Dhanku†À district, just west of the Chiling language area further along the same ridge. Chamling is spoken in Kho†Àf and Udaypur districts, south of the RÀva KholÀ and east of the DÙdhkosÌ, and on both banks of the SunkosÌ, especially to the northeast of the river. The number of ethnic Chamling have been estimated to be as high as 30,000, but language retention is poor in most areas. Language retention amongst the younger generation is reported to be highest in communities on the

Endangered Languages of South Asia 327
southwest bank of the SunkosÌ, such as BalamtÀ. Puma is spoken in Dipluf and CisopÀnÌ in the southeastern corner of Kho†Àf district, about 10 km north of the SunkosÌ to the west of the BufvÀ river.
Western Kiranti: Western Kiranti consists of the Thulung, Tilung, the Chaurasiya group, the Upper Dûdhkosî languages and the Northwestern Kiranti languages. Thulung is spoken mainly in the southern part of Solukhumbu district and in the territory surrounding the confluence of the Solu river and the DÙdhkosÌ. Thulung is so distinct within Kiranti that it is viewed as a group on its own, termed Midwestern Kiranti. The number of Thulung has been estimated at 8,000, but the language is being lost. Tilung is a Kiranti language about which very little is known except the name and the approximate location. The language is spoken only by an indigenous minority in the triangle of land between the lower course of the DÙdhkosÌ and the part of the SunkosÌ below the confluence in the southwestern portion of Kho†Àf district. There are few remaining speakers.
The Chaurasiya group comprises the languages Ombule or ‘Wambule’ and Jero. Ombule is spoken around the confluence of the DÙdhkosÌ and SunkosÌ. The Jero speaking area is contiguous with Ombule territory and lies to the northwest of the Ombule area on both sides of the SunkosÌ. There are approximately 15,000 Chaursaiya people, speaking either Jero or Wambule, and language retention is rapidly waning in the younger generation.
The Upper Dûdhkosî languages are Dumi, Kohi and Khaling. There are less than eight speakers of Dumi east of the Lidim river, all of whom are very elderly. There are unsubstantiated reports of middle-aged speakers around Aiselukharka on the west bank of the Lidim. The Dumi homeland is the area between the RÀva and the TÀp rivers. Kohi is an undescribed Rai language related to Dumi. The language is still spoken in and around the village of Sufdel along the upper headwaters of the RÀva in Kho†Àf district. Language retention amongst the young is still good, but the language community is very small. Khaling is spoken by about 15,000 people in Solukhumbu district in the mountains on either side of the DÙdhkosÌ from BupsÀ above Jumbhif as far downstream as KilimpÌ, just above the confluence of the Hofgu river and the DÙdhkosÌ.
The Northwestern Kiranti languages are Hayu, Bahing, Sunwar and perhaps Surel. If there are any elderly speakers of Hayu remaining, they would most likely be found in the villages of Mu™hÀjor, Bar™á™À, MÀne™ihÌ, AdhamarÀ or in some neighbouring hamlet. Hayu was once spoken in a corridor of land, along the MahÀbhÀrat Lek range alongside the SunkosÌ above its confluence with the Likhu river, primarily in RÀmechÀp and in

328 George van Driem
neighbouring portions of SindhulÌ and KÀbhrepÀlañcok districts. Bahing is also on the verge of extinction. The language has been lost or language retention is poor in most Bahing villages. There are a few exceptional villages with exceptional households, however, within the Bahing homeland area in Okhal™hufgÀ district and neighbouring parts of SolukhumbÙ. Sunwar is the most northwesterly of the Kiranti languages, and it is now spoken only by a small and dwindling minority out of the approximately 30,000 ethnic Sunwar. The Sunwar homeland is the river valleys of the Likhu and KhimtÌ, tributaries of the SunkosÌ and TÀmÀkos respectively. The Surel live in the village of SurÌ near HÀle¬vara in DolakhÀ district. Their language is spoken by at least several hundred people, and some claim that it represents a more archaic stage of the Sunwar language.
Newaric: The Newaric languages are Newar, BarÀm and Thangmi. Newar is the Tibeto-Burman language of the urbanised civilization of the Kathmandu Valley. The language has an epigraphic tradition dating back to 1171 AD. Land deeds survive in Newar from as early as 1114, and the Newar literary tradition dates back to 1374. There are over a million Newar. None the less Newar is a language endangered with imminent extinction. All Newars are bilingual in Newar and Nepali. Nepali is a language originally not native to the Nepali capital. Today the native Newar are vastly outnumbered in their native homeland of the Kathmandu Valley.
At a Tibeto-Burman workshop held at the University of California at Santa Barbara on 28. July 2001, the Newar scholar DayÀ Ratna \Àkya went as far as to proclaim that ‘the more educated the Newar, the less likely he is able to speak Newar’. This is a damning observation to have to make about the language that has been the daily means of communication for a society that yielded one of the most advanced pre-modern societies and has produced sublime art and a refined culture and acted as the midwife for the birth of numeous schools of philosophy. The drastic sociolinguistic changes which have overwhelmed the culturally and technologically advanced Newar language community since the conquest of the Kathmandu Valley by PçthvÌ NÀrÀya¹ \Àh in 1768 may serve as a metaphor for the convulsive changes which are now overwhelming language communities all over the world as they increasingly come under siege by expansive languages such as English.
There is a large Newar language community, but few families are raising their children in Newar. It has even been claimed that none do so. Though the language community is still large in absolute terms, the language may already have reached the point of no return. The prospects may be slightly better for other Newar dialects, which are at any rate not

Endangered Languages of South Asia 329
mutually intelligible with the Newar language of Kathmandu and PÀ†an. The situation is in fact not much better for the Newar dialect spoken in Bhaktapur, but the highly divergent Paharî and Citlfâg dialects and the DolakhÀ Newar language could conceivably hold out for another generation. The Paharî and Citlfâg dialects are spoken by rural groups at localities within the Kathmandu Valley and surrounding hill tracts, whereas the Dolakhâ Newar language is spoken far away in DolakhÀ district.
Barâm is still spoken in just one village in GorkhÀ district in central Nepal, i. e. ¤á™ÀgÀù near PÌpal ¤á™À in the TÀkuko† area. Ethnic BarÀm can be found throughout GorkhÀ district as well as in DÀhdif and NuvÀko† districts. However, in these areas only a few very elderly and isolated individuals can be found with some fragmentary recollection of the language. There are only a few hundred speakers of BarÀm, but the fluent speakers are all middle-aged to elderly and together number far less than a hundred. Thangmi is spoken by approximately 30,000 people, mainly in the northern portion of DolakhÀ district, but also in eastern SindhupÀlcok. Language retention is poor amongst the younger generation.
Shingsaba: Shingsaba or Lhomi are a cis-Himalayan Bodish group with a distinct language. Not much is known about the language, but Shingsaba may not even be a Bodish language, but one heavily influenced by Tibetan. The language may have some affinity with the Kiranti or Tamangic languages. Just over 4,000 speakers were reported in the 1970s. The Shingsaba live in villages on the steep slopes of the upper Aru upstream from the HedÀfnÀ area in SafkhuvÀ SabhÀ district as far as the Tibetan border, e. g. in the villages of CyÀm†Àf and KimÀthafkÀ. The Shingsaba area is surrounded by the towering LumbÀ-SumbÀ HimÀl, Umbhak HimÀl and Kumbhakar¹a HimÀl.
Magaric: Magaric includes the Magar dialects spoken by the Southern Magar septs and Kham or Northern Magar. According to the 1991 census data on language retention, only 430,264 out of 1,339,308 ethnic Magar or one third of the Magar population in Nepal still speak the Magar language, but this return is higher than the real number. Actual language retention is sadly just a fraction of this number. The Magar have been a highly mobile group since the dawn of the Gorkha conquest in the 18th century, and most Magar communities have abandoned their language in favour of Nepali. The language is primarily still spoken in small communities found between the BherÌ and MarsyÀfdÌ, especially in the districts PÀlpÀ, SyÀn˙ jÀ, Tanahù and GorkhÀ. The original home of the Magar was known as BÀhra Magarát ‘the twelve Magar regions’, which comprised all the mid hill regions of LumbinÌ, RÀptÌ and BherÌ zones. The Magar still

330 George van Driem
live in these areas as well as in adjacent parts of Gan™akÌ and DhavalÀgiri zones. There is great dialectal variation within Magar, and because of major differences in grammar and lexicon the various dialects merit separate studies. Kham is also a distinct language spoken by at least 30,000 people in the upper valleys of Rukum and RolpÀ districts in west-central Nepal and in adjacent portions of BÀgluf district, separated from the Magar area proper by several days’ walk. Most Magar dialects are on the verge of extinction, with few children being raised in Magar anywhere. The prospects for Kham are slightly better in the short term.
Chepangic: Chepangic consists of Chepang and Bhujeli. Chepang is spoken by only 25,097 out of 36,656 ethnic Chepang or two thirds of the Chepang, who live in MakvÀnpur, Citvan and DhÀdif districts, south of the Tri¬ulÌ river, north of the RÀptÌ river and west of the highway connecting He†aù™À to Kathmandu. Chepang proper is spoken to the east of the NÀrÀya¹Ì river, whilst BhujelÌ is spoken by at least 2,000 people in Tanahù district to the west of the NÀrÀya¹Ì. The Chepang have until recently lived as semi-nomadic hunter-foragers, but their habitat has been largely deforested and rendered accessible by roads and settlers from elsewhere in Nepal. The work of Christian missionaries has pitted the converted against the traditionalist Chepang. Therefore, the Chepang are now entering modern Nepalese society as a fragmented and socio-economically depressed group, compelled to assimilate both linguistically and culturally in order to survive at all.
Raji and Raute: The Raji and Raute are two groups who have until recently lived as semi-nomadic hunter-gatherers in the western Nepalese Terai and the adjoining portion of PithaurÀga™h district in Uttarkha¹™a. The Raji and Raute groups have been compelled to abandon their traditional lifestyle and adopt a sedentary existence by Nepalese and Indian government resettlement programmes. This has left most Raji and Raute destitute and prey to alcoholism and other social ills. Just 472 Raji were counted in 1988 in the Indian district of PithaurÀga™h, where they had been resettled in four villages in DhÀrcÙlÀ tehsil, four villages in ¤i™ihÀ† tehsil and one village in CampÀvat tehsil. The 1991 census of Nepal returned 3,274 Raji and 2,878 Raute by ethnicity, and 2,959 Raji by mother tongue. The Raji are primarily settled in DÀf-DeukhurÌ district. Since 1979 the Raute have been settled at two places in ¤ã™eldhurÀ district. In addition, several hundred Raute still lead a nomadic lifestyle, led by the septuagenarian headman Man BahÀdur Rasko†Ì. This traditional group has resorted to modest forms of trading in jungle commodities and crafts, since much of their original forest habitat has been destroyed. Unverified

Endangered Languages of South Asia 331
reports would indicate that the resettled groups have largely lost the ancestral language, whereas the itinerant band of Raute is still known to speak Raute. Traditionally the Raute used to migrate from PyÙ†hÀn in the east to ¤o†Ì district in the west. Most recently, the itinerant group has been operating in Surkhet.
Dura: The Dura language is a Tibeto-Burman language which was spoken until the 1970s in the heartland of Lamjuf between the PÀùdÌ and Midim rivers. The last speakers passed away in the 1980s. The surviving Dura data have been collated in Leiden. The precise position which Dura occupied within the Tibeto-Burman language family has yet to be determined.
Gurung: Gurung is a Tamangic language. The Tamangic group includes Gurung, Tamang, Thakali, ‘Narpa, ‘Nyishangba, Gyasumdo, Chantyal, Kaike and perhaps Ghale. According to the 1991 census data on language retention, 227,918 out of 449,189 ethnic Gurung or about one half of the Gurung population still speaks the Gurung language. Gurungs live in the districts GorkhÀ, KÀskÌ, Lamjuf, Parbat, SyÀn˙ jÀ, Tanahù and DhÀdif. Gurung comprises three dialects with a low degree of mutual intelligibility between them: (1) a relatively homogeneous western Gurung dialect in KÀskÌ and Parbat, (2) a heterogeneous eastern dialect group in Lamjuf, GorkhÀ and Tanahù, and (3) a southern dialect in SyÀn˙ jÀ. All Gurung language communities are abandoning the language in favour of Nepali. Probably no young children are being raised in the language, so that all dialects of the language are likely to go extinct after the present generation of speakers expires.
Tamang: According to the 1991 census data on language retention, 904,456 or nearly 90% of the 1,018,252 ethnic Tamang reported Tamang as their first language. Though already in a precarious position, Tamang is not yet as endangered as the other Tamangic languages. Tamang language communities are found dispersed throughout central and eastern hill regions of Nepal, especially in the districts KÀbhrepÀlañcok, MakvÀnpur, SindhupÀlcok, NuvÀko†, DhÀdif, SindhulÌ, RÀmechÀp, BÀgmatÌ, DolakhÀ and RasuvÀ. A majority of 83% of the population in the sparsely populated district of RasuvÀ in BÀgmatÌ zone is Tamang speaking. There is a clear distinction between the western and eastern dialects of Tamang, whereby the Tri¬ulÌ river demarcates the linguistic boundary between the two varieties, with transitional dialects found in western Makvnpur. ‘Murmi’ is an obsolete term for Tamang. The HumlÌ TÀmÀn˙ ‘Tamangs of Huml’ and MugulÌ TÀmÀn˙ ‘the Tamangs of Mugu’ are not linguistically Tamangs, but Limirong Tibetans and Mugu Tibetans respectively.
Thakali: The Thakali are a Tamangic language community in the KÀlÌ Ga¹™akÌ river valley, an affluent area because of the trade in salt and other

332 George van Driem
commodities between Tibet and India in olden days and today because of tourism. The majority of the ethnic Thakali are economically successful, no longer speak Thakali and have moved out of their native homeland to Kathmandu and abroad. Many of the remaining Thakali speakers are originally outsiders of other ethnic groups who have settled in the Thakali portion of the KÀlÌ Ga¹™akÌ river valley in order to make a livelihood and have assimilated as best they can to the Thakali both linguistically and culturally. Particularly, the Towa, who were originally speakers of the ‘Loke dialect of Tibetan, have moved from the neighbouring BÀhra GÀù area and mastered the Thakali language, though they are looked down upon by the Thakali, who refer to them by the derogatory name Arangsi Karangsi. Thakali was spoken by 7,113 people according to the 1991 census. A comparable number of people speak Seke, a related and mutually intelligible dialect spoken in an enclave further upstream, surrounded on all sides by Tibetan speaking settlements. The speakers of Seke are known as Shopa.
Manangba: The Manangba dialects include ‘Nyishangba, Gyasumdo and ‘Narpa, spoken respectively in the upper Manang valley, the lower Manang valley, and in the ‘Nar and Phu valleys, east of the AnnapÙr¹À HimÀl massif. The 1971 population estimate for the ‘Nar-Phu dialect area was approximately 500, whilst the 1971 census put the number of Mananba in Manang proper at approximately 2,600. The latter figure revealed that at the time the Manangbas already effectively constituted merely one third of the population of their native homeland in the Manang valley. A sociolinguistic detail relevant to any field linguist is that the speakers of Manangba dialects generally resent the qualifications Manangba or ManÀn˙ e, both of which have acquired a derogatory connotation. Instead, these people prefer to be known as ‘Gurungs’.
Kaike and Chantyal: Kaike is another Tamangic language spoken by approximately 2,000 people in several villages in Dolpo district. The language is also known as ‘Târâlî Khâm’ or ‘Târâlî Magar’. This name is taken from the toponym TrÀkÀo† ‘star fort’, the main town in Tichurong, where these people live. Chantyal is spoken in the hills south of the Thakali area between the MyÀgdÌ and BherÌ rivers on the steep western and southern slopes of the DhaulÀgiri massif. The Chantyal until recently worked the copper mines of the area. Approximately only 2,000 of the 10,000 ethnic Chantyal still speak the language. The ethnic Chantyal are divided into two groups, one in the northeast, in MyÀgdÌ district, and the other in the southwest, in BÀgluf district, the two areas being separated by a ridge. The BÀgluf Chantyal had ceased to speak Chantyal by the 19th century. The MyÀgdÌ Chantyal still speak the language in certain villages,

Endangered Languages of South Asia 333
e. g. Mafgale KhÀnÌ, DvÀrÌ, Ghyás Kharka, CaurÀ KhÀnÌ, GurjÀ KhÀnÌ, Kuhine KhÀnÌ, ThÀrÀ KhÀnÌ, PÀtle Kharka, MÀlÀmphÀr and MalkÀbÀf, as far as the RÀhughÀ† KholÀ.
Ghale: Ghale is a Tibeto-Burman language which may, in fact, not be Tamangic, but may phylogenetically constitute a group on its own within the Tibeto-Burman language family. The number of Ghale speakers was estimated at 12,000 in 1975. The language is spoken in the northern portion of Gorkh district, where there are 33 Ghale villages and hamlets, and in an adjacent portion of Dhdif district. The main Ghale speech community lies in the area surrounding and north of the town of BÀrpÀk, which has about 650 houses. Traditionally, the Ghale have been ethnically classed with the Gurung, with whom they may intermarry. The designation ‘Ghale Gurung’ is even heard, though others repudiate that they are Gurung. The inaccessibility of the area has protected the language thus far. Yet even in this remote northern part of GorkhÀ district, language death is inevitable, given the present pace of linguistic assimilation to Nepali in Nepal.
10. Endangered languages of Tibeto-Burman languages of the Western Indian and Pakistan Himalayas of Nepal
West Himalayish: The 10 West Himalayish languages are spoken in scattered enclaves in the western Indian Himalayas, between Jammu and Kashmir in the west-northwest and the modern state of Nepal in the eastsoutheast. Rangkas was recorded at the beginning of the 20th century, but is now extinct. Zhangzhung went extinct even earlier, and used to be spoken to the north of the Himalayas across a large portion of western Tibet until it was wiped out by Tibetan towards the end of the first millennium AD. All surviving West Himalayish languages are severely endangered.
The three languages Manchad, Tinan and Bunan are spoken in Lahul district in what today is the Indian state or Himachal Pradesh. Manchad is spoken along the Candra or Upper Chenab river by approximately 15,000 people who have adopted the Hindu religion, and whose language has adopted many Indic loanwords. The term ‘Manchad’ means ‘lower valley’ in the local Tibetan dialect. The language has also been called ‘Pa8anî’ or ‘Pa88anî’ after the Pa†an or Pa††an valley, where it is spoken from Tandi as far upstream as Thirot. Tinan is spoken on the Chenab immediately downstream from the Manchad area, from Tandi as far downstream as Sissu Nullah, particularly in the area known as Gondhla. The 1981 census counted 1,833 speakers of Tinan. Bunan is spoken in the Ga-

334 George van Driem
har or Gahr valley which covers both banks of the BhÀgÀ river from Tandi northeast to Kyelong. The BhÀgÀ is a tributary emptying into the Chenab from the north. The 1981 census enumerated 3,581 speakers of Bunan.
Kanashi is a special language within this branch of the family, spoken in just the one village of MalÀ¹a near Kulu in Kulu district of Himachal Pradesh. Kinnauri is spoken in Kinnaur district of Himachal Pradesh. It is unknown what percentage of the 59,154 people enumerated in the 1981 census for Kinnaur district actually still spoke the language. Rangpo or Rangpo is spoken along the northeastern fringe of Garhwal, confined to the area of the NÌtÌ and MÀ¹À valleys in Jo¬Ìma†h subdivision of CÀmolÌ district, north of BadrinÀth along the upper course of the AlaknandÀ river and around the lower course of the DhaulÌ-GafgÀ river above its confluence with the AlaknandÀ at Jo¬Ìma†h. There are an estimated 12,000 remaining speakers of Rangpo. Darma and Byangsi are spoken further west in the Indian-Nepalese borderlands, straddling the Indian districts of Almo™À and PithaurÀga™h in the area that used to be known as Kumaon as well as in the Nepali district of DÀrculÀ. Darma is spoken in spoken in the uppermost portion of the DarmÀ valley, drained by the river DhaulÌ and bounded on the north by Tibet. At the beginning of the 20th century, 1,761 speakers of the language were counted. No more recent statistic is available. Immediately to the east of the DarmÀ valley lies the MahÀkÀlÌ river valley, which is the home to the Byangsi. The 1991 census counted 1,314 Byangsi in Nepal. A form of Byangsi was recorded by Sten Konow under the name ‘Chaudângsî’.
Central Bodish languages: Europeans call German and English ‘languages’, rather than treating them respectively as a hinterland dialect and an insular dialect of Dutch. However, Westerners tend to treat languages in other parts of the world as ‘dialects’ which are just as distinct from each other phonetically, phonologically, morphologically and lexically as German and English are from Dutch. The same applies to what are generally referred to in the West as ‘Tibetan dialects’. The Standard or Central dialect of Tibetan, spoken in Lhasa, is not an endangered language, even though the language is undergoing heavy lexical and even grammatical influence from Mandarin, the language of the occupying forces. Kham and ‘Amdo Tibetan also still represent lively language communities. However, many other ‘Tibetan dialects’ are endangered. Linguistically, it is more correct to refer to these languages as Central Bodish languages, and not as ‘Tibetan dialects’. These include the many diverse languages spoken in the western extremity of Tibet, parts of which now lie in the modern states of Pakistan and India, as well as the languages spoke in the

Endangered Languages of South Asia 335
sBas-yul ‘hidden lands’, as the high alpine valleys on the southern flank of the Himalayas have been referred to from the Tibetan perspective.
The Central Bodish languages of western Tibet are in many respects the most conservative of the Tibetan languages and also amongst the most endangered. They are spoken in the parts of Tibet which ar now located in the modern states of Pakistan and India, in the areas of sBal-ti ‘BÀlti’, Burig ‘B’urik’ or ‘Purik’, La-dwags ‘Lada’ of ‘Ladakh’, sBi-ti ‘Biti’ or ‘Spiti’, and Zangs-dkar ‘Z’angkar’. In the western Indian Himalayas, the languages of the ‘hidden lands’ include Jâ0, spoken mainly in BagorÀ village, just 17 km south of UttarkÀ¬Ì on the banks of the BhÀgÌrathÌ, where the JÀ™ were resettled after the Indo-Chinese conflict of 1962. Some settlements are also found in PurolÀ, RÀjga™hÌ, and Bha†vÀrÌ sub-divisions. Their original homes lay on the Indo-Tibetan border.
In Nepal, several Central Bodish languages are spoken in enclaves on the southern slopes of the Himalayas which show characteristics divergent from Central Tibetan proper. These include the dialects spoken by the Limirong Tibetans in the extreme northwest of Kar¹ÀlÌ zone in the district of HumlÀ, the Tibetans of Mugu and the Karmarong Tibetans in northwestern Nepal, the dialect of Dol-po ‘D’ôlpo’, the dialect of Mustang known as ‘Loke, the dialect of the Nupri or LÀrkyÀ Bho†e below ManÀslu HimÀl in GorkhÀ district, the dialect of the Tsum in a few villages along a tributary of the Bu™hÌ Ga¹™akÌ known as the Shar, the community of Khacca0 Bho8e ‘mule Tibetans’ north of DhÀibuf and northeast of NuvÀko†, the ‘Langthang Tibetans south of the ‘Langthang HimÀl and north of Jugal HimÀl and GosÀíku¹™, the well-known Sherpa in the mountains surrounding Mt. Everest and in Solu Khumbu, and a small population living at Ha-lung, known in Nepali as OlÀfcuf GolÀ, and at TÀpke GolÀ and Thudam in the northeastern extremity of Nepal around the headwaters of the Tamor.
In Bhutan, three endangered Central Bodish language communities account for nearly 15,000 people. The Brokpas of SÀphu Geo in ‘Wangdi Phodr’a district in the north of the Black Mountains speak a dialect called Lakha ‘language of the mountain passes’ or Tshangkha. There are an estimated 8,000 speakers. Brokkat is a Central Bodish language spoken by the Brokpa community of 300 speakers at Dur in Bumthang district in central Bhutan. A Central Bodish language is spoken by approximately 5,000 people at Mera and Sakteng in eastern Bhutan. A number of Tibetan enclaves are also spoken in Arunachal Pradesh, south of the McMahon line on the Indian side of the Indo-Tibetan border.
Other Bodish languages: Jirel is a poorly documented Bodish language spoken by about 3,000 people in the JirÌ and SikrÌ valleys of DolakhÀ dis-

336 George van Driem
trict in northern central Nepal The name Jirel is the Nepali adjectival form of the place name Jir. Kâgate is spoken in the mountains between the Likhu and KhimtÌ rivers in the northeastern part of RÀmechÀp district by the KÀgate Bho†e ‘paper Bhutiya’ because their ancestors used to manufacture paper. The KÀgate call themselves ‘Yuba’, which likewise signifies ‘paper maker’, and pass themselves off as ‘Tamang’ to outsiders. The number of speakers was estimated at about 1,000 in 1974. There is another group of ‘Sherpas’, who are not recognised as Sherpas by the Sherpa proper, mentioned above. Whilst the Sherpas around Mt. Everest and in Solu Khumbu speak a Central Bodish language, the Sherpa of Yol-mo or ‘Ôlmo’, an area known in Nepali as HelambÙ north of SindhupÀlcok, speak a distinct Bodish language.
11. Endangered Indo-European languages of South Asia
Indo-European languages are spoken throughout the north of the Indian subcontinent and on Ceylon. All of these are Indo-Iranian languages belonging to Iranian, Nuristani and Indo-Aryan branches. Nuristani sometimes still goes by the name ‘Kafiri’, and Indo-Aryan is sometimes still called ‘Indic’.
Iranian languages: Older stages of Iranian, such as Avestan, Old and Middle Persian, Pehlevi, Parthian, Sogdian, Chorasmian, Bactrian, Sarmatian and Khotanese, have gone extinct or have effectively been superseded by later stages of Iranian. The modern languages Persian or Fârsî, Darî, Tâjikî, Kurdish, Baluchi or Balôčî, and Pashto or Pakhto are flourishing. Yet a number of Iranian languages are spoken only by small and dwindling language communities. Ossetian is spoken in the north-central Caucasus. Tâtî is spoken in parts of Azerbaijan, and Czarî, Tâleshî, Semnânî, Gîlakî and Mâzanderânî are spoken in the southwestern Caspian littoral. Gurânî is spoken in several areas in the Zagros east of the Tigris, Zâzâ or Dimli is spoken in eastern Turkey and western Iran. There is considerable dialectal heterogeneity in southwestern, southeastern and central Iran. Other endangered Iranian languages of eastern Afghanistan and neighbouring parts of Pakistan include Parâcî, spoken in three valleys along the southern flank of the Hindu Kush, and Ôrmu·rî, spoken in the area around BarakÌ-Barak in Afghanistan and at KÀ¹ÌgrÀm in Pakistan. The archaic and highly endangered Pâmir languages spoken by communities along the Ãb-i Panja river in southern Tajikistan, in Badakhshan province of northeastern Afghanistan and neighbouring portions of Chi-

Endangered Languages of South Asia 337

nese Turkestan, include \ughnÌ, Ro¬anÌ, BartangÌ, Ro¬orvÌ, SariqÒlÌ, YÀz-

ghulÀmÌ, WakhÌ, ZÈbÀkÌ, SanglÌcÌ and I¬kÀmÌ. Closely related to Pa¬tô are

Yidgha, spoken in the Lutkuh valley of Pakistan, and Munji, spoken in

the MunjÀn valley of northeastern Afghanistan. Yaghnôbî is still spoken

by a small community in an alpine valley around the headwaters of the

YaghnÒb in Tajikistan. There are no reliable up-to-date statistics for the

precise numbers of speakers of these endangered language communities.

Nuristani languages: All Nuristani languages were already faced with

imminent extinction before Afghanistan was turned into a war zone by

the Soviet Union under Brezhnev and later by the Taliban and warring Is-

lamists from countries like Saudi Arabia and Pakistan. The Nuristani lan-

guages are spoken by tribesmen whose ancient Indo-Aryan ancestors

took refuge in the inaccessible mountain valleys of the Hindu Kush in

Nuristan. These tribes have no literary tradition of their own and were

collectively called KÀn˙ irÌ ‘infidels’ until they were converted to Islam af-

ter Nuristan was conquered by the Afghans in 1896. The Nuristani lan-

guages from north to south are Kati, Prasun, Waigali, Ashkun, Gambiri

and Zemiaki. Kati, formerly also known as Bashgali, is perhaps still spo-

ken by about 20,000 speakers. All the other Nuristani language commu-

nities are much smaller than Kati. Prasun, the most aberrant of the

Nuristani languages, is spoken in 6 villages in the high alpine valley along

the headwaters of the Peč, wedged in between the Kati speaking areas in

the KtiwÌ valley and the upper Bashgal valley. Waigali is spoken in the

Waigal valley, a northern tributary of the Pe. Gambiri or Tregâmî ‘three

villages dialect’ is spoken not only at Gambr, Ka†Àr and in the TregÀm val-

ley southeast of lower Waigal in the direction of the Kunar river. The Ash-

kun speaking area lies between the Peč and the Alingar and in valleys

along the upper drainage of these two rivers and their minor tributaries.

Zemiaki, first identified as a 6th quite distinct Nuristani language by Edel-

man and Grünberg-Cvetinovič in 1999, is spoken in a small enclave south

of the Peč river, south of the Waigali area but immediately surrounded on

all sides by Dardic language communities. The Nuristani languages are

not only highly important from the point of view of understanding the

population perhistory of South and Central Asia, they exhibit numerous

peculiar typological features of great interest to cognitive linguistics.

Dardic languages: The most endangered Indo-Aryan languages are

the heterogeneous and archaic Dardic languages, spoken in small alpine

communities. The Kôhistânî cluster,

5 clusters of Dardic languages are the Kunar group, the Citrâl group

tahned7Pi an·¬âaîc.lu7si tn·eâr,atnhde

Kashmiri are not themselves endangered, but other languages of the 7i n· â

338 George van Driem
group are threatened with extinction. These are the archaic Phalû·ra and Sâwî dialects, related to 7i n· â, and the endangered 1umâkî language is of great historical importancve because it is believed to be related to the language of the gypsies. 1umâkî is spoken by a less than 600 elderly ¤oma in Hunza, who traditionally belong to the lowly minstrel and blacksmith castes in what is now northern Pakistan. The Khôistânî languages are Ba¬karîk, Torwâlî, Maiyá, Tirâhî, and the language of Wo8apûr and Ka8ârqalâ. Ba¬karîk or Gâwrî is spoken around the headwaters of the SwÀt and in the Panjkora valley. Torwâlî is spoken in the upper SwÀt valley. Maiyá is spoken between Çi¹Ì and Pashto speaking territory. Tirâhî is spoken in a few villages southeast of Jalalabad in eastern Afghanistan. The language of Wo8apûr and Ka8ârqalâ is spoken in a few villages on the Peč in eastern Afghanistan. The Citrâl languages are Khowâr and Kala6a. Khowâr, the language of the Khô tribe, is the main language of the great CitrÀl valley. Kala6a is spoken by members of the Kala‰ tribe in the western side valleys of southern CitrÀl. The nearly extinct languages of the Kunar group are spoken by small communities found around the confluence of CitrÀl and the Bashgal, i. e. DamÈlÌ, Gawar-BÀtÌ, NingalÀmÌ and \umÀ¬tÌ. Gawar-Bâtî or Narisâtî is spoken in a few villages on the Kunar river. A divergent language is or used to be spoken by a dwindling number of speakers at NingalÀm on the Peč. Another divergent but related language is or used to be spoken at \umÀ¬t. Damêlî is likewise spoken in just one village. The Pa¬aî language is spoken in lower Kunar and in LaghmÀn and was once spoken over a larger area than it is today.
Western Paha¯ d· ð¯ and Central Paha¯ d· ð¯: The three branches of Indo-Aryan known as Western Pahâ0î, literally ‘montane’, Central Pahâ0î and Eastern Pahâ0î do not together form a linguistic taxon, as the nomenclature misleadingly suggests, but merely share the feature of designating groups of alpine language communities. Western Pahâ0î languages are spoken from the western portion of Dehr Dn district in Uttar Pradesh, through Himachal Pradesh all the way west into Jammu and Kashmir. The 1961 census of India distinguished over 60 highly divergent and poorly documented Western Pahâ0î languages known by a welter of local dialect names, including Bafgân· î, Jaunsarî, Sirmau0î, Baghâ8î, Mahâsuî (formerly known as Kihûn· 8alî), Han· 0ûrî, Kuluî, Man· 0eâlî in the area formerly known as Ma¹™e RÀjya, Cameâlî in the area once known as in Cambâ-RÀjya, KÀfg™Ì, BharmaurÌ (or GÀdÌ), CurÀhÌ, PafgvÀlÌ, BhadravÀhÌ, BhalesÌ, Kha¬ÀlÌ and PÀ™rÌ. The Central Pahâ0î languages are the Garhwali and Kumaoni dialects (Ga0hvâlî and Kumâunî), spoken in Garhwal and Kumaon, together forming an area known today as UttarÀkha¹™. All the Western and Central

Endangered Languages of South Asia 339
Pahâ0î languages are endangered because these areas are increasingly being linguistically being assimilated by larger language communities, e. g. Urdu, Panjabi, Hindi. Eastern Pahâ0î is represented by the successful and growing Nepali language. The success and spread of Nepali not only has conferred upon the language the dubious honour of being a ‘killer language’ throughout the Nepal, Sikkim and parts of Bhutan, but ironically also of threatening the archaic and divergent western dialects of Nepali itself.
Indo-Aryan languages with possible allophylian substrate: The Tharu in the Terai speak Indo-Aryan dialects collectively known as Thâruvânî, which is not a language as such but a cover term for various Terai dialects of Bhojpuri, Maithili and especially Awadhi as spoken by ethnic Tharu. The original pre-Indo-Aryan languages spoken by the Tharu are extinct, but survive in the form of substrate words used within households, so that doublets exist for certain words. For example, in Citvan Thâru alongside IndoAryan yÀ¹khÌ ‘eye’ there exists a form tè™ ‘eye’, reminiscent of the Manchad form tira ‘eye’. These original Tharu substrate words are being lost because not every household preserves them. The differences between the Tharuwani dialects and the local Indo-Aryan languages spoken by the high castes have never been properly or systematically studied and documented. Varieties of Tharuwani have been investigated by Christian missionaries, but they have kept their linguistic findings to themselves and used their knowledge mainly for the production of hymnals and Christian literature. As the Tharu are being continuously assimilated into mainstream culture, the vestiges of their ancestral language and the peculiar features of Tharuwani are being lost through increasing linguistic assimilation to the mainstream Awadhi, Maithili, Bhojpuri and Nepali language communities.
Three other Indo-Aryan languages of Nepal are in the thores of death. Most speakers of the Danuwar, Darai and Majhi or Bote language communities have already assimilated linguistically and culturally to modern Nepali mainstream culture. The main Darai settlements are in Citvan, Tanahù, GorkhÀ, NavalparÀsÌ and PÀlpÀ districts. According to the 1991 census data on language retention, only 6,520 out of 10,759 ethnic Darai or less than two thirds of the Darai still speak the Darai language, which exhibits biactantial verbal morphology. The Danuwar or DanuvÀr are native to SindhulÌ and Udaypur districts in the Inner Terai, but Danuwar are also settled in the hills of KÀbhrepÀlañcok and SindhupÀlcok districts and in the Terai districts of SarlÀhÌ, MahottarÌ, Dhanu‰À and SirÀhÀ. According to the 1991 census data on language retention, only 23,721 out of 50,574 ethnic Danuwar or roughly just half of the Danuwar still speak the Danuwar language. The group known as Majhi or Bote live along the NÀrÀya¹Ì or Saptaga¹™akÌ

340 George van Driem
river and its tributaries in the districts of BÀgluf, Parvat, SyÀn˙ jÀ, GulmÌ, PÀlpÀ, KÀskÌ, GorkhÀ, Tanahù, ParsÀ, Citvan and NavalparÀsÌ as well as in the Terai and hills of the districts of RÀmechÀp, SindhulÌ, SindhupÀlcok, KÀbhrepÀlañcok and Dhanu‰À. The 1991 census data on language retention show that only 11,322 out of 55,050 ethnic Majhi or just one fifth of the Majhi still speak the Majhi language.
A number of other inadequately documented Indo-Aryan languages spoken in the hills of Nepal, the Nepalese Terai and Manipur have now nearly vanished. The Kumâle or Kumâhle language is spoken by a potter’s caste in the central Terai and adjacent central hills. The total number of speakers was estimated at 3,500 in the early 1950s, but only 1,413 speakers of the language were counted in the 1991 census. The original language of the Bátar in the eastern Terai, especially Moraf district, may have already vanished. A dwindling number of GanagÀí in eastern Bihar, the eastern Nepalese Terai and West Bengal still speak Afgikâ. In Manipur, the IndoAryan language known as Bishnupriya Manipuri or Vi6n· uprîya Man· ipurî, served as an Indo-Aryan contact language and lingua franca between the 13th and 19th centuries, which had undergone influence of the Meithei language native to the region. In 1964, there were still reportedly 114 speakers of Bishnupriya Manipuri.
References
Berger, Hermann 1992 Das Burushaski – Schicksale einer zentralasiatischen Restsprache (vorgetragen am 12. Januar 1991), Sitzungsberichte der Heidelberger Akademie der Wissenschaften (Philosophisch-historische Klasse, Jahrgang 1992, Bericht 1). Heidelberg: Carl Winter Universitätsverlag.
van Driem, George 2001 Languages of the Himalayas: An ethnolinguistic handbook of the Greater Himalayan region, containing an introduction to the symbiotic theory of language. Leiden: Brill.
van Goens, Ryklof 1675 Extract uyt de Beschryving van den Staat en Gelegenheid van het Eyland Ceylon, de Landen van Madure, Zuyder-Choromandel, Malabar, en Canara. Reproduced on pp. 204–246 in François Valentyn. 1726. Agtste Boek: Beschryvinge van het Eyland Ceylon. Dordrecht: Joannes van Braam, and Amsterdam: Gerard onder de Linden.
Government of India 1969 Census of India, 1961. New Delhi: Ministry of Home Affairs, Office of the Registrar General.

Endangered Languages of South Asia 341
Government of India 1983 Census of India, 1981. New Delhi: Ministry of Home Affairs, Office of the Registrar General.
His Majesty’s Government of Nepal 1995 Statistical pocket book. Kathmandu: Central Bureau of Statistics.
Nigam, R. C. 1971 Survey of Kanauri in Himachal Pradesh (Census of India 1971, Monograph No. 3). Delhi: Language Division, Office of the Registrar.
Schleicher, August 1863 Die Darwinsche Theorie und die Sprachwissenschaft: Offenes Sendschreiben an Herrn Dr. Ernst Häckel, a. o. Professor der Zoologie und Direktor des zoologischen Museums an der Universität Jena. Weimar: Bühlau.
Shakya, Daya Ratna (i. e. Day Ratna kya) 2001 ‘The sociolinguistic position of Newar’, paper presented at the Workshop on Tibeto-Burman Languages and Linguistics, held during the Linguistic Society of America 2001 Summer School for Linguistics. University of California at Santa Barbara.
Singh, Balwant 1988 Census of India, 1981, Series 24: Andaman and Nicobar Islands, Part IX: Special Tables for Scheduled Tribes. Delhi: Controller of Publications.

Chapter 15 Warramurrungunji Undone: Australian Languages in the 51st Millennium
Nicholas Evans
1. Initial orientation to Australian languages
Australia has been occupied by humans for around 5,000 years, and its initial colonization represents the first known major ocean crossing. Thereafter, though there were minor contacts with Indonesia, there is no clear archaeological evidence of subsequent major waves of immigrants until the British established the first European colony in Sydney in 1788. While agriculture and then state-based societies developed on all other continents the original inhabitants of Australia were able to continue living as hunters, fishers and gatherers throughout 50 millennia.
Virtually all scholars agree that Australian languages are all related at a deep level. This makes Australia unique in being the only continent entirely occupied by related languages, though the degree of time depth is such that the term ‘phylic family’ is more appropriate than ‘family’ to describe the relationship.1 It also makes the Australian language family specially significant because of its likely great time depth. This phylic family comprises around 250 languages, or about 700 distinct linguistic varieties if one follows Aboriginal practice in how to measure language diversity; they are relatively uniform phonologically but exhibit enormous variation in grammatical organization.
Because Australia was the only continent entirely occupied by huntergatherers in historical times, its sociolinguistic situation holds great significance for our understanding of the processes of language change in a social universe entirely made up of small groups. Nettle (1999: 93) argues that ‘there would have been more language diversity in the world, certainly in relative terms and perhaps absolutely, before the origin of agriculture’, so Australian languages are vital to understanding the forces that have shaped linguistic diversification for the 99% of our evolutionary history during which all humans were hunter-gatherers (Livi-Bacci 1992). Certainly the pattern described by Nettle, according to which languages spoken by hunter-gatherers rarely have over 5,000 speakers, is played out in Australia where the average number of

Warramurrungunji Undone: Australian Languages in the 51st Millennium 343
speakers per language would have been somewhere between 1,000 and 3,000, with some languages counting hardly more than 50 speakers and the maximum size for any one language unlikely to have exceeded 5,000.
In the oral traditions of north-western Arnhem Land, the first human to enter the continent was a woman, Warramurrungundji, who came out of the sea on the Cobourg Peninsula. As she heads inland, she puts groups of people into particular areas and decrees which languages should be spoken where. Unlike the Judaeo-Christian tradition which sees the aftermath of Babel as a negative outcome punishing humans for their presumption, the Warramurrungunji myth reflects a point of view much more common in small speech communities: that language diversity is a good thing because it shows where every comes from and belongs.2 Widespread multilingualism meant that even languages differing radically in their grammatical organization posed little obstacle to inter-group communication.
Genetic diversity is not evenly distributed over the continent. Of the 25 or so language families found on the continent, all but one are confined to the north-western one-eighth of the continent (Map 23). The remaining seven-eighths is covered by a single family, Pama-Nyungan.
The extraordinarily rich intellectual production of this 50,000 year flourishing, some of which I will touch on briefly in this chapter, is now collapsing over most of the continent, under the impact of the colonial language English and its associated culture of monolingualism. Indeed Australia is probably the continent currently experiencing the most rapid and drastic effects of language loss. It seems likely that by 2088 (three hundred years after the first European colonization), at most a dozen indigenous languages of the continent will have viable speech communities – i. e. a 95% extinction rate, over the three centuries of European rule that will then comprise one two-hundredth of the continent’s history of occupation, of the accumulated linguistic legacy of the preceding fifty millennia.
Map 22 gives a preliminary impression of the fragility of the current situation. Of the 605 language varieties mapped (territories based on estimates of traditional locations), only 25 have over 1,000 speakers, and only 36 have over 500 speakers. The vast majority (526/605) have fewer than 100 speakers. The distribution of ‘healthy’ languages exhibits a clear geographical pattern – they are confined to those parts of the continent furthest from urban settlements, such as the Western Desert, Arnhem Land and the Torres Strait. Even having a ‘remote’ location, however, is no guarantee that a language is healthy – examples of extinct languages from quite remote locations are Wurrugu from the Cobourg Peninsula and Linngithigh from Cape York.

344 Nicholas Evans

n O c e a n

c i fi c a P

a i
d
n I

n a e c O

A

U

S

T

R

A

L

I

A

Brisbane

Perth

Percent
79 or more 30 to 78 7 to 29 Less than 7

Adelaide

Canberra

Sydney

Melbourne

Map 22. Indigenous language speakers as proportion of indigenous population (map S1.5 from the ABS website; reproduced from McConvell and Thieberger 2000)

2. Special characteristics of Australian languages
In this section I give a taste of some of the ways Australian languages are important for our general understanding of linguistics, exhibiting characteristics that are totally or largely absent elsewhere in the world.
As an undergraduate student of psychology at the Australian National University in the 1970s, excited by reading Whorf’s Language, Thought and Reality for the first time, I asked my lecturer why all the ‘exotic’ language examples were Amerindian and none Australian. He replied that ‘we don’t know much about Aboriginal languages, but they don’t seem to be as different or interesting as American Indian ones’. Perhaps he wouldn’t have said this if he had been more aware of the research going on at the time in the Linguistics department a few hundred metres away, but it was a characteristic response to the somnolent history of indifference to Australian languages that had characterised most of the two centuries since white occupation of the continent.

Warramurrungunji Undone: Australian Languages in the 51st Millennium 345
Although there were some honourable exceptions, the overwhelming impression until the 1960s is one of neglectful, amateurish and uninspired efforts that rarely succeed in documenting the languages in a way remotely comparable to the work being carried out by Boas, Sapir and their students in North America, or by Dutch scholars in Indonesia. It was not until the 1970s – 200 years after the British claimed New South Wales, and at a time when a huge number of languages had already disappeared completely – that the first reasonable grammars and dictionaries of Australian languages began to appear (see Austin 1991 for a good survey).
We now have around thirty high-quality grammars and workmanlike grammars of as many again (see below for the situation with dictionaries and text collections). However, the concentration of typological and genetic diversity in the north-west (and the fact that most languages of the south-east became dead or moribund before modern research could be undertaken) means that our coverage is far from even.
In many cases, earlier descriptions simply failed to notice central and interesting facts about the language – if we had ticked these languages off as ‘already described’ on the basis of the short descriptions available, we would have missed the really crucial lessons they have to offer the science of linguistics. I will describe three examples of this in §2.1., concentrating on grammar and phonology, the heartland of the last three decades of research. In §2.2.–2.4. I look at some broader problems where our understanding is much further behind: lexicon and texts (§2.2.), special registers (§2.3.), and the area of multilingualism and the use of linguistic variation more generally to index differences in social group membership (§2.4.).
2.1. Grammar, phonology, and the unimaginable human language
One of the most exciting things about fieldwork is its potential to continuously broaden our preconceptions of what is possible for the human mind, by stumbling upon ‘unimaginable’ languages – those that would never have been thought possible.3
Work on Australian languages has had its fair share of such revelations since the 1960s, whether it be Dyirbal [1], the first language in which ergative syntax was comprehensively described (Dixon 1972), Warlpiri [2], for which the work of Ken Hale and others has uncovered the workings of non-configurational syntax in greater detail than any comparable language (e. g. Hale 1983) or, more recently, the way in which many northwestern languages break their representation of event structure into two

346 Nicholas Evans
parts – a small set of generic verbs that carves up the semantic space of event representations into one or two dozen main types, and a larger set of coverbs that combines with these to portray the event in detail (see e. g. Schultze-Berndt 2000, McGregor 2002).
In most cases it was far from obvious, at the stage of initial survey work that led to descriptions at the level of a short grammar, where the most interesting issues would arise. In each of above cases the interest of the language only became evident when 4 conditions came together – the opportunity for detailed and sustained research, an open-minded linguist with a flair for noticing new issues, outstanding native speakers with an interest in the work, and a favourable intellectual climate.
It is certainly not the case that either the prior existence of a grammatical sketch or of detailed knowledge of a closely related language would lead a researcher to suspect what treasures lay beneath the surface. I now consider two examples of how easy it is to overlook these even when relatively good survey-level documentation is available.
(a) Kayardild [3] is spoken in the South Wellesley Islands in north-west Queensland. It is closely related to Yukulta [4], with which it shares around 80% of its vocabulary, and a little less closely related to Lardil [5], on Mornington Island. Sandra Keen, who undertook research on Yukulta in 1969-70, described the situation as follows: ‘the small amount of comparative work done indicates that Yukulta, Gayardilt [= Kayardild] and Yanggal [6] [= Yangkaal] belong as dialects of one language while Lardil is a different but closely related language. Yukulta, Gayardilt and Yanggal have considerable grammatical similarity as well as a high percentage of shared vocabulary and speakers of these dialects can hold quite detailed conversations with each other’ (Keen 1983). Hale (1983), on the basis of fieldwork on Mornington Island that concentrated on Lardil but included brief recordings of Yangkaal, made similar observations. Any setting of research priorities that de-prioritized work if good descriptions of closely-related languages already existed would certainly not have identified Kayardild as needing special attention in the 1980s.
Luckily other developments led, quite fortuitously, to more detailed research. In 1981 Ken Hale visited Mornington Island to present the Lardil with draft copies of a Lardil-English dictionary. The Kaiadilt community, by then concerned about the fact their language was not being passed on, asked Hale whether a similar project could be undertaken for their language and a chain of events led to the community approaching Bob Dixon, who, to my great good fortune, asked me if I would be interested in doing my Ph.D. on the language.

Warramurrungunji Undone: Australian Languages in the 51st Millennium 347

As it turns out, Kayardild is a superb example of an ‘unimaginable language’, and although it shares most of its vocabulary with Yukulta and the phonological differences are only slight, its grammar is organized in a quite different way. Perhaps its most outstanding feature is the way it keeps passing down all information from higher syntactic levels, so that each word projects up a host of information about all structural levels above it, rather than just its local environment. This can be illustrated by the phenomenon of multiple case marking. To say ‘with a/the boomerang’, the word for ‘boomerang’ is inflected with the instrumental case (1) – nothing unusual about this, from the perspective of Russian or Latin. If you go on to say ‘with brother’s boomerang’, as in (2), you notice that the instrumental spreads over the whole phrase, being placed outside the genitive case on ‘brother’ as well as on ‘boomerang’.

1. wangal-nguni boomerang-INSTR ‘with the boomerang’

2. thabuju-karra-nguni

wangal-nguni

brother-GEN-INSTR boomerang-INSTR

‘with brother’s boomerang’

Although somewhat unusual typologically, double case-marking is far from unique – as well as being found in many other Australian languages, it is a trait found in Central Cushitic in Ethiopia, the ancient near East, and the Caucasus – see Plank (1995) for a collection of descriptions and a historical survey. But in Kayardild this is only the beginning. If you then embed (2) in a clause in the past tense, each noun phrase other than the subject takes an additional ablative suffix, as illustrated in (3).

3. dangka-a burldi-jarra yarbuth-ina

man-NOM hit-PAST

bird-ABL

thabuju-karra-nguni-na

wangal- nguni-na

brother-GEN-INSTR-ABL boomerang-INSTR-ABL

‘the man hit the bird with brother’s boomerang’

This is an example of the ‘modal case’ system, which gives Kayardild a second way of giving information about tense/mood, linked with but partly in-

348 Nicholas Evans
dependent of its verb inflections; it originated through the use of case to mark inter-clausal relations (‘from/after spearing the fish, the man cooked it’) and then became an independent marker of tense/mood when the main clause got ellipsed. In fact, it is precisely because Kayardild is so close to Yukulta (which has the interclausal use) that we have been able to figure out the historical origins of modal case. Among all the world’s languages, only Kayardild and Lardil have modal case systems, and various changes that have taken place in Lardil (such as the specialization of one of the modal cases to the point where its basic use has been lost) makes it much harder to work out what is going in Lardil than in Kayardild.
To top things off, there is a fourth layer of case marking in Kayardild. When one clause is embedded in another and certain other conditions are met (e. g. the two clauses not having the same subject), every word in the subordinate clause takes a further case suffix (most commonly the ‘oblique’, historically a dative). An example is (4); note that while the nominative on ‘man’ in (3) is simply replaced (basically because the nominative only goes on words that have missed out on getting in any other case), all other words (including the past-inflected verb ‘hit’) just tack on the ‘complementizing’ oblique suffix after all other inflections; in the case of thabuju ‘brother’ this means it ends up with 4 case suffixes. No other language in the world takes case stacking to this extreme – comparative morphological evidence shows that Lardil once had it, but various radical phonological changes that have chopped off the ends of Lardil words have produced a somewhat different system in the modern language.

4. ngada

kurri-jarr, dangka-ntha

1sgNOM see-PAST man-OBL

burldi-jarra-ntha hit-PAST-OBL

yarbuth-inaa-ntha bird-ABL-OBL

thabuju-karra-nguni-naa-ntha brother-GEN-INSTR-ABL-OBL

wangal-nguni-naa-nth boomerang-INSTR-ABL-OBL ‘I saw that the man had hit the bird with brother’s boomerang’

This does not exhaust the unique features of Kayardild grammar (see Evans (1995) for a detailed description). For example, in addition to ‘normal’ case inflections like those just given, which leave nouns as nouns, there is another whole set that turns nouns into morphological verbs ca-

Warramurrungunji Undone: Australian Languages in the 51st Millennium 349

pable of taking the full range of verbal inflections (but which still function as nouns syntactically) – a counter-example to the often-made claim that inflections do not change word-class. The point is that here is a prime ‘unimaginable’ language whose importance was still masked when we had quite full information on two closely related languages – and also one where it would have been very difficult to work out the system had we not already had outstanding descriptions of Yukulta and Lardil. It would also have been impossible to figure out its structure if research had begun twenty years later – the number of fluent speakers has dwindled from around 40 in 1982 to under 10 in 2000. Most crucially, the fact that the generation who would now be in their 60s has been disproportionately affected by premature deaths mean that there is effectively only one bilingual speaker left, yet it was the bilingual generation (all born between 1935 and 1945) who were the key to understanding how the language functioned. The premature loss of this generation would certainly not have been predicted, though retrospectively it reflects where the major health stresses of the transition from traditional to mission to ‘modern’ living conditions have fallen most heavily.
(b) Dalabon [7] is spoken in central Arnhem Land. The pioneering Australianist Capell published a grammar of it in 1962 as one of 4 exemplified in his book Some Linguistic Types in Australia. Capell’s grammar typifies the way a sketch grammar can overlook centrally interesting and unusual facts about a language – in this case, I believe, because most of the data was based on a questionnaire which only allowed the investigator to find what had already been foreseen as a possibility. Consider the following pair of sentences (adapted from Alpher 1982):

5. darruh-ko

barra-h-bo-n

brother-DYAD 3dual(harmonic)-REALIS-go-PRES

‘They two, brothers, go.’

6. be-ko

ke-h-bo-n

man’s.son-DYAD 3dual(disharmonic)-REALIS-go-PRES

‘They two, father and son, go.’

As this pair illustrates, the pronominal prefixes on the verb, in addition to person and number, are sensitive to a social factor usually called ‘harmonicity’: the harmonic forms are used if members of the referent set are in the same generation (or even-numbered generations, such as grandpar-

350 Nicholas Evans
ents and grandchildren), while the disharmonic forms are used if they are in odd-numbered generations (e. g. parent and child).
The existence of kinship-sensitive pronominal prefixes was completely overlooked by Capell’s grammar. The most likely explanation for this is that it was largely based on a survey-type questionnaire, used widely by himself and others from the 1940s to the 1960s. Although this included a thorough examination of paradigmatic combinations like ‘we two saw the dog’, ‘we three saw the dog’, etc., it did not ever try to vary the kin relationship between the members of a set like ‘we two’ – presumably because noone had reported this as being relevant at the time, the first published discovery of the phenomenon in any language being Hale (1966) for Lardil. It was only when Barry Alpher began work on Dalabon in 1974 that this material came to light, partly because of the involvement in this research of a native Dalabon speaker, David Jentian Nangan-golod, who was training in linguistics at the then School of Australian Linguistics.
Now it is perfectly understandable that Capell, as the first investigator to report on the language, should overlook many significant features, and his sketches have been put to good use by subsequent investigators (though we still lack a comprehensive description of Dalabon). My point is that survey work is inherently prone to overlooking the most interesting features of languages, and hence provides a poor guide to locating unusual grammatical and phonological characteristics.
2.2. Lexicography and texts
The trajectory of scientific interest since the 1960s has favoured work on grammars at the expense of dictionaries, which have remained ‘the poor cousin of grammatical description’ (Austin 1991). A recent survey of Australian lexicography by Goddard and Thieberger (1997) listed only 17 ‘reasonably large’ dictionaries of Australian languages, even though their definition of ‘reasonably large’ is an unambitious ‘2,000+ entries’. Only 5 out of the 25 non-Pama-Nyungan families are represented in this list. Yet for most nonlinguists dictionaries are the most important type of documentation – certainly the speech communities themselves are more interested in dictionaries than in grammars; encyclopaedic dictionaries are an excellent source of cultural documentation relevant to community-based enterprises as diverse as eco-tourism, gathering of wild plant seeds for native nurseries, or documentation of bark paintings. For historical linguistics the lack of good lexical documentation remains the single greatest handicap to detailed work.

Warramurrungunji Undone: Australian Languages in the 51st Millennium 351
A successful initiative in the early 1990s, resulting from a one-off grant by the Federal Government to the Australian Institute of Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Studies, encouraged linguists to bring out provisional versions of dictionaries based on materials they had already gathered, leading to the publication of dozens of dictionaries and word-lists. However, the interaction of the much slower gestation time of dictionaries than grammars with the short funding cycle of most supporting institutions has made it hard to establish the sort of twenty-year project needed to produce proper dictionaries. Although there are isolated cases of comprehensive dictionaries produced by individual researchers (e. g. Alpher 1991), it has more often been the case that good dictionaries reflect long-term projects, based in the community or a local language centre, that have gathered lexical material and written definitions as part of a more wide-ranging program of language work. In some cases this has involved missionary organizations who over the years have built up a team comprising native speakers engaged in Bible translation (e. g. the WikMungkan [8] dictionary by Kilham et al 1986).
The most successful dictionary-making program has been based in Alice Springs at the Institute for Aboriginal Development, which so far has produced three excellent dictionaries (Goddard’s 1992 Pitjantjatjara/ Yankunytjatjara [9] to English dictionary, Henderson and Dobson’s 1994 Eastern and Central Arrernte [10] to English dictionary, and Green’s 1992 Alyawarr [11] to English dictionary). Crucial to the quality of their dictionary-making programs has been (a) cooperation of trained linguists with native speakers who combine practical training in lexicography with an on-going range of language-related jobs such as interpreting, language teaching, cultural documentation, and producing vernacular literacy materials (b) parallel production of several dictionaries with sharing of ideas and techniques between them (c) success in bringing together sufficient funding, over a relatively long term, to build stable lexicography teams (d) the capability of publishing their own materials.
Text material has lagged even further behind grammars than dictionaries have; the seriousness of this gap is becoming more apparent as linguistics makes more and more use of extensive corpora. Publishing of bilingual texts has neither been commercially feasible nor a high academic priority, and many text collections, submitted to publishers as bilingual, have had to excise much of the vernacular text as the price of publishability. Exceptions (see Laughren 2000 for a fuller listing) include Strehlow’s (1971) ‘Songs of Central Australia’, the collection of Warlpiri [2] ‘dreamings and histories’ in Napaljarri and Cataldi (1994), of Kunwinjku [12]

352 Nicholas Evans
texts in Nganjmira (1997), and, more academically oriented in terms of glossing and linguistic commentary, Heath (1981) on Nunggubuyu [13] and Schebeck (1974) on Adnyamathanha [14]. In recent years it has been local Aboriginal language centres that have led the way in the publication of bilingual text materials, which tend to be directly written in the vernacular rather than transcribed from speakers. As with dictionaries, text collections are valued by the speech communities themselves because of the high content of cultural information; they are also useful ‘insurance’ against an overly-narrow focus by linguists on the questions of the day.

2.3. Multilingualism in speech communities
There is growing interest in the question of how linguistic diversity is engendered and maintained (e. g. Nettle 1999), and in the social mechanisms that favour its development. Australia provides a clear example of how small, culturally similar groups that are in regular contact and whose members normally know a number of neighbouring languages, consistently develop and maintain language diversity. The reigning social model over much of Australia posits a direct relationship between land and language (e. g. Merlan 1981), as well as between language and particular social groupings, such as clans. Individuals then derive the right to be recognized as speakers of particular languages indirectly, through their membership in clan or other groups:

individual

clan or other social group

land

language

Figure 1. The indirect relationship between individuals and ‘their’ languages

This ideology leads to a widely-maintained distinction between speaking and owning a language: a statement that ‘X speaks Y’ may simply mean that ‘X belongs to the group associated with the country where Y is spoken’, and some other person who actually speaks Y fluently because of their life history, but does not belong to the requisite grouping, may not be volunteered as a speaker. I discuss elsewhere (Evans 2001) some of the difficulties this can create in discoveringlast speakers.
The mapping of language onto country creates an interesting range of sociolinguistic practices (see e. g. Brandl and Walsh 1982, Trigger 1987). It

Warramurrungunji Undone: Australian Languages in the 51st Millennium 353
is a regular practice to change the language one is speaking when entering a new territory, to address particular locales (e. g. wells, or dangerous places) in the local language, for characters in myths to switch languages as they move about the country (sometimes this metonymic device may be the only indication that a character has moved from one place to another), and for large-scale song and myth cycles to incorporate a number of ‘legs’, each in a different language and typically told by different speakers in relay – as if the Odyssey, say, passed through half-a-dozen Mediterranean languages and story-tellers as the action shifted.
Typically there is no etiquette that all participants in a conversation should speak the same language, and it is quite normal to witness multilingual conversations in which each participant speaks their own language. This is one factor that may help speakers of critically endangered languages remain fluent the fact that their conversational partners don’t speak their languages doesn’t mean that they have to give it up. It is striking how often, compared to cases reported in some other parts of the world, the ‘last speakers’ of Australian languages have had an excellent command of their morphosyntactic intricacies (see e. g. Harvey’s (1992) grammar of Gaagudju [15] and Dench’s (1995) grammar of Martuthunira [16], both based on work with last speakers).
It is also a widespread practice for a number of languages in a region to be organized into an overarching system, such that speakers’ metalinguistic awareness extends well beyond their ‘own’ speech community or territory. The clearest example is in North-Eastern Arnhem Land (Morphy 1977, Wilkinson 1991), where each language variety is associated with one of two patrimoieties; features distinguishing ‘moiety lects’ (e. g. dropping of final vowels) cross-cut features distinguishing dialect groupings set up on geographical grounds (e. g. loss of initial syllables of some pronouns). The social processes by which differentiation of new social groups (e. g. clan splits) lead to the formation of new ‘patrilects’ in very small-scale speech communities have been described for Western Cape York by Smith and Johnson (1986).
So far little theorization in sociolinguistics has appreciated the importance of carrying out detailed work on super-speech-communities made of many interlocked and intermarrying small languages – and obvious this is hard to achieve until basic grammatical and lexicographic work has been carried out (though see Sutton 1978 for an example of what is possible). Psycholinguistics, with its belief in a ‘critical period’ based on observations of language-learning in large, literate speech communities, may also discover surprises if it were to tackle the problem of second- lan-

354 Nicholas Evans
guage learning in speech communities where it is normal for adults to keep learning new languages throughout their lives. This is also relevant to the question of whether languages can still be passed on even when they are not learned as children. In short, full documentation of language use in such communities is one of the highest priorities if we are to understand the forces that have shaped linguistic diversity for the majority of our human past, in which speech communities throughout the world are likely to have been small.

2.4. Special language functions

A commonly used index of language endangerment is to look at the encroachment of a replacing language on the ‘language functions’ of the threatened language. Frequently cited functions include ‘religious practice’, ‘education’, ‘inter-ethnic communication’ and so forth. However, if we take seriously the emic premise of examining functions from within the perspective of each speech community, we need to allow for the possibility that there exist culture-specific functions that we would never have imagined before undertaking detailed field research. These are of particular scientific interest for the way they encode interpersonal relationships in language, and because in many cases they embody an indigenous tradition of analysis that gives great insight into semantic structure.4

2.4.1. Respect registers
Many Australian languages have special ‘respect registers’, sometimes known as ‘brother-in-law languages’ or ‘mother-in-law languages’, which are used as a polite way of talking between certain types of relative. They normally involve substitution of a proportion of the vocabulary, which may range from a few words to virtually every word in the language, by different lexical items, while leaving the grammar intact. For example in Uw-Oykangand [17], a language of Cape York, a man talking to a potential mother-in-law must use a special register known as Olkel-Ilmbanhthi; to speak this one leaves affixes and function words like ‘I’ intact but replaces the remaining vocabulary items (Alpher 1993: 98):

7a. Alka-nhdh

idu-rr

ay

spear-INSTR spear-PAST I

‘I speared it with a spear.’ (ordinary register)

Warramurrungunji Undone: Australian Languages in the 51st Millennium 355

7b. Udnga-nhdh yanganyunyja-rr ay

spear-INSTR spear-PAST

I

‘I speared it with a spear.’ (respect register)

Because respect registers typically have fewer words than the everyday register, their meanings are correspondingly more general, and several linguists have used this as a way of investigating semantic structure by studying the many-to-one meaning relationships between everyday register words and their respect-register equivalents (Dixon 1971, Evans 1992).
There have been few comprehensive studies of respect registers, and most have been based on what a few old people remember rather than observations of actual use. This is partly because it takes time for fieldworkers to discover their existence, but also because respect registers are far more fragile than the everyday form of a language, not being mastered until well after adolescence. For example, at Oenpelli all children still learn Kunwinjku [12] as their mother tongue, but the youngest two generations are not mastering the respect register, known as Kunbalak or Kunkurrng, to the great concern of the speech community. This has prompted Andrew Manakgu, a Kunwinjku linguist working at the Kunwinjku Language Centre, to specially produce a book of stories with parallel Kunwinjku and Kunbalak versions as an attempt to restore knowledge of this register in the younger generations (Manakgu 1998).

2.4.2. Trirelational kin terms
Another way in which many Australian languages reflect a sensitivity to kinship relations between speaker and hearer is through systems of ‘trirelational’ kin terms, which offer a number of ways of referring to kin based on simultaneously figuring out the relationship of the referent to speaker and hearer. Consider the following terms from the Gun-dembui or trirelational register of Gun-djeihmi [18]; all are ways of referring to the mother of speaker and/or hearer in a range of circumstances:

8. al-garrng al-doingu al-gakkak

‘the one who is your mother and my daughter, given that I am your mother’s mother’
‘the one who is your daughter and my mother (given that you are my mother’s mother)’
‘the one who is your maternal grandmother and my mother, given that I am your mother’

356 Nicholas Evans

arduk gakkak ‘the one who is my maternal grandmother and your mother, given that I am your mother’

al-bolo

‘the one who is mother of one of us and mother-in-law of the other, given that we are husband and wife’

These systems are important for cognitive psychology because of the way they require the speaker to take two perspectives at once – their own and that of their interlocutor. See Merlan (1989) and Laughren (1982) for discussions of two such systems.
Not surprisingly, given the fact that the ability to outgrow an egocentric perspective only comes with maturity, they are not mastered until midadulthood (though we have no proper developmental studies), and their correct use is regarded as polished and courteous. Like respect registers, with which they may coexist in the same language,5 the fact that they are not mastered until adulthood renders them particularly fragile.

2.4.3. Initiation register
A further type of special register is that taught to ceremonial initiates in certain Australian communities as part of the process of formal religious education. I shall briefly discuss two of these here – Jiliwirri and Damin – to give some idea of how important they are as part of humankind’s intellectual heritage; this point has been elaborated elsewhere by Hale (1999), who is responsible for most of the research on which this section is based.
Warlpiri [2] initiates learned, as part of the process of initiation, a special register known as Jiliwirri (Hale 1971), based on the principle of replacing all lexical items (though not grammatical affixes other than pronouns) with their opposites. As the following example shows, to convey the proposition ‘I am sitting on the ground’, one must use a Jiliwirri utterance which would translate literally into everyday Warlpiri as ‘someone else is standing in the sky’:

9. ngaju ka-rna

walya-ngka

nyina-mi

I

PRES-1sg ground-LOCATIVE sit-NONPAST

‘I am sitting on the ground.’ (ordinary Warlpiri)

10. kari ka-ø

nguru-ngka

other PRES-3sg sky-LOCATIVE

‘I am sitting on the ground.’ (Jiliwirri)

karri-mi stand-NONPAST

Warramurrungunji Undone: Australian Languages in the 51st Millennium 357

Jiliwirri has been used to investigate antonymy in Warlpiri lexical semantics, including such non-obvious issues as whether the perception verbs ‘see’, ‘hear’ etc. have antonyms, and on how one determines antonyms for natural species names like ‘red kangaroo’. See Hale (1971) for full discussion.
Even more spectacular is a special initiation register known as Damin, which was taught to Lardil [5] men on Mornington Island as part of their initiation as Warama (second degree initiates) – see Hale and Nash (1997) and McKnight (1999). It is said to have been created by an ancestor known as Kaltharr (Yellow Trevally fish), and has a rich inventory of sounds, some echoing what ‘fish talk’ would sound like. In fact, its phoneme inventory is unique among the world’s languages in employing 5 distinct airstream initiation types: pulmonic egressive (the normal type in all other Australian languages), pulmonic ingressive (the ingressive lateral fricative l*, velaric ingressive (nasal clicks like n!), labiovelar lingual egressive (p’) and glottalic egressive (k’).6 Of these, the pulmonic ingressive and labiovelar lingual egressives are found nowhere else in the world’s languages, at least as phonemic elements.
Because grammatical affixes are simply taken over from everyday Lardil, it is only the lexical roots that display these special phonemes, as can be illustrated by the following sentence equivalents from everyday Lardil (11a) and Damin (11b): Damin substitutes n!aa for ngada, didi for ji- and l*ii for yak- , but leaves the grammatical suffixes intact (other than allomorphic differences between postconsonantal -ur and postvocalic -ngkur).7

11a. Ngada ji-thur

I

eat-FUT

‘I will eat fish.’

yak-ur fish-OBJ

11b. N!aa didi-thur l*i-ngkur

Equally unique is the semantic structure of Damin, which maps the many thousand lexical items of everyday Lardil into around 200 words by a combination of highly abstract semantics, extended polysemic chains, paraphrase, and supplementation by hand signs. In the above example, n!aa does not simply correspond to ngada ‘I’ but can denote any group including ego, which in Lardil includes 9 possible pronouns, representing the three-dimension matrix formed by ngada ‘I’ plus 2 × 2 × 2 combinations of the oppositions dual vs plural, inclusive vs exclusive, and harmonic vs disharmonic. Likewise didi does not simply correspond to jitha ‘eat’

358 Nicholas Evans
but also includes all actions of harmful affect, such as barrki ‘chop’, betha ‘bite’, bunbe ‘shoot’, and kele ‘cut’. The net effect is to produce a totally indigenous analysis of the semantics of the entire vocabulary into a small number of elements, and Hale (1982: 32) justifiably refers to Damin as a ‘monument to the human intellect’. Elsewhere he has drawn attention to the fact that its association with rituals outlawed by the missionaries in power on Mornington Island meant that its transmission was interrupted well before the transmission of everyday Lardil, as well as to the invisibility of this astounding achievement to the outside world:
The destruction of this intellectual treasure was carried out, for the most part, by people who were not aware of its existence, coming as they did from a culture in which wealth is physical and visible. Damin was not visible for them, and as far as they were concerned, the Lardil people had no wealth, apart from their land. (Hale 1998: 211–212)
Each of the special registers described in this section has been developed to fulfil particular ‘language functions’ that lie outside the usual typology of written vs. spoken, high vs. low that we are familiar with from the languages of literate societies. In addition to their sociolinguistic interest, all bring unusual and sometimes unparalleled semantic insights into the study of the ‘everyday’ forms of the corresponding languages. At the same time they are among the most fragile and easily-overlooked phenomena in need of documentation – in other words, they are normally much more sensitive to loss than the ‘normal’ language. Indeed, as we saw in the case of the Kun-balak and Kun-debi registers of Kunwinjku, it may happen that an apparently-healthy language is regarded by its speakers as under threat precisely because one or more of these special functions is no longer being carried out. It is essential that prioritizations of needs for language documentation not overlook these exceptionally interesting language varieties, whose existence often does not emerge until detailed work has been carried out on the everyday variety.
3. Assessing endangerment across the continent
I lack the space here to give full figures on the status of every language on the continent. Rather, I shall summarize the overall picture, give some examples illustrating some of the difficulties of assessment, and point the reader to more comprehensive sources.

Warramurrungunji Undone: Australian Languages in the 51st Millennium 359
Only since 1986 questions about language been asked in the Australian census, and only in the last census (1996) have indigenous languages been identified individually by name. The exact current form of the question – ‘do you speak a language other than English at home?’ – has various difficulties, such as disallowing the possibility that the individual speaks more than one language other than English, and allowing for self-reporting errors. The existence of multiple language names and spellings causes confusion in interpreting the results, although in some areas assistance given to the census-takers helped standardize this. Finally, confidentiality requirements mean that for languages with very low numbers of speakers the figures are not made available, obviously a grave shortcoming when dealing with endangered languages.
Before census figures began being compiled, a number of surveys had been published, beginning with Oates and Oates (1970), which attempted a complete listing of languages, giving estimates of speaker numbers, language viability (including the proportion of the population who still use the language), documentation of grammar/phonology, vocabulary, text/ tape, and names of investigators involved with the language. At the stage when they compiled this the status of many varieties as distinct languages or dialects was still unclear (see Notes to Figure 2 for two examples).
More recently, comprehensive ‘handbooks’ have appeared for several regions: Central Australia (Menning and Nash 1981), the Kimberleys (McGregor 1988), the Pilbara (Sharp and Thieberger 1992), and Western Australia south of the Kimberleys (Thieberger 1993); the latter two overlap in coverage. Each of these gives estimates of speaker numbers and language situation, detailed information on available sources, school programs and language learning materials, and basic word lists.
Significantly, the first three handbooks were commissioned by local Aboriginal organizations:8 an important development since the mid 1980s has been the setting up of Aboriginal-run regional ‘Language Centres’ acting as a local focus for language maintenance, documentation and archiving (Laughren 2000 has a full listing), and these have played an important role in involving community members in a wide range of language activities, as well as in matching researchers with speech communities and negotiating acceptable conditions of involvement by academic researchers.
A further set of figures, for the whole of Australia, was compiled by Schmidt (1990) as part of a nation-wide survey commissioned by the Australian Institute of Aboriginal and Torres Strait Island Studies (AIATSIS) in Canberra. Schmidt’s figures on speaker numbers draw on a number of the above sources plus additional surveys in some areas. However,

360 Nicholas Evans
they only extend to 90 languages: the 20 languages she identifies as ‘healthy/strong’, defined as ‘one which is transmitted to children and actively spoken by all generations in a wide range of social contexts’ (p. 2), and ranging from 200 to 3,000+ speakers, plus a further 70 ‘severely threatened’ languages estimated to have at least 10 speakers (p. 5), and ranging upwards from 10 to 1,000 speakers. The author notes that this list is not exhaustive, and than languages with fewer than 10 speakers are not listed at all. Additional comprehensive figures are the constantly-updated source Ethnologue, and Wurm’s 1999 listing of endangered languages, both compiled from a number of sources.
The difficulties in coming up with accurate figures are illustrated in Table 1, which compares sources for a number of languages that I have worked on sufficiently to come up with my own estimate, and to make a sober assessment of claimed knowledge. The discrepancies are representative of the mistakes that arise when figures are quoted without intensive investigation on the language having been undertaken, but also of the way in which speaker numbers can collapse very quickly in communities with life expectancies decades below those for non-indigenous Australians. For Kayardild [3], for example, Wurm’s estimate of 50 speakers in 1981 would not have been far out; the decline to the current figure of 8 simply reflects the death of most Kayardild speakers in the last 20 years.
They also show how speakers of languages believed extinct can still come out of the woodwork, as happened with Ilgar [19]; another recent example is the Kimberley language Andajin [20] (Saunders 1999).9
Finally, it illustrates the fact that a small number of Australian languages are actually increasing in number, usually through a combination of demographic growth and language shift by speakers of neighbouring languages. Kunwinjku (Bininj Gun-wok) is an example of this (Evans 2003): the more than doubling since the 1980s estimates reflects both factors. Families at Korlobidahdah outstation in Central Arnhem Land, for example, have shifted in the last three generations from being bilingual in Dalabon and the Kune dialect of Bininj Gun-wok, to being monolingual Kune speakers (with some English); the youngest residents of this community who know Dalabon are in their late 40s. In this case, as in many other expanding indigenous languages, a major factor favouring Bininj Gun-wok growth is its role as a lingua franca in the staging of traditional religious ceremonies. In other cases one indigenous language has spread at the expense of others through its use as a lingua franca on missions – see Smith (1986) on the displacement of Kugu Muminh [24] by Wik-Mungkan at Aurukun.

Iwaidjan family Gunwinyguan Tangkic family family

Warramurrungunji Undone: Australian Languages in the 51st Millennium 361

Table 1. Examples of speaker estimates of selected languages from various sources

Oates and Oates 1970

Ethnologue Black 1983 Schmidt

1988

(NT only) 1990

Wurm Australian My assess1999 Census 1966 ment

Kayardild [3] [no figures] no mention no mention

70

50 in 1981, no mention

6

lower today

Lardil [5] ‘Entire popula- 50 possibly no mention

50

possibly 50 no mention

1

tion of Morn-

in 1981

ington Island’

Dalabon [7] (Ngalkbon)

33*

100 – 200

100–200 100–200 100-200 in no mention

20

(< Black 1983)

1983

Kunwinjku

180

(Bininj Gun-

wok) [12]

900 inc. L2 speakers

400 – 900

900 no mention 1403

1500 – 2000

Iwaidja [21] Garig [22] Ilgar [19] Marrgu [23]

120

180 (< SIL)

180

180

180 in 1983 no mention

c. 100

**

no mention no mention no mention no mention no mention

0

**

no mention no mention no mention no mention no mention 2 ‘hearers’

12

4 possibly no mention no mention ‘recently no mention 1 semi-fluent

(< Wurm and

extinct’

Hattori 1981)

* Oates and Oates (1970) discuss the language I am calling Dalabon here under three headings: Gun-dangbon (which they mistakenly list as a dialect of Kunwinjku (“Gunwinggu”), Dalabon and Boun. The figure given here adds the figures for these three together.
** Oates and Oates do not mention Ilgar; they mistakenly subsume Garig as a variant of Iwaidja.

362 Nicholas Evans
In the last two years an important initiative has led to a comprehensive compilation of data on Australian languages, the State of Indigenous Languages audit. This was commissioned by Environment Australia and treats indigenous languages as part of the nation’s natural and cultural heritage. An important feature is that, since it has been introduced as part of a 5-yearly round of reporting, it will be possible to make time-based comparisons from subsequent surveys. The current report (McConvell and Thieberger 2000) includes a full data-base, remarks on factors affecting language maintenance, as well as recommendations for data-gathering methods that will produce a more accurate picture for future audits.
Although this section has focussed on the problems of accurate assessment, it is worthwhile concluding this with some overall approximate statistics revealing the extent of endangerment and extinction.
Of the 250 or so ‘linguist’s languages’ (i. e. grouping together dialects as one language on structural grounds, in a way that speech community members may not acknowledge as valid) spoken in Australia prior to European colonization, fewer than 20 are being passed on to children today, and fewer than one hundred have more than ten fluent speakers. The number that are extinct is harder to quantify exactly, though Wurm 1999 lists 131 extinct languages.
Another way of taking stock is by language family. Of the 25 language families shown on Map 2, only 6 contain ‘healthy’ languages: Pama-Nyungan contains more than half the ‘healthy’ languages, including Warlpiri [2] (3,000+), Arrernte [10] (3,000+), Western Desert [25] (4,000+), YolnguMatha [26] (2,500+), Kala Kawaw Ya [27] (3,000+), Wik Mungkan [8] (1,000), Nyangumarta [28] (700–800), and Thaayorre [29] (500). Five other language families contain the remaining ‘healthy’ languages: Tiwi [30] (1,400) and Anindilyakwa [31] (1,000+) are family-level isolates, Southern Daly contains Murrinhpatha [32] (900+), Gunwinyguan contains Bininj Gun-wok [12, 18] (1,500), and the Maningrida family contains Burarra [67] (400–600) and Ndjébbana [33] (200–). Of the remaining 21 families, 6 or extinct or virtually so – these are Gaagudju [15] (family-level isolate), Umbugarlan, Geimbiyo, Larrakiyan, Limulngan and Kungarakany (isolate). For a further 7, their ‘largest’ language numbers fewer than 20 speakers – these are Tangkic (largest language Kayardild [3], 8–10), Anson Bay (largest language Batjamalh [34], 20), Eastern Daly (largest language Matngele [35], perhaps 10), Western Daly (Marrithiyel [36] and Marri-Ngarr [37] have around 20 each), North Daly (Malak-Malak [38], perhaps 10), and Wagiman [39] (10?). In the 8 further families, the healthiest languages are severely threatened, with speaker numbers between 20

Warramurrungunji Undone: Australian Languages in the 51st Millennium 363
and 200: these are Maran (Alawa [40], perhaps 50), Iwaidjan (Iwaidja [21] and Maung [41], perhaps 150 each), the Wardaman group (Wardaman [42], 30), Mindi (Jaminjung/Ngaliwurru [43], 50–150), Garrwan (Garrwa [44], 200) Jerragan (Kija [45], perhaps 100), Worrorran (Ungarinyin [46], 100–), Bunaban (Bunaba [47], 100), Nyulnyulan (Bardi [48], 75). Meryam Mir [49], the only Papuan language spoken in Australia, has around 200 speakers, none fluent under 40.
There have been many positive turn-arounds in public policy and attitudes towards indigenous languages in the last decades – including public recognition, provision of (some) interpreting services, support for regional language centres, appearance of indigenous languages on the airwaves, return of some Aboriginal lands to their traditional owners, some introduction of Aboriginal languages into schools (though bilingual education has actually been scaled down in the last few years), and language revival programs such as the Kaurna [50] revival program in Adelaide (see Laughren 2000 for a survey of these developments). However, it is not clear that this has significantly retarded the rate of language loss, and other factors, such as the penetration of English-language television and videos into remote areas, appear to be at least as powerful in accelerating language loss. It is unlikely that Australia will lose the dubious distinction of being the continent in which language loss is proceeding most rapidly.
4. Priorities for documentation: a survey of the Australian situation
A situation such as that described in §3 obviously places a large number of languages on the high-priority list for documentation, and prioritising them is an invidious task. In this section I give a brief personal view of the 4 main factors I believe should be taken into account in formulating research in the decades to come.
Firstly, there are languages about which virtually nothing is known, and very low numbers of speakers remain. Examples are Pakanha [51] and Ayupathu [52] in Cape York, virtually undescribed, and with a couple of fluent old speakers each (Barry Alpher p. c.), or Andajin [20] in the Kimberleys, for which a speaker has recently been discovered. Probably fewer than ten languages are in this category. Clearly research with languages like this is high-risk, since the speakers could die at any time, and it depends very much on the personality and state of health of the last individuals, but there have been some very successful documentation projects in

364 Nicholas Evans
similar situations (Martuthunira [16] and Gaagudju [15] being two, as mentioned above).
Secondly, there is a large number of languages with a number of speakers ranging from half-a-dozen to 200, and some sort of limited documentation. Effective research is less risky in such situations than when there is only one or two speakers, and particularly important when the language belongs to a family that has yet to be well-described. But, as also pointed out in §2.1., a ‘family-level sampling’ approach risks overlooking languages that may turn out to have something equivalent in interest to Kayardild [3] multiple-case or Dalabon [7] disharmonic pronouns, and there are scores of other languages where it is still feasible to carry out detailed research and the descriptions are relatively rudimentary: among the many examples are Thaayorre [29], Koko-Bera [53], Karajarri [54], Ngardi [55], Ngarinyman [56], Ngarla [57], Ngarluma [58], Kurrama [59], and Yanhangu [60] (all Pama-Nyungan), Kunbarlang [61] (Gunwinyguan), Marri-Ngarr [37], Marri-Sjabin [62], Marri-Amu [63] and Magatige [64] (Western Daly), and Gwini [65] (Worrorran). (Though in the time since this article was originally written, major new projects on Karajarri, Yanhangu and Kunbarlang have commenced).
Thirdly, as indicated in §2.2., special registers such as mother-in-law varieties, initiation languages, and systems of trirelational kin terms have great sociolinguistic and semantic interest and are of major cultural importance to the communities that use them, but are far more fragile than the basic register of the language. The fragility and importance of such subsystems is often overlooked in assessing priorities for documentation, and does not usually appear on lists of speaker numbers. For example, Tiwi [30] is known to have had a special ‘spirit language’, which appears to be a pool of formerly tabooed terms from which names can be drawn (Hart 1930). Yet I know of no recent source setting out the extent to which it is still known. Typically, too, the existence of such special registers only becomes apparent when research on the ordinary variety is well-advanced.
Fourthly, there are many speech communities where it would be more useful and interesting to take the multilingual speech community, rather than individual languages, as the unit of investigation, because of the many unusual ways in which multiple codes are organized for purposes of social identification and cultural elaboration, as outlined in §2.3. In many cases where critically endangered languages are encapsulated within slightly less endangered ones (e. g. Amurdak [66] in Iwaidja, or some of the Wik languages within Wik-Mungkan), taking the multilingual speech community as the domain for research reduces the dependence of a

Warramurrungunji Undone: Australian Languages in the 51st Millennium 365

project on the survival of one or two speakers, and is more efficient in terms of gathering cultural information since in situations like gathering plant vocabulary speakers normally volunteer material on several languages at once. Taking the multilingual community as the focus of research also helps gives insights into language contact effects (e. g. between Ngarinman [56] and Jaminjung [43] across the Pama-Nyungan / non-Pama-Nyungan border).

1 Dyirbal 2 Warlpiri 3 Kayardild 4 Yukulta 5 Lardil 6 Yanggal 7 Dalabon 8 Wik-Mungkan 9 Pitjantjatjara/Yankunytjatjara 10 Eastern and Central Arrernte 11 Alyawarr 12 Kunwinjku 13 Nunggubuyu 14 Adnyamathanha 15 Gaagudju 16 Martuthunira 17 Oykangand 18 Gun-djeihmi 19 Ilgar 20 Andajin 21 Iwaidja 22 Garig 23 Marrgu 24 Muminh 25 Western Desert 26 Yolngu-Matha 27 Kala Kawaw Ya 28 Nyangumarta 29 Thaayorre 30 Tiwi 31 Anindilyakwa 32 Murrinhpatha 33 Ndjébbana 34 Batjamalh

35 Matngele 36 Marrithiyel 37 Marri-Ngarr 38 Malak-Malak 39 Wagiman 40 Alawa 41 Maung 42 Wardaman 43 Jaminjung/Ngaliwurru 44 Garrwa 45 Kija 46 Ungarinyin 47 Bunaba 48 Bardi 49 Meryam Mir 50 Kaurna 51 Pakanha 52 Ayupathu 53 Koko-Bera 54 Karajarri 55 Ngardi 56 Ngarinyman 57 Ngarla 58 Ngarluma 59 Kurrama 60 Yanhangu 61 Kunbarlang 62 Marri-Sjabin 63 Marri-Amu 64 Magatige 65 Gwini 66 Amurdak 67 Burarra

366 Nicholas Evans

n
a e c
O

a n O c e a n

48

i

d

n

I

54

28 57 58

16

59

34 38 36,62,63,64 37 32 65
46 47 20 45

30 Darwin

22

23 19

21 41 15

33

67

66

60

61

35 39

3

26

12

18 7 13

31

43 42 40
56 44

5 6 43

55

27 49
8 24
52 29 51 53
17 1

2

11 10

25 9

A

U

S

T

R

A

L

I

A

c i f i c a P

Brisbane

14

Perth

50 Adelaide

Canberra

Sydney

Melbourne

Map 23. Australia

Warramurrungunji Undone: Australian Languages in the 51st Millennium 367
5. Final remarks
In closing it is worth remarking on the rapidly evolving changes to the relationship between researcher, research institution, speaker, and local community. As indigenous groups become less disenfranchised, the relationships between all parties have become more complex. One form this has taken has been the drawing up of a code of ethics for linguists working in indigenous communities in Australia by the Australian Linguistic Society in the 1980s, more or less simultaneously with the drafting of a statement of linguistic rights by the Aboriginal Languages Association, an indigenous national association. There has been considerable debate about issues of intellectual property, responsibilities of the linguist to the language community, appropriate training of members of the language community as part of the research process, and a trade-off between outside researchers’ goals and those of the community (e. g. an agreement to produce pedagogical or dictionary materials in return for community support for research on a more ‘academic’ topic, such as syntax or phonology) – see e. g. Wilkins (1992). It is now normal for regional language centres to expect full consultation on such matters as part of the process of planning, execution and ‘bringing back’ of research projects.
Although some academics have seen this as an unwelcome limitation on their intellectual freedom, and there have been rare cases where it has created difficulties in publishing their research, the net effect has been to make for a richer and more interesting understanding of Australian languages, better able to incorporate the cultural insights of native speaker researchers. Some examples of the fecundity of such ‘two-way research’ were given in §2.2. under the discussion of lexicography and text material. As we strive to document what we can of the extraordinary linguistic legacy that will fade away over the next century, a research process that combines the questions and insights of insiders with those of outsiders stands the best chance of describing languages, on their own terms and in ways that capture possibilities beyond our current imaginations.
Notes
1. There is a single exception to this within Australia’s political borders, though not on the continent proper: Meryam Mir, spoken in the eastern Torres Strait between Australian and Papua New Guinea, belong to the Trans-Fly family whose other members are located in Papua New Guinea.

368 Nicholas Evans
2. On similar attitudes in Melanesia see Laycock (1982: 33), who quotes a Sepik man saying ‘it wouldn’t be any good if we all talked the same; we like to know where people come from’.
3. It is a peculiar fact about linguistics that practically none of the most astonishing typological features eventually discovered empirically have been anticipated through prior speculation, whether by philosophers or armchair linguists. This is in marked contrast to the natural sciences where, for example, mathematicians had anticipated the possible existence of the Einsteinian universe by playing speculatively with non-Euclidean geometry, or chemistry, where the likely existence of a large number of elements was deduced by Mendeleev before they were discovered.
4. This is by no means exhaustive – e. g. I omit the special systems of sign language, of interest to our understanding of grammatical and semantic structure – see Kendon (1988), Wilkins (1997).
5. In fact it is possible to see both as special registers: mother-in-law registers index a simple two-value opposition in terms of kin relationships (respectful vs unmarked) but do so by distinct words over the whole vocabulary, whereas trirelational kin terms index a much larger set of relationships between speaker and hearer (as indicated by the translations for (8)), but only register this on that part of the vocabulary dealing with kinship.
6. These forms are cited in a practical orthography. See Hale and Nash 1997. 7. This is slighly oversimplified, since the allomorph -ngkur is restricted to Damin
and may represent an archaic post-vocalic form – see Hale (1973). 8. The Institute for Aboriginal Development in Alice Springs commissioned the
Central Australian handbook; this institution has a broader brief than just language but includes a very active language department (see discussion of lexicography in §2.2.). The Kimberley survey was commissioned by the Kimberley Language Resource Centre, and the Pilbara survey by the Pilbara Aboriginal Language Centre. 9. As far back as Tindale (1974: 225), the group inhabiting Ilgar country (though labeleled Gaari by him) was described by him as ‘a now extinct people’. Charlie Wardaga, a knowledgeable Ilgar speaker, came forward as an Ilgar speaker during research for a Native Title hearing by anthropologist Jeannie Devitt in 1994.
References
Alpher, Barry 1982 Dalabon dual-subject prefixes, kinship categories, and generation skewing. In Heath, Merlan and Rumsey (eds.) 1–18. 1991 Yir-Yoront lexicon. Sketch and dictionary of an Australian language. Berlin: Mouton de Gruyter. 1993 Out-of-the-ordinary ways of using a language. In M. Walsh and Colin Yallop (eds.) Language and culture in Aboriginal Australia. 97–106.

Warramurrungunji Undone: Australian Languages in the 51st Millennium 369
Austin, Peter 1991 Australian Aboriginal languages. In Michael G. Clyne (ed.) Linguistics in Australia: trends in research. Canberra: Academy of the Social Sociences in Australia. 55–74.
Black, Paul 1983 Aboriginal languages of the Northern Territory. Darwin: School of Australian linguistics.
Brandl, Maria and Michael Walsh 1982 Speakers of many tongues: toward understanding multilingualism among Aboriginal Australians. In G. R. McKay (ed.) Australian Aborigines: sociolinguistic studies. (International journal of the sociology of language 36). Berlin: Mouton. 71–81.
Capell, Arthur C. 1962 Some linguistic types in Australia. Sydney: Oceania Linguistic Monograph 7.
Dench, Alan 1995 Martuthunira, a language of the Pilbara region of Western Australia. Canberra: Pacific Linguistics.
Dixon, R. M. W. 1971 A method of semantic description. In D. D. Steinberg and L. A. Jakobovits (eds.) 436–471. 1972 The Dyirbal language of north Queensland. London: Cambridge University Press.
Evans, Nicholas 1992 Multiple semiotic systems, hyperpolysemy and the reconstruction of semantic change in Australian languages. In Michael Morrissey and Günter Kellermann (eds.), Diachrony within synchrony: language, history and cognition. Bern: Peter Lang. 475–508. 1995 A grammar of Kayardild, with historical-comparative notes on Tangkic. Berlin: Mouton de Gruyter. 2000 Iwaidjan, a very un-Australian language family. Linguistic typology 4,1: 91–112. 2001 The last speaker is dead – long live the last speaker! In Paul Newman and Martha Ratcliff (eds.) Linguistic fieldwork. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 250–281. 2003 Bininj Gun-wok: a pan-dialectal grammar of Mayali, Kunwinjku and Kune. Canberra: Pacific Linguistics.
Goddard, Cliff 1992 Pitjantjatjara / Yankunytjatjara to English dictionary. (2nd edition). Alice Springs: Institute for Aboriginal Development.
Goddard, Cliff and Nicholas Thieberger 1997 Lexicographic research on Australian Aboriginal languages 19681993. In Tryon and Walsh (eds.) 175–208.

370 Nicholas Evans
Green, Jenny 1992 Alyawarr to English dictionary. Alice Springs: Institute for Aboriginal Development.
Grimes, Barbara F. 1988 Ethnologue. Languages of the World (11th edition). Dallas: Summer Institute of Linguistics.
Hale, Kenneth L. 1966 Kinship reflections in syntax: some Australian examples. Word 22: 318 – 324. 1971 Notes on a Walpiri tradition of antonymy. In Steinberg and Jakobovits (eds.) 472–482. 1973 Deep-surface canonical disparities in relation to analysis and change: an Australian example. In T. A. Sebeok (ed.) Current trends in linguistics 8: Linguistics in Oceania. The Hague: Mouton. 401– 458. 1982 The logic of Damin kinship terminology. In Heath, Merlan and Rumsey (eds.) 31–37. 1983 Warlpiri and the grammar of non-configurational languages. Natural language and linguistic theory 1,1: 5–47. 1998 On endangered languages and the importance of linguistic diversity. In Lenore A. Grenoble and Lindsay J. Whaley (eds.) Endangered languages: Language loss and community response. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 192–216.
Hale, Kenneth L. and David Nash 1997 Damin and Lardil phonotactics. In Darrell Tryon and Michael Walsh (eds.) Boundary rider: essays in honours of Geoffrey O’Grady. Canberra: Pacific Linguistics. 247–259.
Hart, Charles W. M. 1930 Personal names among the Tiwi. Oceania 1,3: 28–290.
Harvey, Mark 1992 The Gaagudju people and their language. Unpublished Ph.D. Thesis, University of Sydney.
Heath, Jeffrey 1981 Nunggubuyu myths and ethnographic texts. Canberra: Australian Institute of Aboriginal Studies.
Heath, Jeffrey, Alan Rumsey and Francesca Merlan (eds.) 1982 Languages of kinship in Aboriginal Australia. Sydney: Oceania Linguistic Monographs No. 24.
Henderson, John and Veronica Dobson 1994 Eastern and Central Arrernte to English dictionary. Alice Springs: Institute for Aboriginal Development.
Keen, Sandra 1983 Yukulta. In R. M. W. Dixon and Barry J. Blake (eds.) Handbook of Australian languages, Vol. 3. Canberra: Australian National University Press. 190–304.

Warramurrungunji Undone: Australian Languages in the 51st Millennium 371
Kendon, Adam 1988 Sign languages of Aboriginal Australia. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Kilham, Christine, Mabel Pamulkan, Jennifer Pootchemunka and Topsy Wolmby. 1986 Dictionary and source book of the Wik-Mungkan language. Darwin: Summer Institute of Linguistics.
Laughren, Mary 1982 Warlpiri kinship structure. In Heath, Merlan and Rumsey (eds.). 72–85. 2000 Australian Aboriginal languages: their contemporary status and functions. In R. M. W. Dixon and Barry J. Blake (eds.) Handbook of Australian languages, Vol. V. Melbourne: Oxford University Press. 1–32.
Laycock, Don 1982 Linguistic diversity in Melanesia: a tentative explanation. In Rainer Carle, Martina Henschke, Peter W. Pink, Christel Rost and Karen Stadtlender (eds.) GAVA’: studies in Austronesian languages and cultures, dedicated to Hans Kähler. Berlin: Dietrich Reimer. 31–37.
Livi-Bacci, Massimo 1992 A concise history of world population (transl. Carl Ipsen). Cambridge, Massachusetts: Blackwells.
McConvell, Patrick and Nicholas Thieberger 2000 The state of indigenous languages in Australia. Canberra: Australian Institute of Aboriginal Studies.
McGregor, William B. 1988 Handbook of Kimberley languages. Volume 1. General information. Canberra: Pacific Linguistics. 2002 Verb classification in Australian languages. MS.
McKnight, David 1999 People, countries and the Rainbow Serpent. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Manakgu, Andrew 1998 Kunbalak. Stories for Kunwinjku young people in mother-in-law language, ordinary Kunwinjku and English (2nd edition). Kunbarllanjnja (Oenpelli): Kunwinjku Language Centre.
Merlan, Francesca 1981 Land, language and social identity in Aboriginal Australia. Mankind 13,2: 133–148. 1989 Jawoyn relationship terms: interactional dimensions of Australian kin classification. Anthropological linguistics 31,3/4: 227–263.
Morphy, Frances 1977 Language and moiety: sociolectal variation in a Yu:lngu language of north-east Arnhem Land. Canberra anthropology 1,1: 51–60.
Napaljarri, Peggy and Lee Cataldi 1994 Yimikirli – Warlpiri dreamings and histories. San Francisco: Harper Collins.

372 Nicholas Evans
Nash, David (ed.) and Kathy Menning (comp.) 1981 Source book for Central Australian languages. Alice Springs: Institute for Aboriginal Development.
Nettle, Daniel 1999 Linguistic diversity. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Nganjmira, Nawakadj 1997 Kunwinjku spirit. Melbourne: Miegunyah Press.
Oates, William J. and Lynette F. Oates 1970 A revised linguistic survey of Australia. Canberra: Australian Institute of Aboriginal Studies.
Plank, Frans (ed.) 1995 Double case: agreement by Suffixaufnahme. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Pym, Noreen (with Bonnie Larrimore) 1979 Papers on Iwaidja phonology and grammar. Darwin: Summer Insitute of Linguistics, Australian Aborigines Branch.
Saunders, Thomas 1999 A first look at Andajin. Paper presented at Australian Linguistics Conference, University of Western Australia, Perth, September 30, 1999.
Schebeck, Bernhard 1974 Texts on the social system of the Atynyamatana people, with grammatical notes. Canberra: Pacific Linguistics.
Schmidt, Annette 1990 The loss of Australia’s Aboriginal language heritage. Canberra: Aboriginal Studies Press.
Schultze-Berndt, Eva 2000 Simple and complex verbs in Jaminjung. A study of event categorization in an Australian language. Proefschrift, Katholieke Universiteit Nijmegen.
Sharp, Janet and Nicholas Thieberger 1992 Bilybara. The Aboriginal languages of the Pilbara region of Western Australia. Port Hedland: Wangka Maya, The Pilbara Aboriginal Language Centre.
Smith, Ian 1986 Language contact and the life or death of Kugu Muminh. In Joshua A. Fishman, Andrée Tabouret-Keller, Michael Clyne, Bh. Krishnamurti and Mohamed Abdulaziz (eds.) The Fergusonian impact: in honor of Charles A. Ferguson on the occasion of his 65th birthday, volume 2: Sociolinguistics and the sociology of language. Berlin: Mouton de Gruyter. 513–532.
Smith, Ian and Steve Johnson 1986 Sociolinguistic patterns in an unstratified society: the patrilects of Kugu Nganhcara. Journal of the atlantic provinces linguistic association 8: 29–43.

Warramurrungunji Undone: Australian Languages in the 51st Millennium 373
Steinberg, D. D. and L. A. Jakobovits (eds.) 1971 Semantics. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Strehlow, Theodor G. H. 1971 Songs of Central Australia. Sydney: Angus and Robertson.
Sutton, Peter 1978 Wik: Aboriginal society, territory and language at Cape Keerweer, Cape York Peninsula, Australia. University of Queensland: unpublished Ph.D. Dissertation.
Thieberger, Nicholas 1993 Handbook of WA Aboriginal languages south of the Kimberley Region. Canberra: Pacific Linguistics.
Thieberger, Nicholas and William B. McGregor (eds.) 1994 Macquarie Aboriginal words. Macquarie University: Macquarie Dictionary.
Tindale, Norman B. 1974 Tribal boundaries in Aboriginal Australia. (2nd edition). Berkeley: University of California Press.
Trigger, David 1987 Languages, linguistic groups and status relations at Doomadgee, an Aboriginal settlement in north-west Queensland, Australia. Oceania 57: 217–238.
Tryon, Darrell and Michael Walsh (eds.) 1997 Boundary rider: essays in honour of Geoffrey O’Grady. Canberra: Pacific Linguistics.
Wilkins, David 1992 Linguistic research under Aboriginal control: a personal account of fieldwork in Central Australia. Australian journal of linguistics 12,1: 171 – 200. 1997 Handsigns and hyperpolysemy: exploring the cultural foundations of semantic association. In Tryon and Walsh (eds.) 413–444.
Wilkinson, Melanie 1991 Djamparrpuyngu: a Yolngu variety of Northern Australia. Ph.D. Dissertation, University of Sydney.
Wurm, Stephen 1996 Atlas of the world’s languages in danger of disappearing. Paris/Canberra: Unesco Publishing/Pacific Linguistics. forthcoming a. Alphabetical list of entries for threatened and extinct languages. forthcoming b. Australian Aboriginal languages which are endangered in some form, and additional extinct ones.

Chapter 16 Threatened Languages in the Western Pacific Area from Taiwan to, and Including, Papua New Guinea
Stephen A. Wurm
1. General introduction
The question of language endangerment is a very complicated issue. There are two different aspects to it, one sociolinguistic, the other purely linguistic. The sociolinguistic one refers to the declining use of a threatened language by shrinking numbers of its speakers, and deals with the reasons, and circumstances of such events. The linguistic one concerns changes in the manner in which a language is used, the reduction of the number of its different registers, as well as changes and simplifications in its structure, and lexical composition, and semantic changes in its lexicon with all this resulting from a linguistically-oriented endangerment of the traditional form of that language. There may be no or only little decline in the use by its speakers, of a language thus affected, and it may be little affected in its sociolinguistic role and functions, except for the reduction in the number of the sociolinguistically determined application of its registers. It is not necessarily threatened as far as its survival is concerned, but it is not identical with, or sometimes rather different from, the language that it was before these changes took place.
There is disagreeement among linguists as to whether or not such a language should be regarded as being in danger because of its deviating from its traditional form, and whether its endangerment could, or should, be graded according to the severity of it being affected, though in ways which differ from the sociolinguistic gradings of endangerment. Some linguists, and many of the speakers of such languages, regard languages thus affected as new forms of the traditional languages, which may function quite well sociolinguistically, and remain different from a dominant language which may have caused them to be thus affected through its pressure. A frequent phenomenon found in a language thus affected is a change in its semantic setup which moves it from its traditional one in the direction of that of the influencing dominant language. In the Pacific and Australia, there are a comparatively small number of known cases of languages

Threatened Languages in the Western Pacific Area 375
which have been affected in one or several of the ways mentioned above (Wurm 1986, 1992).
The sociolinguistic form of language endangerment manifests itself in a continuing reduction of the number of its speakers, usually from the bottom up, with the children speakers becoming fewer and fewer first, and the age of most of the youngest speakers steadily increasing. As a rule of thumb and a hallmark, the following categories are usually distinguished — Potentially endangered language (p): children are more and more inclined not to use and even not to learn the language; Endangered language (e): the youngest speakers are young adults; Seriously endangered language (s): the youngest speakers are middle-aged or beyond middle age; Moribund language (m): there are only a few aged speakers left. The symbols p, e, s, m will be added at the end of each of the language entries given here later to indicate where a given language is believed to be placed on the scale of sociolinguistic endangerment. This scale can mainly be applied when a language is becoming more and more threatened by pressure from a dominant language and culture, and by attitudes and actions of its speakers and carriers. However, there are situations in which the justifications for this scale do not apply, and the grades of endangerment have quite different underlying causes. For instance, an indigenous language which has a very small number of speakers and traditionally never had more (e. g. the members of a semi-nomadic tribe in a remote part of the Amazon forest, or in western non-peninsular Irian Jaya), and has a healthy number of children speakers, may have to be regarded as endangered or even seriously endangered, and the existence of its speakers as threatened or seriously threatened, if there are plans by members of the dominant population to imminently start extensive logging, mining, or oil-drilling etc. in the tribal area. This would result in the transplanting of the members of the tribe into an unfamiliar hostile environment or worse still, their random scattering or even extermination, with serious or even fatal results for their language. Similar situations can result from natural catastrophes such as volcanic eruptions, tsunamis such as the very powerful one which in November 1998 almost wiped out the speakers of four languages on the northwest coast of Papua New Guinea, though one of these languages had over 4,000 speakers of whom perhaps now only 100-200 are left who happened to be absent from the disaster area when the tsunami hit. Major floods, landslides, rampant epidemics, and local warfare, are other factors leading to the demise of quite healthy, but very small languages.
It may have to be pointed out that not infrequently, though by no means always, the linguistic endangerment tends to accompany the socio-

376 Stephen A. Wurm
linguistic endangerment, though the opposite is not so common. With seriously endangered and moribund languages, a number of the last speakers, or most of them, often tend to speak a simplified and structurally and lexically reduced form of the language, which frequently shows the influences from a dominant language which have been mentioned above. It is interesting to note that with sociolinguistically seriously endangered and moribund languages which had large numbers of speakers before, the simplification and reduction characteristics mentioned above seem to appear earlier and more generally, and with more of the speakers, than with languages which had few or very few speakers (50–200) before, when the language was still healthy. In many such cases, the last surviving fluent speakers still have a perfect or near-perfect command of the full form of their language, whereas with languages which originally had many speakers (1,000 or thousands) and which are only endangered or even only potentially endangered, many speakers begin to speak a form of the language which shows some of the linguistic shortcomings mentioned above.
In the following section on language endangerment in the Pacific area today, and in the listing of languages following it, ‘language endangerment’ and its grades as indicated refer only to their sociolinguistic endangerment. Observed cases of linguistic endangerment in the Pacific area are relatively few to date, and this paper has as its focus the problem of the disappearance of threatened languages for which the establishment of sociolinguistic endangerment is more relevant.
Turning to the social factors threatening languages sociolinguistically, the following may be mentioned in addition to the pressure from large and dominant languages and attitudes and actions by their speakers already mentioned above: economic and social sidelining, isolation and oppression, poverty, and other adverse circumstances resulting in a reduction and loss of ethnic pride and the feeling of ethnic identity of the speakers.
2. Language endangerment in the Pacific area today
Until quite recently, the Pacific area was, with few exceptions, a part of the world least affected by language endangerment, in spite of the prevalence and multiplicity of small to very small languages in a number of its regions. Apart from Australia which had one of the very worst records of language endangerment and extinction in the world until a few decades ago, the only areas with a bad record were those with a significant and

Threatened Languages in the Western Pacific Area 377
dominant metropolitan population from outside the Pacific area, i. e. New Caledonia and to a much lesser extent French Polynesia (French), Hawaii (American), and Taiwan (Chinese). Since the establishment of the State of Indonesia, its record has been getting progressively worse to the present day, though the results of this are still a long way from being as catastrophic as in Australia (or the USA, Canada and elsewhere), because of the shallowness of the time elapsed since Indonesia has come into being, and the absence of policies aimed directly at the destruction of local languages (which were formerly typical of other countries such as Australia, the USA, Canada, the former USSR, Taiwan, etc.), though indirect policies favouring the Indonesian language alone did contribute much to endangering local languages, as did the frequent dislocation of whole communities through transmigration and forced removal (such as that of a considerable part of the population of Timor where several languages were affected).
The reasons for the relatively low incidence of language endangerment in the Pacific area are essentially threefold: the first is the low to very low presence of a dominant outside population in most areas, with the exception of those mentioned above, with Indonesia a special case. So is New Zealand in a positive sense: its local language, Maori, was near extinction at the beginning of the 20th century, but was rescued by positive official attitudes long before such positive approaches became the norm in countries like Australia, Canada, and Taiwan, and in present-day Russia. The second reason is the widespread presence of stable bi- and multilingualism in many parts of the Pacific area. This allows speakers of a local language to acquire a good knowledge of a major large language which may correspond to a dominant language elsewhere (e. g. Tagalog in the Philippines, Tok Pisin in Papua New Guinea, etc.), without abandoning, or being obliged to abandon, their own language as is so common in other parts of the world. In many areas of the Pacific, speakers of local languages simply add their knowledge of a major large language to their already existing repertoire of two or often several languages. The third reason is that in Pacific areas in which there are very many different local languages such as Papua New Guinea, Irian Jaya, parts of Island Melanesia, the Philippines etc., the speakers of the local languages took great pride in them and regarded them as important symbols of their ethnic identity, which was a powerful reason for them to maintain them and not to abandon them in favour of another, larger, and more important and useful, language. Unfortunately, this favourable attitude of the speakers towards their own languages has been gradually waning in recent years in Papua New Guinea

378 Stephen A. Wurm
and elsewhere because of the increasing mobility of the population. This caused many speakers to lose touch with their own speech community, and resulted in very frequent intermarriages between speakers of different languages with Tok Pisin becoming more and more frequently the family language where the parents are from different linguistic backgrounds. The interest of children in their own small local languages has been reduced by elementary education being in only a small number of the 800 or so languages of Papua New Guinea, the same being the case with broadcasting. Many children now tend to prefer the major lingua franca and national language Tok Pisin to their own. Similar situations are observable in other parts of the Pacific area in which there is a multiplicity of small to very small languages.
The number of different languages is very large in the Pacific area under discussion here. In the entire insular Pacific area there are about 960 Austronesian languages (some of them in a few mainland Southeast Asian Pacific rim areas), about 750 Papuan languages, and a very small number of other languages such as Japanese and Ainu in Japan, and two varieties of Chinese on Taiwan — a total of over 1,700 languages. Of these, 193 languages are in some way in danger in the Pacific regions covered in this paper, with about 40 more in areas further east in the Pacific, a total of about 233 threatened languages. (In addition, there are 20 threatened pidgin and creole languages in the area covered in this paper, and 4 more in areas further east, a total of 24.) The breakdown of the figure of 233 for various regions is as follows:
Taiwan 7; Philippines 14; Malaysia: Sarawak 3, Sabah 1; Indonesia: Sumatra 2, (Java 2 creoles), Kalimantan 1, Sulawesi 36, Maluku 22 (+ 1 creole), Nusa Tenggara (Timor-Flores) 8 (+ 1 creole); Irian Jaya 64 (+ 1 pidgin); Papua New Guinea 65 (+ 15 pidgins and creoles). Of the 41 languages further east about 30 are in the Solomon Islands (including the Santa Cruz Archipelago) and Vanuatu; the remaining 11 are in New Caledonia, Micronesia and Polynesia (+ 1 pidgin and 1 creole in Micronesia, and 1 of each in Polynesia).

Threatened Languages in the Western Pacific Area 379
3. List of threatened languages
3.1. Western Pacific area, from Taiwan to, and including, Papua New Guinea
In this list, a bird’s-eye view is given of significant factors relating to the endangerment status of every language with broad approximations. After the language name, the approximate number of extant speakers is given. This is followed by A, under which four factors are listed. Points a)–d) are indicated in numbers 1–4 as follows:
Set A
a) What percentage of the ethnic group does the number of extant speakers approximately represent:
1. under 10% 2. around 20–30% 3. around 40–60% 4. 70–100%
b) To how many children is the language still being passed on:
1. none 2. a few 3. 30–50% 4. 60%– close to all
c) How many of the roles and functions of the language have been passed on to another language:
1. all, except perhaps the family circle 2. most of the important ones 3. some important ones have been kept 4. few or none
d) What is the attitude of the speakers towards their own language:
1. negative 2. neutral 3. mildly supportive 4. strongly supportive
Two hyphenated numbers indicate: a difference in the language areas (e. g. distinct villages); or a situation falls between two neighbouring numbers (e. g. b) 2–3 about 15%); or inadequate or unreliable information available.

380 Stephen A. Wurm
The A set is followed by a B set. Under B, the following information is given. Points a) to c) are indicated by number 1 – 4.
Set B
a) Is the language closely or distantly related to an already known, studied, or large not threatened language:
1. closely related 2. distantly related 3. very distantly related if at all, or a special case, i. e. a linguistically, sociolin-
guistically or otherwise important language for study, even if it is closely or distantly related to a known language 4. language isolate
b) How much information is available on the language:
1. well documented 2. good sketch 3. a little known 4. (almost) unknown
c) What are the circumstances under which fieldwork in the language area itself could be carried out:
1. bad to very bad and impossible 2. some risks 3. reasonably safe 4. good
The B set is followed by a single letter code indicating the degree of endangerment of the language referring to the categories explained above, i. e.
Status – Degree of endangerment
p potentially endangered e endangered s seriously endangered m moribund

Threatened Languages in the Western Pacific Area 381

Table 1. List of threatened languages

Language

Speakers

Set A

Set B

Status

abcdabc

Taiwan

Babuza

3–4

1112124 m

Kanakanabu Kavalan

6–8

1112124 m

5–6

1112124 m

Nataoran Saaroa

5

1112134 m

5–6

1112124 m

Saisiyat

3,200

3 2–3 2 3 1 1–2 4 e

Thao

5–6

1111144 m

Philippines

Adasen

4,000

4 3–4 2 2–3 1 2 4 p

Agta, Alabat Island 30

2–3 2 1 2 1 2 4 s

Agta, Camarines

150

3213124 e

Norte

Agta, Central

500

3213114 e

Cagayan

Agta, Isarog Agta, Mt. Iraya Alta, Northern Arta Ata Atta Faire Ayta Sorsogon Ayta, Bataan Batak

5–6

1111134 m

150

2–3 2 1 1 1 3 4 e

200

3212234 e

15

1 1–2 1 1–2 2 3 4 m

2 – 5?

1 1 1 1 1 3 4 m(d?)

300

3212124 e

15–20 1 1 1 1 2 3 4 m

500

3323134 e

200

3323214 e

Ratagnon

2–3

1111234 m

Borneo (Sarawak, Sabah, Kalimantan)

Abai Sungai

400

3 3 1 2 1 3–2 4 e

Kanowit

100

2–3 1–2 1 1–2 1 3 4 e

Lengilu

3–4

1 1 1 2 1 2 3–3 m

Punan Batu

30

3 2–3 2 2 1 3 4 s

Sian

50

3 2–3 2 2 1 3 4 e

Indonesia: Sumatra

Enggano

700

3 2–3 1 2 2 1 4 e

Lom

2–10? 1 1 1 2 2 4? 4 s, m?

382 Stephen A. Wurm

Table 1. cont.

Language

Speakers

Set A

abcd

Indonesia: Sulawesi

Ampibabo Lauje

6,000

Andio

1,700

Bahonsuai

180

Baleasang

3,000

Baras

200

Besoa

3,000

Boano

2,000

Budong-Budong

50

Busoa

500

Dakka

1,200

Dampal

1–2

Dampelas

2,000

Dondo

13,000

Kalao

400

Kodeoha

1,000?

Koroni

400

Laiyolo

600

Lauje

32,000

Lemolang

1,800

Lolak

50

Napu

4,000

Padoe

5,000

Panasuan

800

Pendau

3,200

Rahambuu

4,000

Saluan, Kahumamahon 1,500

Taje

1–2

Tajio

12,000

Taloki

500

Talondo’

400

Tialo

30,000

Tomadino

500

3–4 2–3 3 2 3323 3212 4333 3 2 1 1–2 3323 4 3 3–4 3 2212 4323 3 2–3 2 2 1111 2 2 1 1–2 4 3 3–4 3 3 3–4 1–2 2 3323 3323 3222 4 3 3–4 3 3322 1112 3322 3332 3332 3332 3332 3 2–3 2 2 1112
3–4 3 3 2 3322 3 2–3 1 2 3 2–3 2–3 2 3222

Set B abc
133 123 133 223 133 123 123 133 133 133 123 123 123 133 133 133 223 1 3–2 3 223 123 123 1 3–2 3 2 3–2 3 213 133 133 123 1 3–2 3 133 133 113 133

Status
e p e e e p p s p, e p m e p p p p e p p s p p p p p p m p p p p p

Threatened Languages in the Western Pacific Area 383

Table 1. cont.

Language

Speakers

Set A

Set B

Status

abcdabc

Indonesia: Sulawesi (cont.)

Tombelala Totoli Waru Wotu

1,000 15,000 300 4,500

3212123 p 3 2–3 2–3 2–3 1 2–3 3 p, e 3212133 p 3322133 p

Indonesia: Maluku

Alune Amahai Aputai Benggoi East Makian (Taba) Emplawas Gebe Kadai Kaibobo Kao Lisela Lola Loun Nila Oirata Paulohi Salas Saparua Serili Te’un Ujir

12,000 3–4 2–3 2 1–2 2 2 3 e

30

1112133 m

120

3212133 e

320

3312133 p

10,000? 2–3 1–2 2 2 1–2 2 2–3 e, s

220

3312133 p

2,000? 3 3 1 2 1? 3 3 p

200

2–3 2–3 1 1–2 1 3 3 e

250

2–3 2–3 1 1–2 1–2 2 3 e

200?

3 2–3 1 1–2 1 3 3 e

9,000 3–4 2–3 2 2 2 3 3 e

800

3–4 2–3 1 2 1 3–2 3 e

2–3

1112133 e

1,500 3–4 2–3 1 2 1 3–2 3 e

600

3 2 1 1–2 2 2 3 e

5–6

1 1 1 1–2 1 3 3 m

30

2–3 1 1 1–2 2 3 3 s

8,000 3–4 2–3 1 1–2 2 3–2 3 e

300

3–4 2–3 1 2 1 3 3 p

900

3 2–3 1 1–2 2 3 3 e

900

3–4 2–3 1 2 1 3–2 3 e

Indonesia: Timor-Flores area, Nusa Tenggara

Adabe Habu Helong Kairui-Midiki Maku’a

800 800 8,500 1,500 20?

4 2–3 2 2 2 3 2–3 p 3–4 2–3 1 2 1 3–2 2–3 p 3–4 2–3 2 2 1 3–2 2–3 p 3–4 2–3 1 3–2 1 2–3 2–3 p
1 1 1 1–2 2 3–2 2–3 m

384 Stephen A. Wurm

Table 1. cont.

Language

Speakers

Set A

Set B

Status

abcdabc

Indonesia: Timor-Flores area, Nusa Tenggara (cont.)

Naueti Palu’e Waima’a

700 2,000 2,000

3 2–3 2 2 2 3 2–3 p 3 2–3 1 1–2 1 3 2–3 e 3 2–3 1 2 1 3–2 2–3 p

Indonesia: Irian Jaya

Anus Arguni As Auye Awera Awyi Bedoanas Biak Bonerif Burate Dabra Damal Demisa Doutai Dubu Duriankere Erokwanas Fayu Foya Iresim Isirawa Itik Kaiy Kapori Karas Kayupulau Keder Kembra

70

3 2 1 2 1 3 2–3 e

150

3 2 1 2 1 3 2–3 p

230

3–4 2–3 1 2 1–2 3 2–3 p

300

3 2 1 2 1 3 2–3 p

70

3 1–2 1 2 2 3 2–3 e

350

3–4 2–3 1 2 2 3 2–3 p

180

3 1–2 1 1–2 1 3 2–3 p, e

30,000 3–4 2–3 2 1–2 1 1 2 p

20?

2 2 1 1–2 1 3 2–3 s, m

100? 3–4 2–3 1 2 2 3 2–3 e

90?

3–4 2–3 1 2 2 3 2–3 e

4,000 3–4 2–3 1 2 1 3–2 2–3 p

400–500 3–4 2–3 1–2 2 2 3 2–3 p

70–100 3 2 1 1–2 1–2 3 2–3 e

110

3–4 2–3 1 2 2 3 2–3 p

30?

3 1 1 1–2 2 2 2–3 s

200

3–4 2–3 1 2 1–2 3 2–3 s

350

3–4 2–3 2 2 1–2 3 2–3 p

20?

1–2 1 1 1–2 1 3 2–3 p

70?

3–4 2 1 1–2 1 3–2 2–3 e

1,800 3–4 2–3 1–2 2 1 3–4 2–3 p

80

3–4 2–3 1 2 1 3 2–3 p

220

3–4 2–3 1 2 1–2 3 2–3 p

30–40? 3 2 1 1–2 2–3 3–4 2–3 e, s

100

3 2 1 1–2 1 3 2–3 e

50

1 1 1 1–2 1 3 2–3 s

180

2–3 2 1 1–2 2 3 2–3 e

20?

2–3 2 1 2 4 4 2–3 m

Threatened Languages in the Western Pacific Area 385

Table 1. cont.

Language

Speakers

Set A

Set B

Status

abcdabc

Indonesia: Irian Jaya (cont.)

Kofei Koneraw Kowiai Kwansu Kwerisa Legenyem Liki Mander Mansim Maremgi Massep Momuna Mor2 Moraori Narau Obokuitai Onin Ormu Pauwi Saponi Sauri Sause Senggi Sobei Taikat Tarpia Tause Taworta Tobati Tofamna Uhunduni Usku

100? 3–4 2? 1 1–2 1 3 2–3 e

200

3–4 2–3 1 2 1 3 2–3 p

500

3–4 2–3 1–2 2 1 3–2 2–3 p

300

3–4 2–3 1 2 1 3 2–3 p

15–50? 2 1 1 1–2 1 3 2–3 m

250

3–4 2–3 1 2 1 3 2–3 p

5–6

1 1 1 1–2 1 3 2–3 m

20

1–2 1 1 1 1 3 2–3 s

5

1 1 1 1 2 1 2–3 m

40

2–3 2 1 2 1 3 2–3 e

25

1–2 1–2 1 1–2 1 3 2–3 s

2,000 3–4 2 1–2 2 1 1–2 2–3 p

20–30 1–2 1–2 1 1–2 2 3 2–3 s

50

3–4 2 1 2 1–2 2 2–3 e

80–90 3–4 2 1 2 1 3 3 e

120

3–4 2–3 1 2 2 1–2 2–3 p

500

3–4 2–3 1 2 1 2–3 2–3 p

500

3–4 2–3 1 2 1 3 2–3 p

80?

3–4 2–3 1 2 4 1 2–3 p?

4–5

1 1 1 1–2 1 3 2–3 m

280

3–4 2–3 1 2 2 3 2–3 p

250

3–4 2 1 2 2 3 2–3 e

100

3–4 2–3 1 2 2 3 2–3 e

1,000 3–4 2 1 2 1 3 2–3 e

500

3–4 2–3 1 2 1 3 2–3 p

300

3 2 1 2 1 3 2–3 e

300

3–4 2–3 1 2 1–2 3 2–3 p

140

3–4 2–3 1 2 1–2 3 2–3 p

100

1 1 1 1–2 1 3–2 2–3 s

90

3–4 2–3 1 2 2–3 3–4 2–3 p

14,000 3–4 2–3 1–2 2 2 2 2–3 p

20?

1–2 1–2 1 1–2 2–3 3–4 2–3 s

386 Stephen A. Wurm

Table 1. cont.

Language

Speakers

Set A

Set B

Status

abcdabc

Indonesia: Irian Jaya (cont.)

Wano Wari Woria Yoki

3000 150? 5 – 6? 20?

3–4 2–3 1–2 2 2 3–4 2–3 p 3–4 2 1 2 2 3 2–3 e
1 1 1 1–2 1–2 3 2–3 m 2–3 1–2 1 1–2 4 4–3 2–3 s

Papua New Guinea

Abaga Ak Amto Anuki Arapesh, Bumbita Arawum Ari Atemble Bagupi Bepour Bilakura Bothar Bulgebi Dengalu Doga Dorro Dumun Faita Gapun Garuwahi Gorovu Kaki Ae Kamasa Kaningara Kawacha Koiari, Grass Koitabu

4–5 75 200 500 2,200 60 50 60 50 50 30 50 50 110 200 80 35 50 80 200 15 260 6–8 300 12 1,700 2,700

1 1 1 1–2 2 3 1 m 3–4 3 1 2 1–2 2 1 e 3–4 2–3 1 1–2 3 3 4 e 3–4 2 1 2 2 3 4 e
3 2 1 1–2 2 2 4 p 3 2 1 1–2 2 3 4 e 3 2–3 1 1–2 1 3 4 e 3–4 2 1 1–2 1 3 4 e 3–4 2 1 1–2 2 3 4 e 3–4 2 1 1–2 2 3 4 e 3 2 1 1–2 2 3 4 s 3–4 2 1 1–2 1 3 4 e 3–4 2 1 1–2 2 3 4 e 3 2 1 1–2 1 3 4 s 4212234 e 3–4 2 1 1–2 1 3 4 e 3 1–2 1 1–2 2 3 4 s 3–4 2 1 1–2 2 3 4 e 3 1 1 1–2 3–4 2–1 3–4 (e), s 3–4 2–3 1 2 1 2 4 p 2 1 1 1–2 1 2 4 m 3–4 2–3 1 2 3 1 4 p 1–2 1 1 1–2 1 2 4 m 3–4 2–3 1 2 1 3 4 p 1–2 1 1 1–2 1 2 4 m 3–4 2 2 2 1–2 1 4 p 3–4 2 2 2 1–2 1 4 p

Threatened Languages in the Western Pacific Area 387

Table 1. cont.

Language

Speakers

Set A

abc

Papua New Guinea (cont.)

Kowaki Kuot Likum Magori Mari Mawak Mindiri Moere Mosimo Murik Musan Musom Mussau-Emira Mwatebu Nauna Onjab Papapana Papi Piu Puari Samosa Sera Sissano Som Suarmin Sumariup Susuami Taap Taulil Tenis Turaka Uya

25

321

900

3–4 2 1

80

321

100

3 2–3 1

80

3–4 2 1

25

3 1–2 1

80

3–4 2 1

50

3–4 2 1

50

3–4 2 1

1,000 3–4 2 2

70

3–4 2 1

200

3–4 1–2 1

3,500

322

120

3 2–3 1

100

321

150

3–4 2 1

120

3–4 2 1

70

3–4 2 1

100

3–4 2 1

30–40? 1 1 1

90

3–4 2 1

40?

121

300?

121

80

3–4 2 1

140

3–4 2 1

80

3–4 2 1

10

111

6–8

111

800

3–4 2 1

30

3 1–2 1

25

2–3 1–2 1

90

3–4 2 1

Set B dabc
2234 2 2–3 1 4 1–2 1 3 4 1–2 2 1 4 2 1 3–2 4 1–2 2 3 4 1–2 1 3 4 1–2 1 3 4 1–2 2 3 4 2 1–2 2 4 1–2 3 3 4 1–2 1 1 4 1–2 3 3 4 2134 1–2 1 3 4 1–2 2 3 4 2134 2 2–3 3 4 1–2 1 3 4 1–2 1 3 4 1–2 2 3 4 1134 1124 1–2 1 3 4 1–2 2–3 3 4 1–2 1 3 4 1 2 3–2 4 1–2 1 3 4 2224 1–2 1 3 4 2234 2134

Status
s p e p, e e s e e e p e e e p, e p, e e p, e e e s e s s e e e m m p s s e

388 Stephen A. Wurm

Table 1. cont.

Language

Speakers

Set A

abc

Papua New Guinea (cont.)

Vehes Wab Warapu Yapunda Yarawi Yimas

70 120 300? 60 1 300

321 3–4 2–3 1
221 3–4 2 1
111 3–4 2 2

Set B dabc
1–2 1 3 4 2134
1–2 2 3 4 2134 1134 2 1–2 1 4

Status
e p, e e, s e m p

Threatened Languages in the Western Pacific Area 389

CHINA
Xun Jiang

MYANMAR

L A
O

V

Ha Nôi

Yangôn

Viangchan

THAILAND

S Mekong

Bangkok

CAMBODIA Phnum Pénh

TNAM E I

Hainan

Hongkong

T’aipei

1

6

3 4

25 TAIWAN

Luzon

9

PHILIPPINES

Manila

7 8

12

11

10

P

a

c

i

f

i

c

O

c

e

a

n

Mindanao

Kuala Lumpur

M A L A Y S I A BRUNEI
13

14
Singapore

Sumatra

15

Borneo

I

Jakarta

N

D

O

Jawa

17

18

19

16 Sulawesi

21

2220 23

33 35

N

E

S

I

A

24

Timor

36 39

40

31 28 2354322637

30 27

Irian

38 29

Jaya

52,53,58

51

49,50

45

PAPUA NEW
GUINEA

42 46 44 41 55
5443

59

47,48

Port Moresby

56 57

Map 24. Western Pacific Area from Taiwan to, and Including, Papua New Guinea

390 Stephen A. Wurm

1 Babuza 2 Kanakanabu 3 Kavalan 4 Nataoran 5 Saaroa 6 Thao 7 Agta, Alabat Is 8 Agta, Isarog 9 Arta 10 Ata 11 Ayta Sorsogon 12 Ratagnon 13 Lengilu 14 Punan Batu 15 Lom 16 Budong-Budong 17 Dampal 18 Lolak 19 Taje 20 Amahai

21 East Makian (Taba) 22 Paulohi 23 Salas 24 Maku’a 25 Bonerif 26 Duriankere 27 Kapori 28 Kayupulau 29 Kembra 30 Kwerisa 31 Liki 32 Mander 33 Mansim 34 Massep 35 Mor2 36 Saponi 37 Tobati 38 Usku 39 Woria 40 Yoki

41 Abaga 42 Bilakura 43 Dengalu 44 Dumun 45 Gapun 46 Gorovu 47 Kamasa 48 Kawacha 49 Kowaki 50 Mawak 51 Puari 52 Sera 53 Sissano 54 Susuami 55 Taap 56 Tenis 57 Turaka 58 Warapu 59 Yarawi

References
Grimes, Barbara E. (ed.) 1996 Ethnologue, languages of the world. 13th edition. Dallas, Texas: Summer Institute of Linguistics, Inc.
Nekitel, Otto 1998 Voices of yesterday, today and tomorrow. Language, culture and identity. New Delhi: UBS Publishers’ Distributors Ltd.
Wurm, Stephen A. and Shirô Hattori (eds.) 1981–83 Language atlas of the Pacific area. Canberra: Australian Academy of the Humanities, in collaboration with the Japan Academy.
Wurm, Stephen A. 1986 Grammatical decay in Papuan languages. Pacific linguistics (Series A) 70: 207–211. 1992 Change of language structure and typology in a Pacific language as a result of culture change. In Dutton, T. (ed.), Culture change, language change, case studies from Melanesia. Pacific linguistics (Series C) 120: 141 – 157.

Chapter 17 The Languages of the Pacific Region: the Austronesian Languages of Oceania
Darrell Tryon
1. Introduction
The linguistic focus of this chapter is the vast Oceanic subgroup of the Austronesian language family, see Map 25.
In geographical terms, the area covered extends from just west of the Irian Jaya border in Indonesia to the far reaches of the eastern Pacific, Easter Island and Hawaii.
In terms, of languages, then, the chapter focuses on the six Austronesian languages spoken in Irian Jaya which are members of the Oceanic subgroup1 together with all of the Austronesian languages of Papua New Guinea, the Solomon Islands, Vanuatu, New Caledonia, Fiji, Polynesia and Micronesia, a total of around 500 languages.
1.1. Methodology
This paper addresses a number of factors which make the South Pacific a unique area. These include:
– Why such a multiplicity of languages? – Why such linguistic diversity? – Factors contributing to language endangerment. – Current measures being taken to protect/preserve language and ma-
terials
The final section of the chapter contains a listing of all of the languages which are members of the Oceanic subgroup of Austronesian with fewer than 500 speakers, together with locations, approximate numbers of speakers, and an evaluation of degree of endangerment.

392 Darrell Tryon
1.2. Why such a multiplicity of languages?
In the Pacific there is a distinction to be drawn between Melanesia (Papua New Guinea, Solomon Islands, Vanuatu, New Caledonia and Fiji) and the island states which make up Polynesia and Micronesia.
In terms of language classification, there are two distinct language families represented in the South Pacific region, the widespread Austronesian or Malayo-Polynesian family, (Tryon 1995 ed.) and the group of languages known as the Papuan family (located right across the New Guinea cordillera and in parts of New Britain, New Ireland and Bougainville in eastern Papua New Guinea and on parts of the Indonesian islands of Alor, Pantar and Timor). The Papuan languages have not all been proven to be genetically related, although it appears likely that they will in due course. What has been demonstrated is that 500 of the 750 Papuan languages are members of what has been called the Trans-New Guinea Phylum (Pawley 1998, Ross 2000).
In this chapter, discussion is limited to those languages which are members of the Oceanic subgroup of the Austronesian family, some 500 languages, see the tree diagram below. The Papuan languages are treated by Wurm (this volume).
In Melanesia, characterised by its egalitarian social structures, there is a great multiplicity of languages, approximately 1,0002, spoken by small communities, usually without hereditary chiefly structures. These communities or clusters of communities (usually corresponding to a single language or dialect) are headed by a big-man or entrepreneur who through prestations (usually the sacrifice of pigs and the distribution of food crops) has risen to the top of his micro-society through the indebtedness of a good number of his fellow community members to him. For the guiding principle of Melanesian societies is that each gift received by a beneficiary incurs a corresponding obligation or debt towards the donor. Those obligated fall under the power of the donor or big-man, for until a debt is repaid, the beneficiary remains obligated to his benefactor, who may request goods or services in the interim. Indeed reciprocal giftgiving is the sole means of cementing relationships in most Melanesian societies. These Melanesian micro-societies average only a few hundred (and occasionally a few thousand) souls, normally only a few villages. Each society is fiercely proud of its own language/dialect, paraded like a badge or emblem.

Taiwan

The Languages of the Pacific Region 393

AUSTRONESIAN

Malayo-Polynesian

Western Malayo-Polynesian
[Philippines] [Indonesia] [Malaysia] [Singapore]

Central-Eastern Malayo-Polynesian

Central Malayo-Polynesian [Eastern Indonesia]

Eastern Malayo-Polynesian

South Halmahera West New Guinea

Oceanic

OCEANIC

Admiralties [Manus]

Western Oceanic [New Guinea] [Western Solomons]

Central-Eastern Oceanic
[South East Solomons] [Vanuatu]
[New Caledonia] [Fiji]
[Polynesia] [Micronesia]

Figure 1. Tree diagram Oceanic subgroup of the Austronesian family

Apart from these factors, the topography of Island Melanesia makes regular communication between distant communities difficult, for there are literally hundreds of islands involved, the larger ones being mountainous and difficult of access. Until colonial times, relations between communities were often hostile. Cumulatively, all of these factors have created an ideal environment for language separation and diversification in the Melanesian region.
In Polynesia and Micronesia, in striking contrast to Melanesia, there are large political units, pyramoidal societies headed by hereditary chiefs or even kings/queens. Tonga, for example, is ruled by King Taufa’ahau IV,

394 Darrell Tryon
while Samoa is divided into three chiefly groups led by paramount chiefs. The social organization of Polynesia and Micronesia has meant in fact that in this region there is normally a single language per state or island group, in stark contrast with Melanesia. As a consequence there are very few languages under threat there compared to the alarming situation in Melanesia.
1.3. Why such linguistic diversity?
Not only are there an astonishing number of languages spoken in the south-west Pacific, but these languages show a high degree of diversity among themselves. This factor adds to the urgency and importance of recording and adequately documenting representative languages in the Melanesian region.
The causes of the formidable linguistic diversity which characterises Melanesia have been discussed elsewhere (Lynch 1981, Pawley 1981). Essentially language diversity in Melanesia is attributable to two factors: first is the isolation factor, referred to above, and inter-tribal hostility and rivalry stemming from traditional Melanesian social organization. Another important factor is language contact between Austronesian and Papuan-speaking populations. For Papuan settlement in Melanesia is of great antiquity, up to 50,000 years in Papua New Guinea, while the Austronesian-speaking populations in Oceania are no more than 4,000 years old. (Spriggs 1997). In Papua New Guinea and the Solomon Islands this contact has been a major contributing factor to language diversity, both on the Austronesian and Papuan side of the equation.
The relevance of linguistic diversity here is simply that of obtaining a satisfactory record of the markedly different linguistic systems which have resulted from the interface between languages of these two unrelated and systemically different language families.
1.4. What are the causes of language endangerment in the Pacific?
In areas which are remote from urban centres there is little threat to the continuance of existing social and linguistic arrangements. The nearer these communities are located to urban centres, the greater the threat to language survival. Indeed, those languages in the area which is the focus of this survey which are classed as endangered, seriously endangered,

The Languages of the Pacific Region 395
moribund or already extinct are almost invariably located in or near urban areas. Since rapidly increasing urbanization is one of the major demographic transformations which currently marks the Asia-Pacific region, even languages with relatively large numbers of speakers are quite rapidly becoming endangered and impoverished under pressure from either local trade languages, pidgins and creoles, and metropolitan languages introduced by colonising powers in the nineteenth century. Even a language with over 100,000 speakers, such as Tahitian, spoken in French Polynesia, is seriously under threat as its younger speakers mix French and English elements in with it, as the modern technological and electronic age pervades all strata of Tahitian society.
Another factor, intimately connected to the urbanization phenomenon, is the movement of young students away from their home areas for purposes of education. Almost all students who undertake secondary schooling do so away from their home villages and/or islands, and those who advance further inevitably end up in capital or provincial cities. Since paid employment is found mainly in these areas, students rarely return to their home communities, but rather contribute to the urban sprawl which increasingly characterises the Asia-Pacific region.
Another factor which plays an important role in terms of language endangerment is government attitude to and use of language as a nationbuilding instrument, especially in Melanesia. In Vanuatu, for example, at independence in 1980, there was no single language used or understood by the whole population, some students in the former Anglo-French Condominium having been ‘educated’ in French and others in English. The nearest thing to a national language was Bislama, an English-based pidgin, commonly used among ni-Vanuatu of different language backgrounds (there are 113 distinct vernaculars spoken in Vanuatu for a population of under 200,000). Since independence Bislama has become the national language, and very much the dominant language in urban agglomerations.
In Melanesia nowadays there are many marriages between partners of different vernacular language backgrounds, predominantly but not exclusively in urban areas. Young people from different islands come together in these areas, basically for education, but increasingly in search of a paid job, as the Pacific is quite rapidly moving from subsistence to cash economy, even in rural areas. The children born of these unions almost invariably grow up with either an English-based pidgin or a variety of English or French as their mother tongue. The consequences for the transmission of the parental mother tongues are not difficult to foresee.

396 Darrell Tryon
While this phenomenon is most acute in Melanesia, it is not uncommon in Polynesia and Micronesia, where one would imagine that larger political units and a single local vernacular would constitute a bastion against invading metropolitan languages. It came as a surprise to me that mixed race Tahitians in their thirties and forties, for example, confessed with embarrassment that they could not express themselves in Tahitian, but only in French, in spite of having Tahitian mothers.
The major point to be made here is that a small number of speakers of a language does not per se constitute a major threat to the survival of many of the Austronesian (or indeed non-Austronesian or Papuan) languages of Oceania. Much more significant are the ravages wrought by galloping urbanization, the displacement of young students during the education process, and the exigencies of nation-building in states composed of micro-societies, each speaking a distinct, if related, language. Of course there are other factors which impinge on language endangerment, quite apart from the threats posed by increasing globalization and monoculturalism. In Melanesia, especially, evangelization is increasingly carried out in an English-based pidgin, rather than a local vernacular, especially since the beginning of the 1970s. This simply exacerbates the pressure on local vernaculars, particularly as their relevance is becoming limited to the village level, while population mobility is on the increase.
At the same time, while languages covered by this survey are potentially, although not necessarily, endangered by having only a small number of speakers, there is a corollary, namely that numbers of languages with relatively large numbers of speakers should also be classed as endangered. In this survey, for example, Takia, an Austronesian language of Papua New Guinea, with 16,000 speakers is a good case in point.
While Takia has a substantial number of speakers, Ross (personal communication) informs me that there are no longer any monolingual Takia speakers, but that all Takia speakers are bilingual in Tok Pisin, the major English-based lingua franca of Papua New Guinea, while many also speak English with varying degrees of competence. He reports that over the past two or three generations many Takia have moved from their island home (Karkar I.) to the mainland of Papua New Guinea seeking paid employment in provincial centres and towns. Even in cases where both parents speak Takia, it is common for the children to grow up speaking Tok Pisin and English. Typically, young Takia students have moved away from their home area for purposes of education, the great majority not returning home to live. When they marry, they often take partners from other areas, their children growing up speaking either Tok Pisin or English.

The Languages of the Pacific Region 397
Even for the stay-at-homes, Takia language use is under pressure as its domains of use are gradually reduced. Many Takia are literate, but when they write they usually write in Gedaged (the earlier lingua franca of the Lutheran Church), Tok Pisin or English. Interaction in other domains, for example at the hospital, at the wharf or on the plantation, takes place almost exclusively in Tok Pisin. This scenario is just a single example of what is the daily experience of many speakers of languages with nominally thousands of speakers in Melanesia today.
2. The language record: Fragility of materials and their preservation
It is widely believed that a considerable proportion of the languages of the Oceanic region will disappear over the next thirty to fifty years as the effects of globalization are felt, even in the Pacific islands. In most areas little is being done to arrest the progress of this threat, either by the governments or the people of the Pacific states, whose attention is focussed more on issues of governance and economic stability.
In some areas Pacific Islanders are, however, making considerable efforts to record and preserve their own languages for future generations. In Vanuatu, for example, some sixty community representatives, nearly all speaking different mother tongues, all Austronesian, have been undergoing linguistic and ethnographic training at the Vanuatu National Museum (formerly the Vanuatu Cultural Centre). This has taken the form of annual workshops, beginning in 1980, funded until recently by the Australian Government’s South Pacific Cultures Fund.3
The motivation for this activity was simply that many high-ranking bigmen and chiefs had expressed great concern at the Malfautmauri or Vanuatu National Council of Chiefs. The major concern was that much traditional knowledge was being lost with the death of a number of Vanuatu elder senior statesmen and that languages were becoming seriously endangered due to the inroads being made by Bislama, the Melanesian Pidgin used as a lingua franca throughout Vanuatu, as well as the languages of education, English and French. So it was that the Vanuatu Cultural Centre initiated a series of workshops in order to address the problem.
During the initial workshops, in the early 1980s, emphasis was placed on the recording of oral tradition, mainly folk-tales, for later transcription and publication for use in schools. The transcription phase involved orthography design for those languages which had no existing mission or-

398 Darrell Tryon
thography. Once the ‘fieldworkers’ (as they are known in Vanuatu) felt comfortable writing and reading transcriptions of field recordings, they quickly suggested that the compilation of dictionaries was indispensable for the preservation of their individual languages.
In order to create dictionary files, (in a pre-computer era) a semantic domains system was adopted, beginning, for example, with visual domains such as ‘the house’, ‘the ocean’, ‘the trees’. Each year a different domain was chosen and researched for the following workshop. Before many years we moved on to conceptual domains such as ‘the family’, ‘death’, ‘birth’, and ‘land’ among many others. This led to the idea of making each of these domains a chapter heading for an ethnography of the particular fieldworker’s society and culture, written by the fieldworker himself in his own language, the lexicon from which was to be extracted and added to existing dictionary files. In this way there is now a double output from each fieldworker’s research in his home community: a dictionary (or rather an annually updated dictionary file in the first instance), and a draft ethnography of that community.
As mentioned above, a well-known adage in the Pacific is that ‘knowledge is power’. What this in fact means is that only some knowledge is public and that much of it is secret. Many of the ‘fieldworkers’ expressed concern that often cyclones and tropical storms damaged or even destroyed the language materials that they had produced, which meant that their work had to begin again ab initio. This destruction applied not only to materials produced during the annual workshops, but also to notebooks and tape-recordings of traditional knowledge, genealogies, music and the like, much of which is secret knowledge not to be transmitted beyond the immediate family or clan. For in Vanuatu it is not uncommon for elderly people to write down or record such information to be passed on to their heirs after their death. However, there was always a fear that this practice was unsafe as the information might fall into the wrong hands. Even more common is for an elderly and infirm person to summon a younger relative when they feel that their hold on life is insecure, and attempt to pass on as much traditional, and usually secret, knowledge as possible in the time remaining to them. Often the elderly leave their run too late, with the result that much traditional information is lost with the passing of each generation.
In order to respond to this situation, a novel proposal was developed at the Vanuatu Cultural Centre, namely the construction of what has become known as a ‘Taboo Room’, which is a cyclone-proof air-conditioned room, rather like a bank vault, in the middle of the Vanuatu Cultural Centre. The Vanuatu fieldworkers and numerous other ni-Vanuatu who have

The Languages of the Pacific Region 399
learned about the Taboo Room (whose existence is now well-known nation-wide) come and deposit copies of their dictionary files and ethnographic field note-books and tape-recordings there, much as one makes a bank deposit. Only the depositor or his/her nominee may withdraw or consult the materials, managed by the Vanuatu Cultural Centre staff. The originals are usually kept at home in the village of the individual fieldworker. If they should be destroyed by cyclones, fire, rats or predatory children, they can easily be replaced and new copies made.
During the first ten years of the Vanuatu Cultural Centre Fieldworkers’ Program, 1980–1990, replacement of damaged ethnographic materials and dictionary files was still an onerous undertaking, as cyclones strike at least one or two islands during the cyclone season (December–April) every year. Post-1990 Vanuatu entered the computer age, so that now dictionary files are kept on hard disk or backed up on diskette, and a hard copy lodged in the Taboo Room archive along with the note-books and tape recordings.
In the various islands the fieldworkers have become unofficial cultural officers, overseeing the work of overseas researchers on behalf of the Vanuatu Cultural Centre, through whom all social science research is co-ordinated and authorised. In addition to lexicography and ethnography, many of the fieldworkers also receive training in archaeology and ethno-musicology, working in tandem with visiting overseas professionals. At the conclusion of the annual Vanuatu Cultural Centre workshops, the fieldworkers return to their villages and become teachers themselves, passing on the skills and knowledge which they have gained that particular year.
Since 1980, the fieldworkers’ network has grown from 10 to 66 men fieldworkers. In 1994, a women’s fieldworker network was established, which at the time of writing has grown to 33. The Vanuatu Cultural Centre Fieldworkers Network is unique in the Pacific. There are only two simple rules applied, no politics and no religion. The only topic tolerated is culture, the traditional culture or cultures of Vanuatu. The fieldworkers receive no salary. They are nearly all important traditional leaders or members of their families who are proud of their individual languages and cultures, their badge of identity, so much so that they are prepared to devote considerable time each month to fostering language and cultural enhancement and preservation in their home areas.
As noted above, there are over 100 different languages still spoken in Vanuatu today, with an average of roughly 1,500 speakers per language, often less. Because of the traditional social organization of Vanuatu society, there is considerable importance laid upon one’s identity and culture,

400 Darrell Tryon
not just through language, but also through traditional dress, music, dance and music, to say nothing of architecture. It is this pride in community identity which has motivated the Vanuatu language recording and preservation program. It is this attitude, too, which ensures that languages with only a hundred or so speakers, very much endangered by world standards, remain safe for the time being, and will probably remain so just so long as they remain sheltered from the forces of globalization.
3. The establishment of priorities for recording endangered languages
A final point, in the context of language endangerment concerns the establishment of priorities for the recording of such languages in the face of limited financial resources. If it is not possible to fund the systematic recording of endangered languages, it would perhaps be wisest to facilitate the recording of languages with no known close relatives, for the maintenance and recording of linguistic diversity is a prime linguistic concern.
For languages which satisfy this criterion, namely if one had to choose between two previously unrecorded language isolates, for example, would it be more advisable to record a language on the point of disappearance, very seriously endangered, spoken by very few speakers, and perhaps imperfectly recalled, or a language which is still fully functional, but potentially endangered, such as Takia (referred to above) for example? Such a choice would be invidious. However, it is a very real question. If the aim is to facilitate as complete a recording of an endangered language and culture as possible while there is still time, then in my opinion it would be more beneficial to science to support the language described in the second scenario. For experience in Oceania has shown that what is known as ‘salvage linguistics’ often recovers only incomplete systems, which, while invaluable in themselves, lack the roundedness which would be achieved by as complete a recording as possible of a fully functioning system.
What follows is a listing of the Austronesian languages of Oceania with fewer than 500 speakers, the languages which in principle appear the most endangered, with an assessment of their degree of endangerment. However, the caveats introduced in the discussion above must also be taken into account.4 The actual number of speakers may not be a reliable guide to language endangerment. For this reason, a number of the languages with fewer than 500 speakers, in a Pacific context, have been ranked here as either only potentially endangered or “unendangered”.

The Languages of the Pacific Region 401
In terms of criteria used, I have adopted those used by Stephen Wurm in his complementary presentation (Chapter 16, this volume), as follows:
In the tables, Set A provides the following information: a) Percentage of the ethnic group represented by remaining speakers:
1. under 10% 2. approx. 20–30% 3. approx. 40–60% 4. 70–100%
b) Percentage of children to whom the language is passed on:
1. none 2. a few 3. approx. 30–50% 4. 60–100%
c) Roles and functions of the language passed on to another language:
1. all, except perhaps the family circle 2. most of the key roles 3. some key roles retained 4. most key roles retained
d) Attitude of speakers towards their own language:
1. negative 2. neutral 3. mildly supportive 4. strongly supportive
Set B provides the following information:
a) Relationship to a language for which good data are available:
1. closely related 2. distantly related 3. very distantly related 4. language isolate
b) Information available on the language:
1. well documented 2. good sketch available 3. poorly known 4. (practically) unknown
c) Fieldwork conditions:
1. very poor, hazardous 2. some risks 3. reasonably safe 4. good

402 Darrell Tryon

These data are followed by a single-letter evaluative code, as follows:

Wurm notation (chapter 16, this volume) P potentially endangered E endangered S seriously endangered M moribund or extinct D extinct

Krauss notation (chapter 1, this volume) A unstable, eroded B definitely endangered C severely endangered D critically endangered E extinct

Assessments are based on data from the following sources:

CB TD E SH McE PL MR SIL DT T&H W&H

Beaumont 1972 Dutton 1971 Ethnologue 1992 Holzknecht 1989 McElhanon 1984 Lincoln 1977 Ross 1988 Grimes (ed.) 1992 Tryon 1995 Tryon and Hackman 1983 Wurm and Hattori 1981

Table 1. Table of Endangered Austronesian languages (Oceanic)

Language
Irian Jaya Bonggo , SIL 1975 PNG Apalik (W. New Britain) E 1992 Aribwatsa (Morobe) SH 1989 Bina (Central) W&H 1981 Bosilewa (Milne Bay) Census 1972 Budibud (Milne Bay) Census 1972 Doga (Milne Bay) SIL 1975 Duwet (Morob) SH 1989

Speakers Set A

435

3,3,2,2

300

4,3-4,3,4

1

1,1,4,3

2

1,4,2,1

350

3-4,3-4,3,3

170

3-4,4,3,3

200

4,2,2,2

398

4,3,3-4,3

Set B Status

2,4,2 E (B)

2,3,3 2,3,2 1,3,2 1,3,3 1,3,3 2,3,4 2,3,2

E (B) M (D) M (D) P (A–) P (A–) E (B) P (A–)

The Languages of the Pacific Region 403

Table 1. cont.

Language

Speakers Set A

PNG (cont.)

Garuwahi (Milne Bay) Census 1972 40

Gitua (Morobe) McE 1978

483

Gumawana (Milne Bay)

250

Census 1972

Hermit (Manus) PL 1977

20

Kaiep (E.Sepik) W&H 1981

150

Kandas (N Ire) CB 1972

480

Kilenge (New Britain). MR 1988 440

Kis (E Sepik) PL 1977

216

Koro(Manus) SIL 1983

400

Lenkau (Manus) SIL 1982

250

Likum (Manus) PL 1977

100

Loniu (Manus) PL 1977

460

Magori (Central) TD 1971

200

Malalamai (Madang) PL 1977

340

Malasanga (Morobe) SIL 1991

435

Matukar (Madang) 1981

219

W&H 1981

Mindiri (Madang) W&H 1981

95

Minigir (E New Britain) E 1992

300

Miu (W New Britain) SIL 1982

395

Mokoreng (Manus) W&H 1981

200

Mondropolon (Manus) W&H 1981 300

Musom (Morobe) SH 1989

140

Mwatebu (Milne Bay) Census 1972 170

Nafi (Morobe) SH 1989

160

Nauna (Manus) PL 1977

130

Nenaya (Morobe) McE 1978

315

Nuguria (North Solomons)

200

W&H 1981

Nukumanu (N Solomons) DT 1981 200

Numbami (Morobe) McE 1978

270

Okro (Manus) W&H 1981

200

4,3-4,3-4,4 4,3,3,4
4,3,3,4 ,3,3,3 4,3-4,3-4,3 4,4,3,3 3,2-3,1,1-2 4,4,3-4,3 4,4,3-4,3 3,3,3,1-2 4,4,3-4,1-2 3,2-3,1,1-2 3,2-3,1,1-2 4,4,3,3 4,4,3,3
3-4,2,1,1-2 3-4,4,4,3 3-4,4,4,3 3-4,4,4,3 3-4,4,4,4 3-4,1,1,1-2 3,2-3,1,2 3,3,3,2 3,2,1,1-2 3,3, 3-4, 3-4 4,4,4,4
4,4,4,4 3-4,3-4,3,3 3-4,4,4,4

Set B
1,1,2 1,1,2
1,2,1 2,3,2 2,2,2 1,2,2 2,1,4 1,2,2 1,2,2 1,3,4 1,3,4 2,1,4 2,1,3 2,2,2 1,3,2
1,3,4 2,3,3 2,3,2 1,2,2 1,2,2 1,1,4 1,3,4 2,3,2 1,3,4 2,3,3 1,2,3
1,2,3 1,1,3 1,2,4

Status
M(D) OK OK
M (D) P (A–) P (A–) P (A–) E (B) P (A–) P (A–) P (A–) P (A–) E (B) E (B) P (A–)
OK
E (B) OK OK OK OK E (B) P (A–) E (B) P (A–) OK OK
OK P (A–)
OK

404 Darrell Tryon

Table 1. cont.

Language

Speakers Set A

Set B Status

PNG (cont.)

Ouma (Central) W&H 1981

4

Papapana (N Solomons) PL 1977 150

Piu (Morobe) SIL 1970

130

Sengseng (W New Britain)

455

SIL 1992

Sepa (Madang) W&H 1981

270

Sera (Sandaun) W&H 1981

435

Takuu (North Solomons) DT 1981 250

Tench (New Ireland) CB 1972

50

Uruava (North Solomons) PL 1977 5

Vehes (Morobe) McE 1978

100

Wab (Madang) PL 1977

145

Wampur (Morobe) SIL 1990

360

Wataluma (Milne Bay) Census 1972 190

Watut North (Morobe) SH 1989 465

3-4,2,1,2 3-4,2,1,1-2 4,3-4,3-4,3

1,3,4 1,3,4 2,2,2

M (D) P (A–) E (B)
OK

3-4,3-4,3,3 1,2,1,1, 4,4,4,4
3,1-2,1,1-2
3-4,3,3,3 3-4,2-3,1,2 4,4,3-4,4 4,4,3-4,4
4,4,4,3

2,3,2 1,3,4 1,1,3 1,3,4
1,2,2 1,3,4 1,2,3 1,2,3 2,2,2

P (A–) S (C) OK S (C) M (D) OK S (C) OK OK OK

Solomon Islands

Asumboa (EOI) SIL 1990

60

3,2,3,3 3,2-3,2 E (B)

Buma (EOI) T&H 1983

60

3-4,2-3,3,3 3,2-3,2 E (B)

Faghani (Makira) T&H 1983

300

4,3-4,4,4 1,2-3,3 P (A–)

Kokota (Isabel) SIL 1990

200

3,3-4,3,3 2,2,2-3 E (B)

Laghu (Isabel) T&H 1983

5

3,2,4,3 2,3,2-3 S ©

Nembao (EOI) T&H 1983

280

3,3,3,3 3,2-3,2 E (C)

Sikaiana (Malaita) T&H 1983

485

4,4,4,4 1,2,2-3 OK

Tanema (EOI) T&H 1983

5

3-4,3,3,3 3,2-3,2 D ©

Tanimbili (EOI) T&H 1983

100

3-4,3,3,3 3,2-3,2 E (B)

Vano (EOI) T&H 1983

5

3,2,4,3 3,2-3,2 M (D)

Zazao (Isabel) T&H 1983

166

3,3,3,3 2,2-3,2-3 S (C)

Vanuatu Aore (Santo) DT 1995 Araki (Santo) DT 1995 Aulua (Malakula) DT 1995 Baki (Epi) DT 1995 Bierebo (Epi) DT 1995

1

M (D)

105

3,2,3,3

2,3,3 S (C)

300

4,4,4,4

2,3,3 OK

200

3-4,3,3-4,4 3,2,3 P (A–)

450

3-4,3,3-4,4 3,2,3 P (A–)

The Languages of the Pacific Region 405

Table 1. cont.
Language
Vanuatu (cont.) Bieria (Epi) DT 1995 Fortsenal (Santo) DT 1995 Hiw (Torres) DT 1995 Katbol (Malakula) DT 1995 Koro (Banks) DT 1995 Labo (Mal) DT 1995 Lakona (Banks) DT 1995 Lametin (Santo) DT 1995 Larevat (Mal) DT 1995 Lehali (Banks) DT 1995 Lehalurup (Banks) DT 1995 Letemboi (Mal) DT 1995 Lingarak (Mal) DT 1995 Litzlitz(Mal) DT 1995 Lorediakarkar (Santo) DT 1995 Maewo Cent (Maewo) DT 1995 Mafea (Santo) DT 1995 Maii (Epi) DT 1995 Malmariv (Santo) DT 1995 Malua Bay (Malakula) DT 1995 Maragus (Mal) DT 1995 Morouas (Santo) DT 1995 Mosina (Banks) DT 1995 Mpotovoro (Mal) DT 1995 Narango (Santo) DT 1995 Nasarian (Mal) DT 1995 Nati (Mal) DT 1995 Ninde (Mal) DT 1995 Nokuku (Santo) DT 1995 Piamatsina (Santo) DT 1995 Polonombauk (Santo) DT 1995 Repanbitip (Mal) DT 1995 Rerep (Mal) DT 1995

Speakers Set A

Set B Status

170

3-4,3,3-4,4 3,2,3 S (C)

150

4,4,4,4

3,3,2 S (C)

120

4,4,4,4

2,3,3 E (B)

450

4,4,4,4

2,3,3 OK

105

4,4,4,4

2,4,2 E (B)

350

4,3-4,4,4 4,3,2 E (B)

300

4,4,4,4

2,3,2 E (B)

150

4,4,4,4

1,3,2 P (A–)

150

4,4,4,4

2,3,2 P (A–)

150

4,4,4,4

2,4,3 E (B)

90

4,4,4,4

2,4,3 S (C)

305

4,4,3-4,3-4 2,2,2 S (C)

210

4,4,4,4

2,3,3 P (A–)

330

4,4,4,4

2,3,3 P (A–)

50

3-4,2,3,3 3,4,3 S (C)

350

4,4,4,4

1,3,3 P (A–)

50

3-4,3,3-4,3 1,2,3 E (B)

100

4,4,4,4

1,3,2 P (A–)

150

4,4,4,4

1,3,2 P (A–)

300

4,4,4,4

2,3,2 P (A–)

10

3-4,2-3,3,3 3,4,3 M (D)

150

4,4,4,4

2,3,2 P (A–)

400

4,4,4,4

2,3,3 P (A–)

180

4,4,4,4

2,3,3 P (A–)

160

4,4,4,4

2,4,3 P (A–)

20

2-3,2,3,3-4 2,3,2 S (C

10

2-3,2,2,3 2,3,3 S ©

250

4,4,4,4

1,2,3 P (A–)

160

3-4,4,4,4 1,2,3 P (A–)

150

4,4,4,4

3,3,3 P (A–)

225

2-3,2-3,4,4 3,3,3 P (A–)

90

4,4,4,4

3,3,3 E (B)

375

4,4,4,4

2,3,2 P (A–)

406 Darrell Tryon
Table 1. cont.
Language
Vanuatu (cont.) Roria (Santo) DT 1995 Seke (Pentecost) DT 1995 Shark Bay (Santo) DT 1995 Sowa (Pentecost) DT 1995 Tambotalo (Santo) DT 1995 Tangoa (Santo) DT 1995 Tasmate (Santo) DT 1995 Toga (Torres) DT 1995 Tutuba (Santo) DT 1995 Ura (Erromango) DT 1995 Valpei (Santo) DT 1995 Vinmavis (Mal) DT 1995 Vunapu (Santo) DT 1995 Wailapa (Santo) DT 1995 Wusi (Santo) DT 1995 New Caledonia Arha (Rivierre pc) Arho (Rivierre pc) Bwatoo (Rivierre pc) Haeake (Rivierre pc) Haveke (Rivierre pc) Hmwaveke (Rivierre pc) Mea (Rivierre pc) Neku (Rivierre pc) Nemi (Rivierre pc) Pije (Rivierre pc) Pwaamei (Rivierre pc) Pwapwâ (Rivierre pc) Vamale (Rivierre pc) Sîchë (Rivierre pc)

Speakers Set A

Set B Status

150

4,4,4,4

2,3,2 P (A–)

300

4,3-4,4,4 2,3,3 E (B)

225

3-4,3,3,3-4 2,3,3 E (B)

20

4,3-4,3-4,4 3,3,3 S ©

50

4,3-4,3-4,4 3,3,3 S ©

375

4,4,4,4

1,2,4 P (A–)

150

4,4,4,4

2,3,3 P (A–)

315

4,4,4,4

2,3,3 P (A–)

150

3-4,3-4,4,4 1,3,3 E (B)

10

M (D)

300

4,4,4,4

1,3,3 E (B)

210

4,4,4,4

2,3,3 P (A–)

375

4,4,4,4

1,3,3 P (A–)

100

4,4,4,4

2,3,3 P (A–)

170

4,4,4,4

1,2,3 E (B)

250

S (C)

10

M (D)

300

P (A–)

100

P (A–)

300

P (A–)

300

P (A–)

300

P (A–)

200

S (C)

325

OK

100

S (C)

325

P (A–)

130

P (A–)

150

E (B)

30

M (D)

2

3

1

PAPUA 4 NEW GUINEA
5

6 78

0o

13

14 16

15

17

15oS

18

19

20

24

5oS

22 23 21

9

SOLOMON

ISLANDS

18oS
25

10 11

VANUATU
168oE
10oS

The Languages of the Pacific Region 407

AUSTRALIA

145oE

150oE

1. Sera 2. Hermit 3. Tench 4. Wab 5. Aribwatsa 6. Ouma 7. Garuwahi (Gweda) 8. Bina

9. Uruava 10. Laghu 11. Zazao 12. Vano 13. Lehalurup 14. Fortsenal 15. Tambotalo 16. Lorediakarkar

155oE
17. Aore 18. Araki 19. Sowa 20. Maragus 21. Letemboi 22. Nasarian 23. Nati 24. Bieria

165oE
25. Ura 26. Pije 27. Arha 28. Arho 29. Neku 30. Sichë
© Cartography ANU 05-018

Map 25. Pacific Region: the Austronesian Languages of Oceania

12
165oE
NEW CALEDONIA
26
21oS
27 28 29 30
166oE

408 Darrell Tryon
Notes
1. Bonggo, Kayupulau, Ormu, Sobei, Tarpia and Yotafa (Tobati). 2. This number includes the 500 Papuan languages spoken in Papua New Guinea,
excluded from this chapter, but treated in the chapter by Wurm (this volume). 3. The SPCF was discontinued in 1997. Funding currently comes through the
AusAID small grants scheme. 4. For detailed comments on the Austronesian languages of Papua New Guinea,
I am indebted to my colleague Malcolm Ross (Australian National University). Comments on the remainder are based on my own field research.
References
Beaumont, Clive L. 1972 History of research in Austronesian languages: New Ireland. Pacific Linguistics, Series A, No. 35: 1–41.
Dutton, Tom E. 1971 Languages of southeast Papua: a preliminary report. Pacific Linguistics, Series A, No. 28: 1–46.
Grimes, Barbara F. (ed.) 1992 Ethnologue: Languages of the World. Dallas, Texas: SIL.
Holzknecht, Susanne 1989 The Markham languages of Papua New Guinea. Pacific Linguistics, Series C, No. 115.
Lincoln, Peter C. 1977 Listing Austronesian languages: Part 1 – Oceanic languages. University of Hawaii. Mimeo.
Lynch, J. D. 1981 Melanesian diversity and Polynesian homogeneity: the other side of the coin. Oceanic linguistics 20: 95–129.
McElhanon, Kenneth. A. 1984 A linguistic field guide to the Morobe province, Papua New Guinea. Pacific Linguistics, Series D, No. 57.
Pawley, Andrew 1995 Melanesian diversity and Polynesian homogeneity: a unified explanation for language. In Hollyman, Jim and Andrew Pawley (eds.) Studies in pacific languages and cultures in honour of Bruce Biggs. Auckland: Linguistic Society of New Zealand. 269–309. 1998 The trans New Guinea Phylum hypothesis: a reassessment, In Miedema, Jelle; Odé, Cecilia and Rien A. C. Dam (eds.) Perspectives on the Bird’s Head of Irian Jaya, Indonesia. Amsterdam & Atlanta: Rodopi. 655 – 690.

The Languages of the Pacific Region 409
Ross, Malcolm 1988 Proto Oceanic and the Austronesian languages of Western Melanesia. Pacific Linguistics, Series C, No. 98. 2000 Grouping Papuan Languages: one more attempt. Paper presented at the Australian Linguistics Society Conference, University of Melbourne, 7.–9. July 2000.
Spriggs, Matthew 1997 The Island Melanesians. Oxford: Blackwell
Tryon, Darrell T. and Brian D. Hackman 1983 The languages of the Solomon Islands: an internal classification. Pacific Linguistics, Series C, No. 72.
Tryon, Darrell T. 1981 Towards a classification of Solomon Islands languages. Papers from the Third International Conference on Austronesian Linguistics. Pacific Linguistics, Series C, No. 74: 97–108.
Tryon, Darrell T. (ed.) 1995 Comparative Austronesian dictionary. Berlin: Mouton de Gruyter. (4 vols).
Wurm, Stephen A. and Shiro Hattori 1981 Language atlas of the Pacific area. Canberra: The Australian Academy of the Humanities in collaboration with the Japan Academy.

Names Index

Abdulaziz, Mohamed 372 Adelaar, Willem F. H. xii, 9–10, 26, 33,
45, 48–52, 56 Adler, M. K. 208, 230 Agranat, Tatiana B. 258–259 Aikhenvald, Alexandra Y. 32, 42, 56–
58, 125, 136 Aikhenwald, Alexandra Yu 124 Albó, Xavier 15, 19, 26, 49, 56 Alekseyev, Mikhail E. 257, 259 Almasude, Amar 123, 128, 136 Almeida, António de 188, 202 Alpher, Barry 349–351, 354, 363, 368 Álvarez–Santullano Busch, María
Pilar 17, 26 Anderson, Stephen 163 Anoshkina, Janna G. 256, 259 Applegate, Joseph R. 124, 136 Arango Ochoa, Raúl 26 Arkeketa, Tony 116 Arnold, Werner 267, 274–275 Asher, R. E. 137–138, 207, 230–231,
279, 301 Athanasius, Mu’allim 130 Atiya, Aziz S. 137 Austin, Peter 345, 350, 369 Ayoub, Georgine 136–137 Ayres, Glenn 81
Bakker, Peter 213, 230–231 Banhakeia, Hassan 138 Barnard, Alan 202 Barret, Rusty 68, 83 Bartholomew, Doris 80, 83, 85 Bartholomew, Lastra 80 Batibo, Herman 166, 177–178, 188,
202–203 Baxter, Alan 301 Beaumont, Clive L. 402, 408 Beavon, Keith 163 Beck, Anke v Bender, Jorigine 118 Benedict, Paul K. 285, 301

Benedicto, Elena 74, 83 Benedicto, Helena 74, 83 Bennett, Jim 202 Berardo, Marcellino 111–112, 115, 117 Berger, Hermann 306, 340 Biesbrouck, Karen 178 Biscaye, Elizabeth 116 Bistolfi, Robert 137 Black, Paul 361, 369 Blacking, J. 202 Blair, Heather 89, 115 Blake, Barry J. 370–371 Bleek, Wilhelm Heinrich
Immanuel 183, 202 Blench, Roger M. xiii, 140, 142, 145,
149–151, 160–163, 166, 178 Boas 345 Bombi, R. 260 Boukouss, Ahmed 123, 136–137 Boven, Karin 51–53, 56 Boyd, Raymond 163 Bradley, David xiv, 278, 287, 301–302 Bradley, Maya xiv, 278, 287, 301–302 Brandl, Maria 352, 369 Brenzinger, Matthias v, ix–x, xiii, xvii,
123, 140, 160–163, 178–179, 184, 194, 202–203, 207, 230, 263 Brindle, Jonathan Allen 136 Bross 156 Brown, Keith 57 Brunot, Louis 131, 137 Brye, Ed 163, 171 Budruss, Georg 265, 274–275 Bulatova, Nadezhda Ya. 258–259
Camargo, Eliane 51–53, 56 Cameron, Deborah 108, 115 Campbell, Lyle 18, 70, 80, 82–83 Cantoni, Gina 136, 138 Capell, Arthur C. 349–350, 369 Carle, Rainer 371 Carlin, Eithne 56 Carlson, Robert 142

412 Names Index

Caron, Bernard 142, 157, 277 Casement, Roger 13, 26 Cassidy, Lin 203 Castellanos, Carles 138 Cataldi, Lee 351, 371 Caubet, Dominique 137–138 Ceccaldi, Pierrette 142, 161 Censabella, Marisa 11, 16, 26 Cerrón-Palomino, Rodolfo 14, 26 Chaker, Salem 137–138 Chatfield, Ruth 169 Chaves, Rojas 75, 83 Childs, Tucker 142 Chirinos Rivera, Andrés 14, 26 Clair, Robert N. St. 136, 138 Claudi, Ulrike 161 Clifton, John M. 240, 259 Clist, Bernard 165, 178 Clyne, Michael 369, 372 Collis, Dirmid R. F. 207, 230 Connell, Bruce xiii, 140, 142, 145, 157,
161, 163, 171, 178 Constenla Umaña, Adolfo 75–76, 83 Continiu, R. 276 Craig (Grinevald), Colette 74, 83–84,
117 Crawhall, Nigel xvii, 137, 202 Crevels, Emily 26, 33, 45, 48–52, 56 Cronk, Lee 194, 203 Crozier, David 142, 145, 151, 161 Cuarón, Garza 60–61 Cuellar, Herlan Ayreyu 49, 58
Dakin, Karen 80–81 Dam, Rien A. C. 408 Dandam 153 Datz, Margaret 81 Davids, Laurentius 186 Davidson, Jill D. 113, 116 Davis, Mary B. 116–118, 121 Davydova, G. A. 261–262 De Montes, María Luisa Rodríguez 27 De Oliveira de Cadornega, A. 188 De Rosas, Juan Manuel 12 Deckinga, G. 259 Dench, Alan 353, 369 Devitt, Jeannie 368

Dick, Galena Sells 109, 116 Díez Astete, Álvaro 56 Diffloth, Gerard 281, 301 Dimmendaal, Gerrit J. 184, 203 Dixon, Robert M. W. 32, 42, 56–58,
345–346, 355, 369–371 Dobson, Veronica 351, 370 Dodykhudoeva, Leila R. 256–257, 259 Dorian, Nancy C. 116, 208, 230 Douyon, Denis 142 Driem, George van xiv, 303, 306, 340 Drude, Sebastian 56 Dunn, Michael 258 Durieux, J. A. 161 Durieux-Boon, E. I. K. 161 Dutton, Tom E. 390, 402, 408 Dwyer, Arienne xvii
Edelman, Joy I. 237, 260–262, 337 Edmondson, Jerry 285, 301 Egbokhare, Francis O. 172, 178 Egesdal 116 Ehret, Chrisopher 191, 203 Eiseb, Eliphas 186, 203 El Kirat, Yamina 125, 128–129, 136–137 El Molghy, Abdelghani 138 Elders, Stefan 178 England, Nora 66–68, 81–82, 84, 117 England, Norman 66–68, 81 Escobar, Alberto 13, 27 Estermann, Carlos 186, 188, 203 Evans, Nicholas xiv, 342, 348, 352, 355,
360, 369 Exter, Mats 202
Feinen, Monika v Ferguson, Charles A. 372 Fishman, Joshua A. 372 Fitzcarraldo 12 Fleisch, Axel 136 Fonseca, Gustavo Solis 48, 58 Forte, Janette 51, 57 Franchetto, Bruna 30, 56–57 Frazer, Elizabeth 115 Fryer, Paul 230 Furbee, N. Louanna 113, 116 Fussman, Gerard 265, 275

Names Index 413

Gaddafi, Muammar 125 Gamain, Danielle 132, 136 Garay, Ana Fernández 16 García Rivera, Fernando Antonio 48,
57–58 Garza Cuarón, Beatriz 59, 80, 84 Gerhardt, Ludwig 160 Gibson, Gordon D. 203 Gildea, Spike 56 Giordan, Henri 137 Gnerre, Maurizio 50, 57 Gochal 153 Goddard, Cliff 87–88, 350–351, 369 Goddard, Ives 87–88, 116, 350–351 Godenzzi, Juan Carlos 15, 20, 27 Goens, Ryklof van 305, 340 Golla, Victor 29, 57, 116 Golovko, Evgeniy V. 256, 258–259 Gomez, Gail 56 González de Pérez, María Stella 27 González Ñañez, Omar 45, 57 Good, Ken 203 Gordon, Raymond G. 69, 84, 161, 200,
203 Graffi, G. 260 Gray, Andrew 12, 27 Green, Jenny 351, 370 Green, Tom 74, 351 Greenberg, Joseph 151, 180–181, 203 Grenand, Françoise 53, 57 Grenoble, Lenore A. xii, xv, xvii, 84,
116, 118, 202, 302, 370 Grierson, George 274–275 Grimes, Barbara F. 124, 131, 137, 161,
163–165, 178, 207, 231, 370, 390, 402, 408 Grinevald (Craig), Colette xiii, 59, 65, 69, 74, 84, 108, 116 Grünberg-Cvetinoviè 337 Grünthal, Riho 221, 231 Guessoum, Abderrazak 123, 126, 129, 137 Guirardello, Raquel 56 Güldemann, Tom 182, 188, 203 Gundermann Kröll, Hans 27 Gutiérrez, Enrique Sánchez 26

Haacke, Wilfrid H. G. 185–186, 202–203 Haboud, Marleen 21, 27 Hackman, Brian D. 402, 409 Hale, Kenneth L. xv, 72, 74, 84, 117,
206, 345–346, 350, 356–358, 368, 370 Hart, Charles W. M. 364, 370 Harvey, Mark 115, 353, 370 Harvey, Penelope 115, 353, 370 Hary, Benjamin 131–132, 137 Hasselbring, Sue 182, 203 Hatfield, Debbie 142 Hattori, Shiro 279, 302, 361, 390, 402,
409 Haugen, Einar 208, 231 Heath, Jeffrey 352, 368, 370–371 Heine, Bernd 162–163, 178, 194, 203 Heine, Ingo 203 Heinrich, Patrick xvi–xvii Henderson, John 351, 370 Henschke, Martina 371 Herranz, Atanasio 84 Herrera, Guillermina 67, 82 Herzfeld 26 Hetzron, Robert 275, 277 Hill, Jane H. 60, 84 Hill, Kenneth C. 60, 84 Hindley, Reg 218, 231 Hinton, Leanne 91, 117, 121 Hochstetler, Lee 142, 149, 152, 161 Hofling, Andrew 66, 84 Hollyman, Jim 408 Holm, Agnes 109, 117 Holm, Wayne 109, 117 Holmestad, Einar 208, 231 Holt, Dennis G. 72, 82, 84 Holzknecht, Susanne 402, 408 Hornberger, N. H. 26–27, 116 Hughes, David W. 204
Ipsen, Carl 371 Irvine, A. K. 124, 137 Ishaq, Emile Maher 130, 137 Ishihara, Mashide xvi–xvii
Jakobovits, L. A. 369–370, 373 Janhunen, Juha 207, 232, 261–262, 291,
301–302

414 Names Index

Jastrow, Otto 268, 274–275 Jelle, Miedema 408 Jenniges, Wolfgang 207, 231 Jettmar, Karl 276 Johnson, Steve 353, 372 Juncosa, José E. 21, 27, 50, 57
Kähler, Hans 371 Kastenholz, Raimund 140, 157, 161 Kato, Barau 142 Kaufman, Terrence S. xv, 29, 57, 61, 64,
67, 69, 80–81, 83–85 Kazakevich, Olga A. xiv, 233, 256–262 Keen, Sandra 346, 370 Kegl, Judy 82 Kellermann, Günter 369 Kendon, Adam 368, 371 Kibrik, Aleksandr E. xiv, 233, 256–257,
260–262 Kieffer, Charles 265–266, 274, 276 Kilham, Christine 351, 371 King Mohammed VI of Morocco 126–
127 King Taufa’ahau IV 393 Kinkade, M. Dale 88–89, 117, 119 Klein, Harriet E. Manelis 27, 161 Kleinewillinghöfer, Uli 142, 161 Klimov, G. A. 259, 262 Kodzasov, Sandro V. 260–261 Kolesnik, Natalia G. 241, 259–262 Koontz-Garboden, Andrew 74 Kormushin, I. V. 262 Krahnke, John 266, 275 Krauss, Michael xii, 1, 33, 84, 87, 117,
134, 190, 198, 206, 231, 257–258, 261, 263, 275, 292, 402 Krishnamurti, Bh. 372 Kriuchkova, T. B. 259–262 Kropp-Dakubu, Mary-Esther 142 Kuznetsova, A. I. 259–261 Kwere, Keitiretse 182 Kyuchukov, Hristo 213, 231
Lade, Arild Jostein 208, 231 Landaburu, J. 21, 84 Lanes, Elder 56 Lar 153

Larrimore, Bonnie 372 Larsen, Tom 81 Larzalere, Norma S. 114 Lastra, Yolanda 26, 59–61, 80, 83–85 Laughren, Mary 351, 356, 359, 363, 371 Laycock, Don 368, 371 Leitch, Myles 163, 169–170 Leite, Yonne 56 Leitho, Tsoxee 182 Lemmus, Jorge 82 Lemus, Jorge 85 Lewis, B. 139 Li, Fengxiang 302 Li, Rong 302 Lichtenstein, Hinrich 183 Lincoln, Peter C. 402, 408 Linn, Mary S. 106, 108, 110–111, 114,
117 Livi-Bacci, Massimo 342, 371 Lizarralde, Manuel 29, 57 Lloyd, Lucy C. 183, 202 Longacre 59 Luangthongkum, Theraphan 281, 301 Lucht, L. 259 Luiselli, Donata 58 Lynch, J. D. 394, 408
Mac, J. 42, 259 MacKay, John A. 80, 89 Maffi, Luisa 57 Maitinskaya, K. E. 262 Malka, Elie 131, 137 Mamfa 153 Manakgu, Andrew 355, 371 Manrique 80 Maoji, Fu 302 Mapatis, Elnora 118 Mariella, Patricia 117 Martin, John F. 102, 117 Martin, Laura 82, 102 Martínez Sarasola, Carlos 12, 27 Martinic, M. 17, 27 Marx, Bettina 136–137 Marzal, Manuel M. 11, 28 Masayesva-Jeanne, LaVerne 84, 117 Mateo Toledo, Eladio 81 Matras, Yaron 213, 231, 275–276

Names Index 415

Matsumura, Kazuto 26, 117–118, 206, 231–232, 260–261, 301–302
Mazonde, Isaac 203 McCarty, Teresa L. 109–110, 116–117 McClure, J. Derrick 208, 231 McConvell, Patrick 344, 362, 371 McElhanon, Kenneth. A. 402, 408 McGregor, William B. 346, 359, 371,
373 McKay, G. R. 369 McKnight, David 357, 371 Meira, Sérgio 56 Melià, Bartomeu 18, 28 Ménage, V. L. 139 Menning, Kathy 359, 372 Merlan, Francesca 352, 356, 368, 370–
371 Mezhoud, Salem 129, 137 Mikhalchenko, Vida Yu 207, 232, 256,
259–262 Mitchell-Enos, Violet 117 Mithun, Marianne 83, 87–88, 118 Miyaoka, Osahito 116 Monro, P. 82 Montana Salish 94 Montes Rodrigues, María Emília 43, 57 Montijo, Yolanda 91, 117, 121 Moore, Denny xii, 15, 29, 56–57 Moore, John H. 106, 118 Morgenstierne, Georg 264–265, 274,
276 Morphy, Frances 353, 371 Morrissey, Michael 369 Morroy, Robby 52, 56 Moseley, Christopher 137–138, 207,
212, 216, 231, 279, 301 Moshkalo, V. V. 260–262 Mous, Maarten 213, 230 Mukarovski, H. 136 Munson, Linda 81 Muraviova, Irina A. 261 Murillo, David 49, 56 Muysken, Pieter C. 19, 26
Naden, Tony 142 Nakagawa, Hiroshi 118 Nangan-golod, David Jentian 350

Napaljarri, Peggy 351, 371 Nash, David 357, 359, 368, 370, 372 Nazarova, Zarifa 237 Nekitel, Otto 390 Neroznak, V. P. 207, 232, 259, 261–262 Nettle, Daniel 342, 352, 372 Newman, Paul xv, xvii, 116, 369 Nganjmira, Nawakadj 352, 372 Nichols, Johanna 29, 57 Nigam, R. C. 341 Norwood, Susan 74 Nurse, Derek 162, 191, 203 Nyako 153
O’Grady, Geoffrey 370, 373 Oates, Lynette F. 359, 361, 372 Oates, William J. 359, 361, 372 Odé, Cecilia 408 Odisho, Edward 268, 274–276 Ohtani, Yoichi 118 Oloviannikova, Irina P. 261 Oranskaya, T. I. 238, 261 Oransky, I. M. 238, 261 Orywal, Erwin 276 Ostler, Nicholas xvii, 116, 118, 137, 202 Owens, Jonathan xiv, 263, 266, 275–276
Pamulkan, Mabel 371 Parfenova, Olga S. 258, 260 Pawley, Andrew 392, 394, 408 Payne, D. L. 85 Pellat, Ch. 139 Penn, Nigel 183–185, 204 Pennacchietti, F. 276 Perekhvalskaya, Elena A. 257, 259 Pettener, Davide 58 Pi Hugarte, Renzo 12, 28 Pink, Peter W. 371 Plank, Frans 347, 372 Poblete, María Teresa M. 17, 28 Pogarell, Reiner 208, 232 Pootchemunka, Jennifer 371 Potseluyevskii, E. A. 261–262 Powskey, Malinda 118 Pozzi-Escot, Inés 14, 20, 28, 48, 58 Premsrirat, Suwilai 301 Prokofiev, G. N. 261

416 Names Index

Pym, Noreen 372
Queixalós, Francisco 28, 33, 53, 56, 58 Quizar, Robin 81
Ramirez, Henri 56 Rampton, Ben 115 Rantala, Leif 221 Rastorguyeva, V. S. 260–262 Ratcliff, Martha xvii, 369 Rayevskaya, O. V. 259–261 Redard, Georges 266, 276 Renault-Lescure, Odile 28, 33, 56, 58 Renfrew, Colin 57–58 Reyhner, Jon 136, 138 Richardson, Kay 115 Rivas, Ramón 71, 85 Rivera, Fernando García 48, 57–58 Rivers, Roberta 203 Roberts, Jim 163, 373 Robin, Christian 81, 84, 117, 205, 232,
260, 269, 277 Robins, R. H. 84, 117, 205, 232, 260 Roca, Julio Argentino 12 Rodrigues, Aryon D. 29, 32, 42–43, 57–
58 Rodríguez Bazán, Luis Antonio 19, 28,
49, 58 Rojas Chaves, Carmen 75, 83, 85 Romanova, O. I. 262 Rongier, Jacques 142 Roosevelt, Anna C. 29, 58 Ross, Malcolm 392, 396, 402, 408–409 Rossel, Gerda 178 Rost, Christel 371 Rowe, John Howland 14–15, 28 Ruette, Krisna 45, 58 Ruhlen, Merrit 277 Rumsey, Alan 368, 370–371
Sadiqi, Fatima 125, 138 Saib, Jilali 136 Salamanca, Danilo 72, 74, 82 Salas, Adalberto 17, 28, 383, 390 Salminen, Tapani xiii, 205, 221, 231,
258, 262 Samarina, I. V. 262

Sampson, Clavil Garth 180, 204 Sandalo, Filomena 56 Santos Atahuallpa, Juan 10 Santos, Fernando 11, 28, 58 Sapir 345 Saunders, Thomas 360, 372 Savage, Theresa 301 Sawai, Harumi 292, 302 Schacht, J. 139 Schaefer, Ronald P. 172, 178 Schapera, Isaak 180, 204 Schebeck, Bernhard 352, 372 Schiffman, Harold F. 118 Schleicher, August 303, 341 Schmidt, Annette 359, 361, 372 Schmitt, Rüdiger 277 Schoch, G. 153, 162 Schultze Jena, Leonhard 180, 204 Schultze-Berndt, Eva 346, 372 Sebeok, Thomas A. 136, 138, 204, 276,
370 Seki, Lucy 30, 32, 58 Seriri, Kwere 182, 202 Shakhnarovich, A. M. 261–262 Shakya, Daya Ratna 341 Sharp, Janet 359, 372 Sherzer, Joel 76 Shimizu, K. 142, 161 Shinkai, Reinaldo 33 Shoji, Hiroshi 207, 232, 261–262, 301–
302 Shoshiashvili, Igor 258–259 Sibille, Jean 137–138 Simeone-Senelle, Marie-Claude 267,
274, 277 Simoni, Lucia 29, 58 Simonov, Mikhail D. 262 Singh, Balwant 341 Skorvid, S. S. 259–261 Skotnes, Pippa 204 Skutnabb-Kangas, Tove xv, xvii Smieja, Birgit 203 Smith, Ian 353, 360, 372 Smith-Stark, Thomas C. 80, 83, 85 Solis 48 Solís Fonseca, Gustavo 58 Solncev, V. M. 207, 232, 260–262

Names Index 417

Sommer, Gabriele 163, 178 Souag, Lameen 125, 127, 138 Spriggs, Matthew 394, 409 Stadtlender, Karen 371 Stanley, Lori 116 Stark, Louisa R. 27 Starostin, Sergej A. 257, 259, 262 Steele, Josie 118 Steinberg, D. D. 369–370, 373 Stewart, Steve 81 Strand, Richard 277 Strehlow, Theodor G. H. 351, 373 Suarez, Jorge 80, 85 Sutton, Peter 353, 373
T’sou, K. Benjamin 302 Tabouret-Keller, Andrée 372 Takassi, Issa 142, 161 Tamura, Suzuko 118 Tanaka, Jiro 181, 204 Tarazona-Santos, Eduardo 58 Tedghi, Joseph 132–133, 138 Temple, O. 142, 162 Tenishev, E. R. 261–262 Testelets, J. G. 259, 262 Thieberger, Nicholas 344, 350, 359, 362,
369, 371–373 Thomson, Derick 208, 231 Tiessen, C. 259 Tilmatinè, Mohand 138 Tindale, Norman B. 368, 373 Tirosh-Becker, Ofra 131, 136, 138 Tobias, Phillip V. 180, 202, 204 Torero Fernández de Córdova, Alfredo
14, 28 Tosco, Mauro 141, 162, 276 Touré, Sekou 141 Tourneux 156 Traill, Anthony 181, 183–187, 204 Triana y Antorveza, Humberto 10–11,
28 Trigger, David 352, 373 Tryon, Darrell T. xii, xiv, 369–370, 373,
391–392, 402, 409 Tsuchida, Shigeru 206 Tsunoda, Tasaku 118, 206

Tupac Amaru II, 11
Udovitch, Abraham L. 131–132, 138 Uhlenbeck, E. M. 84, 117, 205, 232, 260 Ushiña S., Pedro H. 50, 58
Vakhtin, Nikolaj B. 207, 232, 262 Valensi, Lucette 131–132, 138 Vansleb, J. M. 130 Viegas Barros, J. Pedro 12, 28 Vinogradov, V. A. 261–262 Vinogradova, S. P. 238, 257, 262 Visser, Hessel 187 Voegelin, C. 267, 277 Voegelin, F. 267, 277 Volodin, Aleksandr P. 258, 262 Voort, Hein van der 56 Vossen, Rainer 161, 182, 185, 188, 202–
204 Vycichi, Werner 125, 138
Walsh, Michael 352, 368–370, 373 Wang, Jun 302 Ward, Monica 82, 85 Wardaga, Charlie 368 Wardhaugh, Ronald 166, 178 Warren, Andy 142 Watahomigie, Lucille J. 84, 102, 104,
109, 117–118, 208 Watahomigie, Philbert Sr. 84, 102, 104,
109, 118 Weiers, Michael 269, 277 Westermann, Diedrich 181, 202, 204 Westphal, Ernst O. J. 188, 204 Wetzels, Leo 56 Whaley, Lindsay J. xii, xv, xvii, 84, 116,
118, 291, 302, 370 Whorf 344 Wilkins, David 367–368, 373 Wilkinson, Melanie 353, 373 Williamson, Kay 142, 149, 162 Wilmsen, Edwin N. 181, 204 Windfuhr, Gernot 266, 274, 277 Winter, J. Christoph 193, 204 Wolf, K. 153, 162 Wolmby, Topsy 371

418 Names Index

Wurm, Stephen A. xiv, 140, 162, 205– 207, 210, 232, 279, 290, 302, 360–362, 373–375, 390, 392, 401–402, 408–409
Yallop, Collin 368 Yamamoto, Akira v, xiii, xv, xvii, 87,
108, 113, 117–118, 207–208, 232 Yarshater, Ehsan 266, 276–277 Yartseva, V. A. 262 Yaska, Kimiko 114 Yazzie, Evangeline Parsons 136, 138

Yefimov, V. A. 261 Yeliseyev, Yu. S. 262 Yu-Mikhalchenko, Vida 260
Zafrani, Haïm 131, 139 Zavala, Roberto 62, 64, 80–82, 85 Zeitlyn, David 171, 178 Zepeda, Ofelia 117 Zhenghui, Xiong 302 Zhenxing, Zhang 302

General Index

bilingualism (multilingualism) 14–15, 27, 65, 68–69, 71–73, 77, 89, 95, 102, 109, 117, 129, 136, 145, 154, 163, 169, 175–176, 183, 234, 236, 238, 258, 276, 286, 306–307, 309, 313–314, 320–321, 323, 325, 328, 343, 345, 349, 351–352, 360, 363, 369, 377, 396
bilingual education 14, 27, 68–69, 72, 77, 89, 363
bilingual texts 351
colonial powers and language British 305 British (in Australia) 342 colonial war 185 colonizers 59, 123, 126–127, 187 European colonizers 126 French 170 French (North Africa) 123
communities’ language activities Arizona models 109 Kohanga Reo (language nests, Maori) 7 native speaker researcher 367 Punana Leo (language nest, Hawaiian) 7 Taboo Room (Vanuatu Cultural Centre) 398–399
Cyrillic 237
domains (functions) of language use administration 9, 123, 130, 150, 196, 237 culture-specific functions 354 inter-ethnic communication 237, 257, 354
emigration 267
formal education xi, xiv, 2, 88, 109, 125– 127, 186, 196, 210, 233, 235, 246, 258, 314

medium of instruction 186, 235–237 school xvi, 4, 7, 89–96, 102–103, 108–
109, 116–117, 123, 169, 172, 186, 217, 227, 234–241, 243, 245–251, 256–257, 259–260, 287, 309, 325, 328, 341, 359, 363, 395, 397 secondary and higher education 196
Gaeltachtaí (Irish-speaking districts) 7
homogenizing 123 hunter-gatherer 330
identity and language ix |Xam i. 183–185 Amazigh i. 125, 128–129, 136 Amazigh renaissance 123 Arab Muslim i. 123 Bashar i. 151 Berber renaissance 123 Coptic i. 130 ethnic i. ix, 141, 376–377 Gelao i. 284 linguistic i. 126, 186 Maya i. 67 Naro i. 186 San i. 180
indigenous autochthonous peoples 179, 183 i. communities 108, 115, 208, 235, 244, 246, 367 i. inhabitants 124 i. languages 4, 11, 16–21, 30–32, 56– 57, 60–62, 64–65, 69–73, 75–78, 83, 85–89, 92, 111, 114–115, 119, 152, 155, 173, 192, 241, 261, 325, 343, 359–360, 362–363, 371 i. people 72, 124, 211, 234, 241, 325 i. populations 59–60, 64, 75, 77, 124, 130, 233, 325
intergenerational transmission 5, 130, 173, 243
intermarriage 32, 172, 305, 378

420 General Index

-ization Arabization 123, 196 Castilianization (Hispanicization) 11 Christianization 10, 196 globalization 154–155, 195–196, 396– 397, 400 industrialization 196 Islamization 151 marginalization xvii, 137, 197, 202 modernization 196 urbanization 2, 76, 152, 170, 196, 395–396 westernization 196
language ancestral l. 88, 108–109, 124, 247, 319, 321, 324, 331, 339 colonial l. 146, 343 dead l. 269 dominant l. (majority l.) 2, 66, 89–90, 108, 145, 196–197, 209, 212, 216– 218, 222–224, 226, 238, 305, 307, 374–377, 395 genetic relationship 124, 185, 188 imperial l. 9 l. attitudes xi, 128 l. proficiency (l. competence 194, 234, 243 l. programs 91, 108–109, 120 l. shift xi, xv, xvii, 11, 13–15, 60, 65– 66, 76, 88, 108, 117, 129, 150, 154, 161–163, 191, 193, 195, 204, 233, 236, 243, 247, 360 l. transmission x–xii, 129, 198 l. vitality ix–xi, 33, 115, 128 lingua franca (linguae francae) 69, 72–73, 169–172, 197, 234, 237, 305, 318, 322, 340, 360, 378, 396–397 minority l. xvi, 66, 145, 150, 152–153, 155, 195–197, 203, 208–211, 225, 231–232, 234–236, 244, 246–247, 262, 275–276, 302, 305 orthodox Christian l. 130 replacing l. 4–5, 192, 354 trade l. 151, 169, 395 world l. (global l.) 196, 198
Language Centres 359

language documentation and research 13, 30, 32, 80, 84, 90–91, 94–95, 124, 138, 152, 266, 274, 339, 345, 350– 352, 359, 367, 370, 372, 398
ethics of fieldwork 303–304 funding of fieldwork 303 lexicography and text material 92–
94, 124, 304, 325, 330, 345, 350–353, 367–368, 374, 398–399 linguist and community xiii, 367 oral traditions 76, 131, 191, 343 written documents 132–133 language planning and policies national language 11, 13–14, 123, 126, 188, 192, 196, 237, 239–240, 278, 311–312, 378, 395 national language policy 123 standardization 64, 77, 82, 126, 132 language revival and maintenance (see also communities’ language activities) xv, 78, 112, 152–153, 172, 209, 232, 267, 276, 301, 359, 362–363 l. revitalization xi–xii, xv, xvii, 32, 69–70, 72–74, 78, 109–112, 117 literacy l. bureau 152 l. in minority languages 152 l. programmes 140, 152–153
migration and language 62, 73, 129, 132, 137, 142, 146, 160, 179, 191–192, 244, 276, 312, 319, 325, 342 Bantu expansion 165–166 Diaspora 4, 128–130, 161, 187, 213 displaced populations 14, 141, 154, 193 migrant communities 129, 137, 142 waves of immigrants 191, 342
mother tongue xi, 9, 124, 126, 129, 192– 195, 197, 234–235, 237–238, 241, 256– 258, 260, 330, 355, 395, 397
pidgin and creole 3, 7–8, 29, 41, 51–53, 69, 71–73, 94, 146, 160, 171, 174–175, 276, 278–279, 291–292, 297, 301, 318, 322, 378, 395–397

General Index 421

power (politics) and language Arabo-Islamic dominance 123–126 bad government 197 genocide xvii, 11–12, 183–185, 197, 317 human rights xvii Inca empire xii, 9–10 military 13, 125, 150–151, 258 physical violence 184, 197 political insecurity 154 slave trade 150 war 9, 11–13, 82, 141, 153–154, 166, 173, 185, 187, 208, 210, 226–227, 244–245, 268, 276, 279, 283, 288, 315, 337, 375
Red Book of Endangered Languages 26, 206–207, 225
religion and language xi, xiii, 4, 31–32, 123, 196, 333, 354, 399 Christianity 10, 61, 130, 151–152, 196, 268, 309, 330, 339, 343, 351 Hinduism 333 Islam xi, xiii, 123–124, 126–127, 130, 132, 139, 145, 150–151, 197, 268, 337 Judaeo-Christian tradition 343 Judaism 130–132, 136, 138 liturgical phrases 130 missionary linguists xiii, 30–31, 177 native r. 31–32 orthodox Christian 130 religious faith 130
revival program 363 Royal Institute of the Amazigh Culture
(IRCAM, Morocco) 126–127, 138
script Arabic s. 126–128 Cyrillic s. 235, 238, 240, 256 Grantha s. 309 Greek s. 130 Hebrew s. 131–132

indigenous s. 313 Latin s. 126–128, 235, 240, 256, 310 Neo-Tifinagh 127 Oriya s. 310 Persian s. 310 Roman s. (see Latin s.) 127 Tifinagh 127–128, 138 speech varieties dialectal variation 182, 330 initiation register 356–357 linguistic affiliation 180, 228 lumping vs. splitting 212 mutually intelligible 29, 124–125,
182, 268, 329, 332 regional variation xv, 124, 132, 285 respect registers 354–356 special register 345, 354, 356, 358,
364, 368 subsistence strategies and languages
farmers ix, 183–185, 195, 266 hunter-gatherer ix, 141, 165, 178,
180–181, 183, 185, 192–195, 204, 280, 330, 342 pastoralists 141, 184–185, 193–195
technology and languages broadcast and literacy programmes 140 internet (web portals) 128, 136, 206, 256 media xi, xv, 2, 82, 126, 136, 152, 160, 193, 196–198, 206, 228, 237, 246 printed media 128 radio 68, 102, 128, 152, 154, 239–240 television 2, 102, 128, 237, 239–240, 246, 363
two-way research 367
UNESCO v, x–xii, 26–27, 162, 206–207, 225, 232, 301 Language Vitality and Endangerment x–xi, xii, 115

Language Names Index

!Gã !ne 187, 189 !Goro 182, 189 !Ora 185–186, 188 !Xóõ 181, 187, 189, 204 !Xu˜ (Ju) 181, 187, 189 ʔa33 ʔuo55 284 ʔa33 qaw13 284 ŋ|u 189 Ani 189 Gana 182, 189 |Ganda 182 |Gui 182, 189 Hõã 189 Hua 187–188 Khomani 187 Ku ’e 187, 189 Kx’au 187, 189 Ng 187 |Xaise 182, 189 |Xam 183–185, 187, 189, 202, 204 Xegwi 187, 189 |Xo-Buga 182 |Xo-Khwe 182 |Xom-Buma 182 ‘Amdo Tibetan 334 ‘Loke 332, 335 ‘Nam’ 292 ‘Narpa 331–332 ‘Nar-Phu 332 ‘Nyenkha 312–313 ‘Nyishangba 331–332 ‘Ongota 197, 200
A’ingae 50 A’tong 320 A’uo Gelao 295 a55 kə55 288 Aasáx 193–194, 199, 204 Abaga 386, 390 Abai Sungai 381 Abenaki 119 Abkhazo-Adyghean 236 Absentee Shawnee 95

Acatec 61 Achagua 21, 25 Aché 18, 25 Achi 68, 82 Achuar 46 Achuar Chicham 50 Achumawi 122 Acoma 96 Adabe 383 Adasen 381 Adnyamathanha 352, 365 Afgikâ 340 Afrikaans 180, 183, 185–187, 192 Agta 381, 390
A. Alabat Island 381 A. Isarog 381, 390 A. Mt. Iraya 381 Aguacateco 62 Aguaruna 46 Agul 240, 250, 253, 256 Ahom 323 Aikaná 41 Ainu 2, 7, 118, 236, 278, 291–292, 297, 301–302, 378 Aiton 324 Aja 199 Ajurú 35, 55 Ak 386 Aka 199, 315 Akan 149, 151 Akatek 66, 78, 81 Akebu 149 Akeu 288, 296 Akha 288–289 Akie 194, 199 Akkala Saami 215, 220–221 Akpondu 156 Akum 174 Akuntsu 36, 55 Akurio 51–52, 55 Akwaio 39, 50 Akwáwa 34 Akwayo 44

Language Names Index 423

Akwén 36, 55 Alabama 95 Alabat Is 390 Alabugat Tatar 230 Alacaluf 12, 17, 25 Alagwa 199 Alaku 52 Alan 227 Alawa 363, 365 Albanian 215–216, 224–226 Alderney French 230 Alemannic 217, 222–223 Aleut 87, 91, 96, 119, 236, 241–242, 249,
253, 256 Algherese Catalan 215, 224 Along 286 Alpine Provençal 215, 218–219 Alsatian 217, 222 Alta, Northern 381 Alto Pativilca 20, 25 Aluku 53 Alune 383 Alutor 242, 249, 253 Alyawarr 351, 365 Amahai 383, 390 Amahuaca 46, 48 Amanayé 34, 55 Amawáka 40 Amazigh 123–131, 133, 136–138 Amharic 196 Ampibabo Lauje 382 Amto 386 Amuesha 46 Amurdak 364–365 Anal 322 Anambé 34, 55 Andajin 360, 363, 365, 372 Andi 240, 249, 253 Andio 382 Andoke 43 Andoque 13 Andro 323 Anej 199 Anfillo 199 Angaité 18, 25 Angami 322 Angas 149

Angloromani 213 Anindilyakwa 362, 365 Anong 286 Anson Bay 362 Añu 44, 55 Anuki 386 Anung 286, 296 Anus 384 Anyi 157 Aonek’enk 16, 25 Aore 404 Apalaí 38 Apalik 402 Aparaí 38, 53 Apatani 316 Apiaká 34, 55 Apinayé 36 Apurinã 38 Aputai 383 Aqao 284
A. Gelao 295 Arabela 47, 55 Arabic xi, xiii, 123–138, 141, 146, 149–
150, 157, 175–176, 197, 213, 215–216, 225, 234, 266–269, 271–272, 274–277 Aragonese 215, 219 Arakanese 323 Araki 404 Aramaic 132, 267–269, 271, 274–275 Aranese 218 Araona 48 Arapaço 40 Arapesh 386 Arara 35, 38, 40 A. do Pará 38 Arawá 37, 45 Arawak 38, 42, 44–45, 48, 50–52, 81 Araweté 34 Arawum 386 Arbëreshë Albanian 215, 224 Arbore 199 Archi 240, 250, 253, 257 Arekuna 51 Arem 281, 294 Argobba 199 Arguni 384 Arha 406

424 Language Names Index
Arho 406 Arhuaco 22, 25 Ari 386 Aribwatsa 402 Arikapú 38, 55 Arikara 93 Arikém 35 Arin 234 Arití 38 Aromanian 215, 225 Arrernte 362 Arsario 22, 25 Arta 381, 390 Aruá 35, 55 Aruák 38 Arvanite
A. Albanian 215, 225 A. Romanian 225 As 384 Asháninca 10, 45 Ashing 317 Ashkun 264–265, 270, 272, 337 Ashluslay 16, 25 Assamese 319–323 Assan 234 Assiniboine 94 Assyrian 276 Asturian 215, 218–219, 229 Asturian-Leonese 229 Asumboa 404 Asur 308 Asurini do Tocantins 34 Asuriní do Xingu 34 Ata 381, 390 Atacameño 17, 25 Atánquez 22, 25 Atemble 386 Athpahariya 325 atsaʔ 290 Atsugewi 122 Atta Faire 381 Aulua 404 A-uo 284 Austrian German 222 Auvergnat 215, 218–219 Auye 384 Ava 17, 25

Avá-Canoeiro 34, 55 Avar 240, 257 Avestan 336 Awá 21, 25, 27 Awadhi 339 Awakatek 66, 81 Awaké 45, 55 Awapit 21, 25 Aweera 199 Awera 384 Awetí 30, 35 Awjila 125, 134–135 Awyi 384 Axíninka 38 Axvax 240, 249, 253 Ayapa mixe zoque 62 Ayizi 287, 296 Aymara 10–11, 13–15, 17, 19–20, 25 Ayoreo 18–19, 25 Ayta 381, 390
A. Sorsogon 381, 390 Ayupathu 363, 365 Azer 158 Azerbaijani 234, 236, 239–240 Aztec 60
B’urik 335 BaVkarîk 338 Bat ari 267, 271
°
Babine 90, 119 Babino Saami 220 Bable 218 Babole 169 Babuza 381, 390 Bacama 149 Bactrian 336 Badaga 308–309 Bade 156, 158 Bafgân· î 338 Baghâ8î 338 Bagi Me 149–150, 158 Bagirmi 175–176 BÀgluf Chantyal 332 Bagupi 386 Bagvalal 240, 249, 253, 257 Bahing 327–328 Bahonsuai 382

Bai 287 Baima 285, 296 Baka 175 Bakairí 39 Baki 404 Bakole 174 Bakpinka 156, 158 Baldamu 174 Baleasang 382 Balôčî 336 BÀlti 335 Baluchi 336 Bambara 150–151, 157 Bana 289, 297 Banawá-Yafí 37 Bangni 316 Baniva 42, 45 Baniwa 44 Baníwa do Içana 38 Banka 157–158 Bantawa 326 Bao’an 291, 297 Bará 39–40, 42 BarakÌ 269
B.-Barak 266 BarÀm 328–329 Baras 382 Barasána 40, 43 Bardi 363, 365 Baré 38, 44–45, 55 Barí 22, 25, 44 Bariba 149 Bartangi 236–237, 250, 253 Bartangis 236 Basaa 175 Bashgali 337, 338 Bashkir 215, 227, 229 Basque 205, 215–217, 219, 229 Bassa 174 Bataan 381 Batak 381 Bátar 340 Batek 282, 294 Bathari 273 Bati 174, 264, 270, 276 Batjamalh 362, 365 Bats 239, 250, 253

Language Names Index 425
Baure 48, 55 Bavarian 222, 230 Bawm 323 Baygo 199 Bayso 197, 199 Baz 268 Beaver 119 Beboid 149, 171 Bedoanas 384 Beeke 176 Beezen 174 Beiço-de-Pau 36 Beik 286 Belarusian 226 Belhare 325 Bella Coola 120 Bellari 309 Benga 170, 176 Bengali 305, 319–320, 323 Benggoi 383 Beothuk 87, 120 Bepour 386 Berakou 175 Berber 123–125, 127, 131, 136–138, 141,
149–150 Berbice 51 Berti 199 Besïro 19, 25 Besisi 282, 294 Besoa 382 Bezhta 240, 249, 253 BhadravÀhÌ 338 BhalesÌ 338 BharmaurÌ 338 Bhojpuri 339 Bhujeli 330 Bhumij 308 Bhutanese 312 Bia Ye 49 Biak 384 Bierebo 404 Bieria 405 Bijogo 149 Bikya 174 Bilakura 386, 390 Bilybara 372 Bina 402

426 Language Names Index
Binga 200 Bini 149 Bininj Gun-wok 360–362, 369 Bíntucua 22, 25 Birale 200 Birarchen 291 Birhor· 308 Birkid 199 Birom 149 Birri 175 Bishnupriya Manipuri 340 Bishuo 174 Bislama 395, 397 Bisu 289, 296 Bit 280, 293 Biti 335 Black Mountain 312
B. language 313 Blackfoot 119 Bo 281 Boano 382 Bodish 312–313, 334–336 Bodo 175, 318–319, 323 Bodo-Koch 318–319 Boguru 176, 199 Bokar 316 Bola 286, 296 Bom 157 Bom Krim 158 Bonda 307 Bonerif 384, 390 Bong’om 199 Bonggo 402, 408 Bongo 199 Bongro 316 Boni 52–53, 199 Bonjo 168–169, 176 Boor 175 Bor Abor 317 Bora 13, 38, 42, 46 Bori 317 Boróro 36 Boruca 75, 78 Bosilewa 402 Bosnian 224 Bote 339 Bothar 386

Botlikh 240, 249, 253 Boun 361 brâʔûî 310 Brahui 310 Breton 2, 209, 215, 219 Bribri 75 Brokkat 335 Bruncas 75 Bubia 174 Budibud 402 Budong-Budong 382, 390 Budukh 240, 250, 253, 259 Buga 182, 199 Buglere 76 Bugun 315 Buguo 280, 293 Bulang 280 Bulgarian 212, 224, 226 Bulgebi 386 Buma 182, 404 Bumbita 386 Bumthang 312 Bunaba 363, 365 Bunan 333–334 Bung 172, 174, 177 Buranjis 323 Burarra 362, 365 Burate 384 Burgenland Croatian 215, 223 Bu-rig 335 Burmese 286, 290, 323 Burmic 287 Burushaski 304, 306, 340 Busa 149 Buso 175 Busoa 382 Bussa 199 Busuu 174 Buxia 280, 293 Buyang 284, 295 Bwatoo 406 Bwisi 170 Byangsi 334
Cabe 154 Cabecar 75 Cabiyari 42, 55

Cacua 42 Caddo 93 Cagayan 381 Cahabón 69 Cahto 122 Cahuapana 46 Cahuarano 47, 55 Cahuilla 122 Cajamarca 20, 25 Cak 323 Callahuaya 19, 25 Caló 213 Camarines Norte 381 Cambap 171, 174, 177 Cameâlî 338 Cameroon Pidgin 171, 174 Campa 45, 48 Campidanese 215, 223 Campidanese Sardinian 213, 224 Camsá 23 Candoshi 46
C.-Shapra 46 Canela Apaniekra 37 Canela Ramkokamekra 37 Canichana 49, 55 Capanahua 47, 55 Cape Khoe-khoe 188 Caquinte 45, 48 Carapana 43 Carib 50–51, 53 Cariban 21 Caribe 42, 44 Carijona 42, 55 Carnijó 37 Carpatho-Ruthenian 226 Carrier 119 Cashibo-Cacataibo 47 Cashinahua 47 Cassubian 222 Castilian 217 Catalan 218 Catío 25 Cavineña 49 Cayapa 21, 25 Cayubaba 49, 55 Cayuga 90, 120

Language Names Index 427
Central C. Alaskan Yupic 116 C. Arrernte 351 C. Asian Arabic 271 C. Asian Mixed Arabic 266, 269, 271–272 C. Aslian 282 C. Cagayan 381 C. Italian 223 C. Neo-Aramaic 274 C. Siberian Yupic 242, 249, 256
Ch’orti 66–67, 69, 81–82 Cha’palaachi 21, 25 Chachapoyas 20, 25 Chachi 21, 25 Chachis 27 Chacobo 48 Chak 323 Chali 312–313 Chamacoco 18, 25 Chamalal 240, 249, 253 Chamba Leeko 149 Chamí 25 Chamicuro 45, 55 Chamling 326 Champenois 217 Chané 19, 25 Chang 321 Channel Islands 215, 219, 230
C. French 213 Chantyal 331–332 Chathare 324 Chatong 281, 294 Chaudângsî 334 Chayahuita 46 Che Wong 282, 294 Chechen 239 Chemehuevi 122 Chepang 330 Chepewyan 119 Chepya 289, 296 Cherokee 106 Chilcotin 119 Chiling 325–326 Chimariko 87, 92 Chimila 22, 25 Chinese 256, 280, 282, 284–288, 290,
313, 336, 377–378

428 Language Names Index

Chinimne 94 Chintang 326 Chintao 286 Chintaw 296 Chipaya 19, 25 Chiquitano 11, 19, 25 Chirag 257 Chiriguano 17, 19, 25 Chiripa 18, 25 Chiru 322 Chitonahua 47, 55 Chiwere 93 Cho-ca-nga-ca-kha 311–312 Choctaw 96 Chôke 311 Chokri 322 Chol 80 Cholo 27 Chong 281–282, 294 Chorasmian 336 Chorei 323 Chorote 16, 25 Chorotega 75 Chorotí 18, 25 Chortis 82 Choynumni 122 Choyo 285, 295 Chrau 281, 294 Chuj 66, 82 Chukchansi 94, 122 Chukchee 236, 241–242, 249, 253, 256 Chulikata 318 Chulim 248, 253 Chulupí 16, 18, 25, 48, 55 Chulym 242 Chumash 121 Chumburung 153–154 Chungli Ao 322 Chuvan 234 Chuvash 215–216, 227, 229 Cibchan 44 Cimbrian 215, 224, 229 Cinta-Larga 35 Citlfâg 329 Citrâl 337–338 Citvan Thâru 339

Coahuilteco 116 Coaiquer 21, 25, 27 Coast-Southern Tsimshian 121 Cocama 43, 47, 55 Cocama-Cocamilla 47, 55 Cochimi 62, 78 Cochiti 96 Cocopa 78 Cofán 27, 43, 50 Cogapacori 45 Collas 16, 25 Colorado 21, 25, 121–122 Comox-Sliammon 120 Cong 289, 297 Copper Is. Creol 249 Coptic 3, 7, 130, 134–135, 137 Coreguaje 43 Cornish 7–8, 218 Corsican 215, 219, 223 Costanoan 92 Cosung 288, 296 Cree 88–90, 116, 119 Creek 106 Creole (Pidgin)
Arabic based c. (p.) 276 Assamese based c. (p.) 322 Dutch based c. (p.) 51 English based c. (p.) 51–53, 69, 72,
395–396 French based c. (p.) 53, 94 Jinghpaw based c. (p.) 318 Portuguese based c. (p.) 52–53, 279,
291, 301 Crimean Tatar 215, 226–227, 230 Crimean Turkish 230 Croatian 224 Csángó Hungarian 215, 225 Cubeo 43 Cucapa 62 Cuiba 22, 25, 44 Culina 45 Cuna 22, 25 Cunén 69 Cupeño 122 CurÀhÌ 338 Curripaco 42 Cypriot 213, 215–216, 225, 229, 269, 274

Czarî 336 Czech 222
D’ôlpo 335 Daari 275 Dabra 384 ¤á™ÀgÀù 329 Dafla 316 Dagbane 149 Dahalo 182, 194, 199 Dair 199 Dakka 382 Dakkang 281, 294 Dakota 88, 121 Dakpa 312–313 Dalabon 349–350, 360–361, 364–365,
368 Dalecarlian 220 Dalmatian 224 Damal 384 Damana 22, 25 DamÈlÌ 265, 276, 338 Damin 370 Dampal 382, 390 Dampelas 382 Dan 149 Danau 280, 293 Danish 219 Danisi 182, 189 Danshe 157 Danu 286 Danuwar 339 Darai 339 Darang Deng 285 Dardic 265, 270, 276–277, 337 Dargwa 240 Darî 336 Darma 334 De’aruwa 25 Dearuwa 23 Defaka 156, 158 Delaware 90, 119 Demiin 7 Demisa 384 Dengalu 386, 390 Deni 37 Deori Chutiya 318

Language Names Index 429
Desána 40 Desano 43 Desin Dola 283 Deti 189 Dhangar 310 Dhimal 320–321 Dhímmai 315 Diahkói 34 Dida 157 Didam 307 Dideyi 307 Diegueño 121 Dilling 199 Dimasa 319 Dimbong 174 Dimli 336 Dimme 199 Djeoromitxí 38, 55 Dobocubí 22, 25 Doga 386, 402 Dogon 142, 149, 152, 161 Dogrib 91, 119 Dolakhâ Newar 329 Dolgan 242, 248, 253, 256 Dol-po 335 Domari 275–276 Dondo 382 Dong 283 Donno So 149 Dorro 386 Doutai 384 Dow 39 Dr’omo 312 Dr’omowa 312 Drânjoke 311–312 Duala 174 Duano 283, 295 Dubu 384 DÙdhkosÌ 326 Dugusa 158 Dulbu 156, 158 1umâkî 338 Dumi 327 Dumna 122 Dumun 386, 390 Dungmali 326 Dunlap Mono 122

430 Language Names Index

Dura 331 Duriankere 384, 390 Dutch 182, 222, 305, 334, 345 Duwai 156 Duwet 402 Dvngsar 286 Dyarim 156 Dyirbal 345, 365, 369 Dyula xi Dzala 312–313 Dzongkha 311–312
East E. Frisian 222–223 E. Itelmen 234 E. Makian 383, 390
Eastern E. and Central Arrernte 365, 370 E. Arrernte 351 E. Band Cherokee 95 E. Daly 362 E. Mansi 257 E. Mari 215, 226–227 E. Neo-Aramaic 269, 274 E. Permyak 226 E. Slovak 222, 225
Efik 149, 151, 156 Ega 157–158 Egyptian 130 Ekoid 149 El Hugeirat 199 Elmolo 194, 197, 199 Eman 174 Emberá 21–22, 25, 76 Émérillon 53 Emilian 215, 224, 229 Emilian-Romagnol 229 Emok-Toba 18, 25 Emplawas 383 Enawenê-Nawê 38 Eñepa 44 Enets 242, 248, 253, 256 Enggano 381 English xvi, 52, 68, 89–90, 101, 124, 127,
132, 146, 160, 172, 178, 195–196, 203, 217–218, 232, 258, 268, 274, 291, 306,

311–312, 328, 334, 343, 346, 351, 359– 360, 363, 369–371, 395–397 Eotile 157–158 Ergong 285, 295 Erikpaksá 37 Ernga 308 Erokwanas 384 Ersu 285, 295 Erzya 209–210, 215, 227 Ese Eha 47 Esperanto 3, 7 Esse Ejja 49 Esselen 87, 121 Estonian 219–220 Ette Taara 25 Euchee 106, 108, 110–111, 117 Even 236, 242, 248, 253, 256 Evenki 236, 241–243, 248, 253, 256, 258, 291 Ewe 149 Ewenki 291, 297, 302 Ewondo 175 Extremaduran 218
Faetar 207, 215, 224 Faghani 404 Faita 386 Falam Chin 323 Fanagalo 192 Fania 176 Faroese 2, 209, 219 Fars 267 Fârsî 336 Fayu 384 Finnish 219–220 Finnmark Finnish 220 Flemish 222 Fongoro 175, 199 Forest Nenets 242, 244, 248 Fortsenal 405 Foya 384 Franconian 222 Francoprovençal 215, 219 French 95, 115, 123, 127, 129, 136, 146,
160, 169–170, 172, 174–175, 195–196, 215, 217–219, 230, 395–397 Guernsey F. 230

Jersey F. 230 Frisian 205, 212 Friulian 215, 224 Fulfulde 145–146, 149–150, 172, 174 Fulniô 37 Fungom 174 Furu 171, 174 Fyem 156, 158
Ga0hvâlî 338 Gaagudju 353, 362, 364–365, 370 Gabrielino 122 Gadaba 307, 309–310 Gaelic 218 Gafat 199 Gagauz 215, 225, 227 Galibi 44, 50
G. do Oiapoque 39 G. Marwono 41 Galician 212, 215, 218–219, 229 Gallego 218 Gallo 215, 218–219, 223 G.-Romance 223 Gallong 316 Gallurese 215, 223–224 Gambiri 270, 337 Ganan 290, 297 Gangte 322 Ganjule 199 Ganzi 175 Gaoshan 279 Gapun 386, 390 Gardiol 215, 224 Garhwali 338 Garifuna 69, 71, 73, 77, 81–82, 85 Garig 361, 365 Garo 318–320 Garrwa 363, 365 Garuwahi 386, 403 Gascon 207, 215, 218–219 Gashowu 122 Gasu 290, 297 Gats’ame 197, 199 Gavaar-baatii-Gabari 270 Gavião 33, 35, 37 G. do Maranhão 37 G. do Pará 37

Language Names Index 431
Gawar-BÀtÌ 264, 270, 272, 276, 338 Gâwrî 338 Gayardilt 346 Gazhuo 287, 296 Gbaya 149 Gebe 383 Gedaged 397 Geimbiyo 362 Geji cluster 156 Gelao 283 Geman Deng 285 Geme 175 Georgian 236, 239 Gera 156, 158 Geral 34, 43 German xvi, 217, 222, 227, 334 Getaʔ 307 Ghadamès 133, 135 Ghale 325, 331, 333 Ghomara 128, 133, 135 Gilaki Gîlakî 267, 336 Gitua 403 Goajiro 21, 25 Godoberi 240, 249, 253, 257, 260 Goldi 290 Gôn· 0i 309 Gong 286, 296 Gongduk 314 Gorotire 36 Gorovu 386, 390 Gorum 307 Gothic 227 Gottscheerish 230 Goundo 175 Grangali 270, 272 Grass 386 Great Abor 317 Greek 130, 223–226, 229–230, 274 Griko 215, 223 Griqua 186 Gro-mo 312 Gtaʔ 307 Guahibo 22, 25 Guaikurú 38 Guajá 34 Guajajara 35

432 Language Names Index
Guajibo 44 Guajiro 44 Guamaca 22, 25 Guambiano 21, 25 Guaná 18, 25 Guanano 43 Guanche 125 Guanchen 133, 135 Guarani 10, 16–19, 25, 34, 43, 45, 49,
53 Guarasugwe 49, 55 Guarayo 18, 25, 49 Guarequena 42 Guariba 40 Guató 36, 55 Guatuso 75 Guayabero 22, 25 Guayakí 18, 25 Guaymi 75–77 Guichong 285, 296 Gula 199 Gule 199 Gulmancema 149 Gumawana 403 Gun 355, 360–362, 365, 369 Gun-dangbon 361 Gun-djeihmi 355, 365 Gününa 16
G. Küne 11, 25 G. Yajich 25 Gura 156, 158 Gurânî 336 Gurdu-Mbaaru 156 Gurung 331, 333 Guruntum-Mbaaru 158 Gutob 307, 310 Guyanais 53 Guyanese 51–52 Gweno 199 Gwich’in 119 Gwini 364–365 Gyasumdo 331–332 Gyele 176 Gyem 156, 158 Gyu-mo 312
ha33 khiʔ55 284

Habu 383 Habyoot 267–268, 271, 273
H. Mahra 271 Hadza 181, 189, 195 Haeake 406 Haida 87, 93, 120 Haisla 121 Hâjong 318 Haka Chin 323 Haketía 225 Hakhi 284
H. Gelao 295 Hakka Chinese 285 Haliti 38 Halkomelem 120 Han 119 Han· 0ûrî 338 Hantyrka 213 Harakmbut 12, 46 Hare 119 Harkmbut-Katukina 46 Harro 197, 199 Harsuusi 267, 271, 273 Hasadaʔ 308 Hassaniyya 158 Hausa xi, 149–151, 156, 160 Havasupai 96, 101–104, 117 Haveke 406 Hawaiian 6–7 Hayu 327 Hebrew 3, 7–8, 131–132, 136, 138 Heiltsuk 121 Helong 383 Henkha 313 Hermit 403 Hezhe 290, 297 Hijuk 174 Hill Miri 316 Hill Tippera 319 Hills Kachari 319 Hindi 305–306, 317, 339 Hinukh 240, 249, 253 Hitnu 22 Hitnü 25 Hiw 405 Hixkaryána 39 hm nai 285

Hmar 323 Hmong 280 Hmwaveke 406 Ho 308 Hojai 319 Hok 95 Holkomelem 94 Hor· o 308 Hozo 199 Hpun 286, 296 Hpyin 289, 296 Hrangkol 323 Hruso 315 Hu 280, 293 Hualapai 101–105, 109, 118 Huambisa 46 Huanca 20, 25 Huarayo 47 Huasteco 80 Huba 149 Huetar 75 Huihui 282, 294 Huilliche 17, 25–26 Huitoto 13, 42, 46, 55 Hung 281, 294 Hungarian 215–216, 222, 225 Hunzib 240, 249, 253 huo nte 285 Hupa 116, 121 Hupda 42 Húpda 39 Huron 120 Hwalbáy 96, 101, 105
Iatê 37 Icelandic 2, 219 Idoma 149 Idu 318 Iduh 280, 293 Igbo 149 Ika 22, 25 Ikpeng 39 Ilgar 360–361, 365, 368 Ilue 156, 158 Imeraguen 157–158 Iñapari 45, 48, 55 Inari Saami 215, 221

Language Names Index 433
Indri 199 Inga 22, 25 Ingarikó 39 Ingrian 215, 222, 248, 253, 256 Ingrien 242 Ingush 239 Inkhokvari 253 Intha 286 Inuit 6 Inuktitut 88, 91, 119 Iñupiatun 96 Ioway-Otoe 92 Ipulo 174 Ipurinã 38 Iquito 48, 55 Iranian 266, 306 Iránxe 41 Iresim 384 Irish 2, 7, 209, 217–218, 231 Irish Gaelic 215, 219 Iru-Itu 19, 25 Irul·a 308–309 Isconahua 47, 55 Ishkashimi 236–237, 250, 253, 257, 264,
269–270, 272 Isirawa 384 I¬kÀmÌ 337 Isleño 95 Istriot 215, 225 Istro-Romanian 215, 225 Isubu 174 Italian 223
South I. 223 Italiot Greek 223–224 Italkian 215, 225 Itelmen 234, 241–242, 249, 253, 256 Itik 384 Itonama 49, 55 Itza 78 Itzaj 66 Iwaidja 361, 363–365, 372 Ixcatec 61, 78 Ixil 62, 66, 81–82 Iyemi 38 Iyive 174 Izere 153

434 Language Names Index

J’umo 312 J’umowa 311–312 Jâ0 335 Jabutí 38, 55 Jah Het 282, 294 Jakaltek 66 Jalaa 149–150, 158 Jamamadí 37 Jaminawa 40 Jaminjung 363, 365, 372 Japanese xvi, 292, 378 Jaqaru 20, 25 Jarawa 305 Jarawan 149, 161, 174 Jarawára 37 Jaunsarî 338 Javaé 37 Jawoyn 371 Jê 36 Jebel Haraza 199 Jebero 46, 48, 55 Jehai 282, 294 Jeri Kuo 157–158 Jero 327 Jewish 130–132, 136–137, 213, 218, 225–
226 Jhangar 310, 321 Jíbaro 46 Jibbali 273 Jicaque 71 Jilbe 156, 158 Jilu 268 Jinghpaw 318, 323 Jinuo 279, 288, 296 Jiongnai 285, 295 Jirel 335–336 Jívaro 50 Jodí 45 Jogli 321 Jonkor Bourmataguil 175 ju nɔ 285 Juaneño 122 Juang 307 Judaeo
J.-Arabic 131–136 J.-Berber 131, 134, 139 J.-Arabic 132, 137–138

J.-Crimean 226 J.-French 218 J.-German 227 J.-Greek 225, 229 J.-Italian 225 J.-Provençal 218 J.-Spanish 225 Judezmo 213, 215, 217, 225–226 Juk 281, 294 Jukun 149, 151, 171, 174 Juma 34 Jurchen 290 Jurití 40 Juruna 35 Jutish 220
K’ekchi 70 K’emant 199 K’iché 69 K’ichee’ 66, 68, 81–82 K’wadza 194 ka33 θu31 290 Ka8ârqalâ 338 Kaaniigraam 266 Kaapór 34 Kabalay 175 Kabyle 125, 128, 133, 135 Kachari 319 Kaco’ 281, 294 Kadai 278, 283–284, 292, 295, 301, 383 Kadiwéu 38 Kadu 290, 297, 323 KÀfg™Ì 338 Kafir 265, 276 Kafiri 264–265, 336 KÀgate 336
K. Bho†e 336 Kaggaba 22 Kahumamahon 382 Kaibobo 383 Kaiep 403 Kaike 331–332 Kaikudi 309 Kaingáng 36
K. Central 36 K. do Paraná 36

K. do Sudeste 36 K. do Sudoeste 36 Kairui-Midiki 383 Kaitag 257 Kaiwá 18, 25 Kaiy 384 Kaki Ae 386 Kakua 39 Kala Kawaw Ya 362, 365 Kalasaalaa 270 Kala6°a 338 Kalabari 149 Kalao 382 Kalapálo 39 Kali’na 50, 53 Kalmyk 215–216, 227, 230 Kamã 39 Kamaiurá 30 Kaman 286, 296, 318 Kamas 236 Kamasa 386, 390 Kamayurá 34 Kambeba 34, 55 Kamberi 149 Kami 280 Kampa 38 Kamsá 25 Kanakanabu 381, 390 Kanamantí 37 Kanamarí 39 Kanarese 308 Kanashi 334 Kandas 403 Kande 170, 176 Kangjia 291, 297 Kaningara 386 Kankuamo 22, 25 Kannada 309 Kanoê 41, 55 Kanowit 381 Kanuri 149–150 Kao 383 Kapóng 39 Kapori 384, 390 Kaqchikel 66, 68, 81–82 Karagash 230 Karaim 215, 227, 251

Language Names Index 435
Karajá 37 Karajarri 364–365 Karapanã 41 Kararaô 36 Karas 384 Karata 240, 249, 253 Karbí 321 Karelian 215, 220, 222 Kari 176 Karib 38, 277 Kariña 44, 50–51 Karipúna 34
K. do Norte 41 Karitiana 35 Karko 317 Karo 35, 199 Karuk 93, 121 Kasabe 171, 177–178 Kashmiri 337 Kashubian 215, 222–223 Kaska 119 Kasong 281, 294 Kasupá 41 Katawixí 39, 55 Katbol 405 Kati 337 Katuic 281 Katukína 39
K. do Acre 40 K. do Rio Biá 39, 55 K. Pano 40 Kaurna 363, 365 Kavalan 381, 390 Kawacha 386, 390 Kawahíb 34 Kawaiisu 95, 122 Kawesqar 12, 17, 25 Kawki 20, 25 Kaxararí 40 Kaxinawá 40 Kayabí 34 Kayapó 36 Kayardild 346–348, 360–362, 364–365, 369 Kayupulau 384, 390, 408 Kazakh 213, 230 Kechayi 92

436 Language Names Index

Kede 186, 188 Keder 384 Keiga 199 Kekchi 69–70 Kelo 199 Kembra 384, 390 Kemi Saami 221 Kendeje 175 Kendem 174 Kensiu 282, 294 Kenyang 174 Keraʔ 308 Kerek 241–242, 249, 253, 258, 262 Ket 242–244, 248, 257 Keti 253 Kha¬ÀlÌ 338 Khacca0 Bho8e 335 Khaling 327 Kham 329–330, 334 Khamit 280 Khampti 323 Khamyang 324 Khanty 236, 241–242, 245, 248, 253, 256 Khar· ia 307 Khasi 306 Kheng 312 Kheza 322 Khiamngan 321 Khinalug 240, 250, 253, 257, 259 Khlaphlao 285 Khmer 281–282, 306 Khoekhoegowab 179, 181, 185–186,
202–203 Khoirao 322 Khotanese 336 Khowa 315 Khowâr 338 Khufi 236, 250, 253 Khvarshi 240, 249, 253 Khwe 181–182, 186–187, 189 kɯ31 mɑn35 285 Kiche’-Tzutujil-Kaq’chikel 60 Kickapo Kikapu 78 Kickapoo 62 Kidie Lafofa 200 Kihûn· 8alî 338 Kija 363, 365

Kildin Saami 215, 220–222 Kilenge 403 Kiliwa 62, 78 Kim 149 Kinare 200 Kinnauri 334 Kinyaruanda 196 Kiong 156, 158 Kirundi 196 Kis 403 Kissi 149 kjɔŋ nai 285 Klallam 94 Klamath 94, 122 Ko 200 Ko0a 308 Ko0agu 309 Koaiá 41, 55 Koch 320, 323 Kodeoha 382 Koegu 197 Kofa 158 Kofei 385 Kogui 22, 25 Kohi 327 Kôhistânî 337 Kôi 309 Koiari 386 Koitabu 386 Kokáma 34, 55 Kokborok 319 Koke 176 Koko-Bera 364–365 Kokota 404 Kokraimoro 36 Kol 308 Kolami 309–310 Kole 199 Kolokuma 149 Kom 322–323 Koma 200 Komi 215, 226–227, 229 Komo 200 Kon· 0a 309 Kona 156, 158 Koneraw 385 Konyak 318, 321

Kootenay 120 Koraga 309 Korava 309 Kore 200 Koriak 242 Korku 306, 308 Koro 403, 405 Koroa 308 Koroni 382 Korúbo 40, 55 Korwa 308 Koryak 241, 249, 253, 256 Kot 234 Kota 308–309 Kotoko 175 Kowaki 387, 390 Kowiai 385 Kôya 309 Krahô 37 Krenák 36, 55 Kren-akarore 36 Kren-akore 36 Kren-yé 37 Krikatí 37 Krim 157–158 Krimchak 215, 226–227 Krinkatí 37 Kriol 72 Kristang 279, 291, 297 Kryz 240, 250, 253, 259 Kua 189 Kubachi 257 Kubenkrankegn 36 Kubeo 41 Kubewa 41 Kûbi 309 Kucong 279, 288 Kudu-Camo 156, 158 Kugu Muminh 360, 372 Kugu Nganhcara 372 Kûi 309 Kuikúro 30, 39 Kuikúru 39 Kuiva 44 Kujarge 176 Kujubim 41, 55 Kulína 37

Language Names Index 437

Kuluî 338

Kulung 326

Kumâhle 340

Kumaoni 338

Kumarchen 291

Kumâunî 338

Kuna 76–77

Kunar 337

Kunbalak 371

Kunbarlang 364–365

Kune 360, 369

Kungarakany 362

Kunwinjku 351, 355, 358, 360–361, 365,

369, 371–372

Kunza 17, 25

Kuot 387

KKuurr· duixsh

310 336

Kurgan-Tube 236

Kurichu 312

Kurrama 364–365

Kurripako 38, 44

Kurru 309

Kurtôp 312

Kuruáya 35, 55

Kuruba 309

Kurukh 310

Kusan 92

Kusunda 306

Kûvi 309–310

Kw’adza 200

Kwadi 188–189

Kwak’wala 121

Kwanja 171–172, 174

Kwansu 385

Kwazá 41, 55

Kwegu 197, 200

Kwerisa 385, 390

Kwinti 52

a31 γə55 289 Laal 176 Laamoot 200 Labo 405 Lacandon 61, 78 Lachi 285, 295 Lada 335

438 Language Names Index

Ladakh 335 Ladin 215, 224 Ladino 66, 132, 136, 225 La-dwags 335 Laemae 287, 296 Lâfûl 307 Laghu 404 Laghuu 290, 297 Laguna 96 Laha 285, 295 Lahu 279, 288–289 Lai 280, 293 Laiyolo 382 Laji 285 Lajia 283, 295 Lak 240 Lakha 335 Lakher 323 Lakhota 116 Lakkia 283 Lakona 405 Lakota 95 Lalo 287–288, 296 Lalung 319 Lamas 20, 25 Lametin 405 Lamgang 322 Lamo 288, 296 Lâmongshé 307 Langa 174 Languedocian 215, 218–219 Lanoh 282, 294 Lanquín 69 Lao 280, 283 Laomian 279, 289, 296 Laopin 289, 296 Laqua 285 Lardil 346, 348–350, 357–358, 361, 365,
370 Larevat 405 LÀrkyÀ Bho†e 335 Larrakiyan 362 Latar 308 Latgalian 220 Lati 285 Latin 3, 7, 213, 347 Latundê 40

Latvian 219 Lauje 382 Lavi 281 Lavua 280, 293 law21 sεŋ21 289 law33 pan11 289 Lawpan 297 Lawseng 297 lε21 mε21 287 Leco 49, 55 Legenyem 385 Lehali 405 Lehalurup 405 Leimai 287 Leimo 287 Lemke 226 Lemolang 382 Lenape 93 Lenca 70–71 Lengilu 381, 390 Lengua 18, 25
L.-Mascoi 18 Lenkau 403 Leonese 215, 218–219, 229 Lepcha 311, 313–314 Letemboi 405 Levai 316 Lezgian 240 Lhokpu 311, 313 Lhomi 329 Li 283 li13 pu33 lio33 285 Liangmai 322 Ligurian 215, 223–224 Liki 385, 390 Likum 387, 403 Lillooet 120 Limbu 324 Limburgian 222, 229
L.-Ripuarian 229 Limirong Tibetan 331, 335 Limousin 215, 218–219 Limulngan 362 Lingala 166, 169, 176 Lingarak 405 Língua Geral Amazônica 34 Linngithigh 343

Lipo 288 Lisela 383 Lishpa 315 Lisu 287–288 Lithuanian 219 Litzlitz 405 Livonian 215, 222 Lo’ong 307 Logorik 200 Logudorese 223
L. Sardinian 213, 215, 224 Lohorung 325 Lokono 50–52 Lola 383 Lolak 382, 390 Lom 381, 390 Lombard 215, 223–224 Loniu 403 Lorediakarkar 405 Lorkoti 200 Lorrain 217 Lotha 322 Loun 383 Low German 222 Low Saxon 215, 222–223, 227, 229 Lower Sorbian 215, 223, 229 Lowland Scots 218 Loyal Shawnee 93, 111–112 Lude 215, 220, 222 Luiseño 94, 122 Luish 290, 323 Lule Saami 215, 221 Lunchang 321 Lungmi 286 Luri 156, 158 Lushai 322 Luxembourgian 222 Lüzi 285
Maa 193–194 Maasai 177 Maba 175 Macaguane 22, 25 Macedonian 212, 224 Macedo-Romanian 225 Machiguenga 45 Machineri 48

Language Names Index 439
Macú 42 Macuna 43 Maewo Cent 405 Mafea 405 Magar 329–330, 332 Magatige 364–365 Magori 387, 403 Mahâsuî 338 Mahongwe 170, 176 Mahri 273 Maidu 121 Maii 405 Maiongong 44 Maipure 38 Maithili 339 Maiyá 338 Majang 197 Majhi 339–340 Mak 18, 25, 283, 295 Mak’á 18, 25 Makiritáre 39 Mako 44 Makú 22, 39, 44 Máku 41, 45, 55 Maku’a 383, 390 Makúna 41 Makuráp 35 Makushi 51 Makuxí 39 Malak-Malak 362, 365 Malalamai 403 Malasanga 403 Malay 279, 283 Malayalam 305, 308–309 Malayo 22, 25 Malaysian English 291 Malecite 119 Malecus 75 Malin 290, 297 Maliseet-Passamaquoddy 95 Malmariv 405 Maltese 216, 223 Malto 310 Malua Bay 405 Maluri 322 Mam 81–82 Mambila 145, 149, 171, 174

440 Language Names Index
Mamindê 40 Man· 0a 309 Man· 0eâlî 338 Manangba 332 Manchad 333, 339 Manchu 241, 278, 290, 292, 297 Manchu-Tungus 248
M. Jurchen 292 Mandaic 268 Mandan 94 Mandarin 285, 334 Mander 385, 390 Manding 157 Mandinka 149–150 Mang 280, 293 Mangayat 199 Mangdebi-kha 313 Manipur 340 Manitenéri 38 Manjui 18 Mansi 241, 245, 248, 253, 256–257 Mansim 385, 390 Manx 218
M. Gaelic 218 Mao 322 Maonan 283 Maori 7, 377 Mapoyo 44–45, 55 Mapuche 14, 16–17, 25 Maquiritari 44 Maragus 405 Maram 322 Maran 363 Maraña 42 Maremgi 385 Mari 215–216, 226–227, 387 Maring 322 Mariupolitan Greek 230 Marocasero 22, 25 Marrgu 361, 365 Marri
M.-Amu 364–365 M.-Ngarr 362, 364–365 M.-Sjabin 364–365 Marrithiyel 362, 365 Martuthunira 353, 364–365, 369 Marúbo 40

Masaká 41 Masalit 175 Mashco 46 Massalat 176 Massep 385, 390 Mastanahua 47, 55 Mataco 16, 19, 25
M.-Maka 48 Matagalpa 72–73 Matawari 52 Matipú 39 Matis 40 Matngele 362, 365 Mator 234 Matsés 40, 47 Matukar 403 Maung 363, 365 Mawak 387, 390 Mawayána 38, 50–51, 55 Mawé 35 Maxakalí 37 Maxi 154 Maxinéri 38 May 281, 294 Maya 59, 61–62, 64–70, 77, 80–82, 84, 86 Mayali 369 Mayangna 74 Mayongong 39 Mayoruna 40, 47 Mâzanderânî 336 Mazateco 80 Mbara 176 Mbosi 169 Mbre 158 Mbyá 17–18, 25, 34 Mea 406 Meadow Mari 226 Mech 319 Meche 319 Meglenitic 225 Megleno-Romanian 215, 225 Mehináku 38 Mehri 268, 271 Meithei 322–323, 340 Mekém 36, 55 Mekens 36 Melanesian Pidgin 397

Mende 157 Menkrangnoti 36 Mentuktíre 36 Meryam Mir 363, 365, 367 Mewahang 325 Mi’kmaq 90 mɯaŋ51 290 Miao 280 Micha 287, 296 Micmac 119 Midźuish 318 Miji 315 Miju Mishmi 318 Mikir 321 Milang 316 Miloh 307 Miltu 175–176 Miluk 92 Mindi 363 Mindiri 387, 403 Minica 42 Minigir 403 Minyong 317 Mirandese 218 Miranha 38 Mishing 317 Mishmi 318 Miskitu 69, 71–74, 77, 82
M. Coast Creole 69, 71–72 Missouria 92 Misumalpan 72 Miu 403 Miwok 94, 122 MixeZoquean 64, 81 Mixteca 61 Mizo 322–323 Mlabri 280, 293 Mmani 157–158 Mo 283 Mo’ang 290, 297 Mócheno 215, 224, 229 Mochica 20, 25 Mocho 62, 82 Mocoví 16, 25 Moda 200 Modoc 94, 122 Moere 387

Language Names Index 441
Mogholi 269, 272 Mohawk 95, 120 Mojave 121 Mojeño 48 Moken 283, 294 Moklen 283, 295 Moklum 321 Mokoreng 403 Mokpe 174 Moksha 215, 227 Molise Croatian 215, 224 Molo 200 Momuna 385 Mon 278, 280, 292–294, 307 Monachi 94 Mondê 35, 55 Mondropolon 403 Mongol 269, 287 Mongsen Ao 322 Monimbo 72 Mono 122, 174 Montagnais-Naskapi 119 Moore 149, 151 Mopan 66, 69–70, 78 Moraori 385 More 49, 55 Mor2 385, 390 Moronahua 47 Morouas 405 Morvandiau 218 Mos 282 Moselle Franconian 222 Moseten 49 Mosimo 387 Mosina 405 Motilón 44 Moveres 75 Movima 49 Mozarabic 218 Mpi 288, 296 Mpotovoro 405 Mru 323 mu31 di33 289 mu31 tɑ31 289 Muda 289, 296 Mugu Tibetan 331 Muinane 42, 46, 55

442 Language Names Index
Mulao 283 Muminh 360, 365, 372 Mumuye 149 Mun· 0ârî 308 Munda 308 Mundang 149 Mundurukú 35 Munichi 46, 55 Munjani 270 Munji 264, 337 Munji-Yidgha 270, 272 Munsee 90 Mura 40, 55 Murik 387 Murrinhpatha 362, 365 Mursi 197, 200 Murui 46 Musan 387 Musom 387, 403 Mussau-Emira 387 Muya 285, 295 Muysca 10 Mvanip 145, 156, 158 Mwaghavul 149 Mwatebu 387, 403 MyÀgdÌ Chantyal 332 Myeik 286 Mynky 41 Mzab 133, 135 Mzieme 322
N|u 187 Na’o 200 Nachiring 326 Nadëb 40 Nafi 403 Nafusi 125, 134–135 Nagamese 322 Naguri 308 Nah 316 Nahali 304–305 Náhuatl 60–61, 64 Nahukwá 39 Naiki 309–310 Naikri 309 Nakarotê 40 Nambikwára 40

N. do Norte 40 N. do Sul 40 Namuyi 285, 295 Nanai 236, 242, 248, 253, 256, 290, 297 Nancere 175 Nancowry 307 Napore 200 Napu 382 Narango 405 Narau 385 Narisâtî 338 Naro 181, 186–187, 189 Nasa Yuwe 22, 25 Nasarian 405 Naskapi 91, 119 Nass-Gitksan 121 Nataoran 381, 390 Nati 405 Naueti 384 Naukan 242, 249 Nauna 387, 403 Nayi 200 Ndai 174 Ndaka 176 Ndjébbana 362, 365 Ndjuka 52 Ndoro 145 Ndunda 145, 156, 158 Ndyuka 53 Neghidal 248 Negidal 242, 253, 257 Nehali 306 Neku 406 Nemadi 141, 157–158 Nembao 404 Nemi 406 Nenaya 403 Nenets 213, 236, 241–242, 244–245, 248, 253, 256, 262 Neo-West Aramaic 271 Nepalese Terai 340 Nepali 311–314, 321, 324–325, 328–329, 331, 333, 336, 339 Neutral 120 New Norwegian 220 Newar 328–329 Nez Perce 95

Ngaliwurru 363, 365 Ngalkbon 361 Nganasan 248, 253, 256 Ngardi 364–365 Ngarinyman 364–365 Ngarla 364–365 Ngarluma 364–365 Ngas 153 Ngbandi 149 Ngbinda 176 Ngnai 285, 295 Ngombe 175 Ngong 174 Ngwaba 156, 158 Nhandéva 18, 25, 34 Nheengatú 34, 43, 45 Nicaraguan Sign Language 78, 82 Nicola 119 Nihali 305 Nila 383 Ninam 41 Ninde 405 NingalÀmÌ 338 Ninzo 157 Nishi 315–316 Nitinaht 121 Nivaclé 16, 18, 25 Nivkh 241–242, 249, 253, 256 Njanga 171 Njerep 171, 174, 177–178 Nkoroo 156 Nocte 321 Nogay 215, 226–227, 230 Nokuku 405 Nomatsiguenga 46 Nonuya 42, 55 Nooksack 92 Nootka 121 Norman 215, 218–219 Norn 218 North
N. Daly 362 N. Frisian 215, 223 N. Saami 209–211, 215, 221 Northern N. Aslian 282 N. Pame 61, 78

Language Names Index 443
N. Sumu 74 Norwegian 211, 219–220 Noy 176 Nruanghmei 322 Ntenyi 322 Nubaca 175 Nuguria 403 Nukak 42 Nukini 40, 55 Nukumanu 403 Numbami 403 Nung Ven 285, 295 Nunggubuyu 352, 365, 370 Nuorese 223 Nupbikha 312 Nupe 149 Nupri 335 Nuristani 264–265, 270, 336–337 N u 189 Nyahkur 280, 293 Nyang’i 194, 200 Nyangumarta 362, 365 Nyemba 182 Nynorsk 220
Obokuitai 385 Ocaina 42, 46, 48, 55 Occitan 211 Ocuiltec 61 Ocuiltec Tlahuica 78 Odut 156, 158 Ofayé 37, 55
O.-Xavante 37, 55 Ohlone 122 Oiampi 35 Oirata 383 Ojibwa 88, 119 Ojibwe 91 Okanagan 120 Okiek 194 Okro 403 Old Prussian 222 Õlmo 336 Olonetsian 215, 220, 222 Oluta 62
O. Popoluca 61, 78, 85 Omágua 34, 47–48, 55

444 Language Names Index
Ombule 327 Omo Murle 200 Omok 234 Omotik 194, 200 Omotina 36, 55 Ona 12, 16–17, 25 Oneida 90, 95, 120 Ong 307 Ongamo 200 Ônge 305 Onin 385 Onjab 387 Onondaga 90, 120 Oormuri 269–270 Opayé° 37 Opon-Carare 21, 25 Opuuo 200 Orang Kuala 283 Oraon 310 Orejón 47 Ormu 385, 408 Ôrmur· î 336 Ormuri 265–266, 272 Oro Win 41, 55 Oroch 242, 248, 253 Orochen 291 Orok 242, 248, 253, 257 Oron 156 Oroqen 291, 297, 302 Osage 93 Ossete 227 Ossetian 336 Otomí 80 Ouma 404 Oykangand 354, 365
PÀ™rÌ 338 PaVaî 337–338 PaVtô 337 Pa88anî’ 333 Pa8anî’ 333 Pacahuara 48, 55 Pacaraos 20, 25 Padam 317 Padoe 382 Páez 22, 25 Paezan 22

PafgvÀlÌ 338 Pahâ0î 338–339 Paharî 329 Pai Coca 50 Paí Taviterã 18, 25 Paijiao 280, 293 Pailibo 316 Paipai 62, 78 Paite 322 Paitér 35 Pakaanova 41 Pakan 280, 294 Pakanha 363, 365 Pakatan 281, 294 Pakhto 336 Palikúr 38, 52 Paliu 280 Palu’e 384 Pama-Nyungan 365 Pamir 236 Panará 36 Panare 44 Panasuan 382 Panatahua 10 Pâñcthare 324 Panggi 317 Pânî Koch 320 Panjabi 339 Pano 40, 46, 48 Papapana 387, 404 Papi 387 Papia Kristang 291 Paraachii 269 Parachi 265–266, 270, 272, 276 Parâcî 336 Parakanã 34 Paramaca 52, 53 Paraujano 44, 55 Pareng 307 Paresí 38 Parintintin 34 Parji 309–310 Parkateyé 37 Parthian 336 Parya 238, 251, 253, 261 Pashai 265 Pashto 269–270, 336

Pasing 280, 293 Patamona 51 Patua 291, 297 Paulohi 383, 390 Paumarí 37 Paunaca 19, 25 Pauwi 385 Pawnee 93 Paya 71–72 Paya Pech 78 Pear 282, 294 Peba-Yagua 43, 47 Pech 71 Pedá Djapá 39, 55 Pehlevi 336 Pemon 44, 51 Pemóng 39 Pendau 382 Pengo 309 Pentlatch 120 Permyak 215, 226–227, 230 Persian 265–267, 269–271, 275, 336 Petun 120 PhÀkial 323 Phalok 280, 293 Phalûr· a 338 Phedâppe 324 phɔŋ33 ku55 289 Phom 321 Phong 281, 294 Phongku 297 Phonsung 281, 294 phu a 289 pi33 su44 289 Piamatsina 405 Piapoco 21, 25, 44 Piaroa 23, 25, 44 Picard 215, 218–219 Piedmontese 215, 224 Pije 406 Pilagá 16, 25 Pima-Panago 78 Pima-Papago 61 Pinche 48 Pipil 70, 78, 82–83, 85 Pirahã 40

Language Names Index 445
Pira-Tapuya 41 Piratapuyo 43 Píro 38, 46 Pisamira 43, 55 Pisu 297 Pit River 93 Pite Saami 215, 221 Pitjantjatjara 351, 365, 369 Piu 387, 404 Plains Kachari 319 Plains Miri 317 Plautdietsch 213, 215, 217, 227 Pochuri 322 Poitevin-Saintongeais 215, 218–219 Polabian 222 Polci 156, 158 Polish 222 Polissian 226 Polonombauk 405 Pomak 224 Pomo 93, 116, 122 Pontic Greek 225 Popti’ 81–82 Poqomam 66–68, 82 Poqomchi’ 66 Portuguese 32, 146, 160, 212, 217 Potawatomi 93, 119 Powahat 307 Poyanáwa 40, 55 Prasun 265, 270, 337 Prasuni 264, 272 Provençal 215, 218–219 Pû 307 Puari 387, 390 Pubiaw 295 Puinave 22, 25, 44–45 Puinave-Makú 44 Puiron 322 Pukobiyé 37 Pula 289–290, 297 Puma 326–327 Pumé 45 Pumpokol 234 Punan Batu 381, 390 puo11 ʔjaŋ42 284 Puquina 10 Purik 335

446 Language Names Index

Puroit 315 Puruborá 35, 55 Puturú 35 Pwaamei 406 Pwapwâ 406 Pyu 292, 303
Q’anjob’al 66, 68, 81–82 Q’eqchi 69–70, 81–82 qa biaw33 285 Qaw 284, 295 Quechan 121 Quechua xii, 2, 9–11, 13–15, 17, 19–21,
25 Quingnam 9 Qwarenya 200
Rabha 320 Rahambuu 382 Raji 330 Rama 73–74, 78 Ramarama 35 Ramo 316 Rangkas 333 Rangpo 334 Raorou 288, 296 Ratagnon 381, 390 Rau 283, 295 Raute 330–331 Remo 47, 307 Rengma 322 Repanbitip 405 Rerep 405 Reshe 156, 158 Resian Slovene 215, 224 Resígaro 46, 48, 55 Retuarã 43 Reyesano 49, 55 Rikbaktsá 37 Ripuarian 222, 229 Ro¬anÌ 337 Ro¬orvÌ 337 Rodiya 305 Romagnol 215, 224, 229 Romani 209, 213, 215–217, 225, 231,
275 Romanian 215, 224–225

Romansch 205, 215, 223 Rongmai 322 Roria 406 Roshorvi 236–237, 250, 253 Rotwelsch 213 Ruc 281, 294 Ruga 320 Rugha 320 Runa Shimi 50 Rushani 236, 250, 253, 257 Russian xiv, 210, 219, 226, 234–239,
241–244, 246–247, 256–259, 268, 347 Rusyn 215, 225–227, 229 Rutul 240, 250, 253, 257 Ryukyuan xv–xvi
Saami xv, 205, 209, 211–212, 215–216, 220–222, 242, 248, 253, 256
Saanich 90, 120 Saaroa 381, 390 Sabanê 40, 55 Sac 281 Sach 294 Saek 283, 295 Sahaptin 95, 116 Saisiyat 381 Sak 290, 297, 323 Sakapultek 66 Sakapulteko 69 Sake 170, 176 Sakirabiár 36, 55 Salas 17, 28, 383, 390 Sáliba 23, 25 Salinan 87, 92, 122 Sáliva 44–45 Saluan 382 Salumã 38 Sâm 326 Samataw 287, 296 Samba Daka 149 Sambe 157–158 Sambú 25 Samei 287, 296 Sámi 220 Samish 90 Samosa 387 Samoyed 236

Language Names Index 447

Sampang 326 Samrai 282, 294 Samre 282, 294 San Felipe 96 Sanapaná 18, 25 Sandawe 181, 188–189, 195 Sanema 45 Sangkong 289, 297 Sanglechi-Ishkashimi 264, 269–270, 272 SanglÌcÌ 337 Sango 175 Sangtam 322 Sanhaja of Srair 128, 133, 135 Sanká 22 Sanskrit 7–8 Santa Ana 96 Santhali 306, 308 Santiago del Estero 25 Santo Domingo 96 Sanumá 41 Sanyi 296 Sanyie 287 Sa-ong 282, 294 Saora 307 Saparua 383 Saponi 385, 390 Sar 176 Sarak 316 Saramaccan 52 Saramaka 53 Sarcee 119 Sardinian 215, 223–224 SariqÒlÌ 337 Sarmatian 336 Sassarese 223 Sassarese Sardinian 215, 224 Sateré-Mawé 35 Saterland Frisian 222 Saterlandic 215, 222 Sauri 385 Sause 385 Savara 307 Sâwî 338 Sawkna 128, 134–135 Sayan Samoyed 6 sBal-ti 335 sBi-ti 335

Scanian 220 Scots 215, 218–219, 229 Scottish Gaelic 215, 219 Sebundoy 23, 25 Sechelt 120 Secoya 47, 50 Segeju 200 Sekani 90, 119 Seke 332, 406 Selk’nam 12, 17, 25 Selkup 234, 244, 246, 248, 253, 256–258 Selpechen 291 Sema 322 Semai 282, 294 Semaq Beri 282, 294 Seme 149 Semelai 282, 294 Semnânî 266–267, 336 Seneca 95, 116, 120 Sened 128, 133, 135 Senggi 385 Sengmai 323 Sengseng 404 Sentinelese 305 Sepa 404 Sera 387, 390, 404 Serbian 224 Serbo-Croat 212, 224 Seri 62, 78, 87 Serili 383 Serrano 122 Setswana 187–188, 196 Shabo 197, 200 Shâchop 311 Shâm Doâniyâs 324 Shanenawá 40 Sharanahua 47 Shark Bay 406 Shasta 122 Shawanauá 40 Shawiya 125, 133, 135 Shawnee 106, 115 She 105, 107, 285, 295 SheKgalaghari 188 Shelta 213 Shenowa 125, 133, 135 Sherbro 157

448 Language Names Index
Sherdukpen 315 Sherpa 335–336 Shimaco 47 Shimong 317 Shingsaba 329 Shipaya 35, 55 Shipibo-Conibo 47 Shita 200 Shixing 285, 295 Shompen 307 Shor 248, 253, 256 Shoshone 116 Shua 189 Shuadit 218 Shuar Chicham 50 Shughni 253 Shugnani 237, 257 Shui 283 Shumashti 276 Shumasti 270, 272 Shuswap 120 Sian 381 Siberian Yupik 253, 256 Sîchë 406 Sicilian 223 Sida 289 Sienare Senufo 157 Sighu 170, 176 Sikaiana 404 Sikapakense 66 Sikïyana 51, 55 Sikuani 22, 25, 44 Sila 289, 297 Simte 323 7i n· â 306, 337–338 Sinhalese 305 Sinsali 289, 296 Siona 43, 50 Sirenik 236 Siriano 41, 43 Siriono 49 Sirmau0î 338 Sissano 387, 390 Sivandi 266 Siwi 125, 134–135, 138 Skepi 51

Skolt Saami 215, 220–221 Slave 119 Slavey 91 Sliammon 120 Slovak 222, 225 Slovene 215, 224 Slovincian 222 Snchit su’umshstsn 94 So 281 Sobei 385, 408 Sodia 307 Sogdian 336 Sogoo 200 Solon 291 Som 387 Somyev 157–158, 172, 175, 177 Song 281 Songhay 149 Songish 120 Soo 200 Sooke 120 Soqotri 273 Sora 307 Sorbian 205, 207, 210, 215, 223, 229 South
S. Bahnaric Chrau 281 S. Itelmen 234 S. Munda 307 S. Saami 215, 221 S. Zoque 62 Southern S. Aslian 282 S. Mansi 257 S. Sumu 74 Sowa 406 Spanish xii, 7, 9–15, 63, 65–67, 71–72, 77, 81, 125, 127, 136, 195, 217–218, 225 Spiti 335 Squamish 120 Sranan Tongo 52 Straits 120 Suai 281 Suarmin 387 Suba 200 Subtiava 72 \ughnÌ 337 Sukuma 177

Sulung 315 Sumariup 387 \umÀ¬tÌ 338 Sumu 71–74 Sumu Mayangna 78 Sunwar 327–328 Surel 327–328 Suruahá 37 Suruí 34–35
S. do Tocantins 34 Susuami 387, 390 Su-ung 282, 294 Suyá 36 Svan 239, 250, 253 Swahili 166, 177, 196 Swedish 219–220 Swiss German 222 Swoeng 281, 294
ta31 uaŋ55 285 Taap 387, 390 Taba 383, 390 Tabasaran 240 Tacana 47–49 Tachelhit 133, 135 Tachi 122 Tagalog 377 Tagargrent 125, 133, 135 Tagin 316 Tagish 119 Tahitian 395–396 Tahltan 119 Tai
T. Daeng 283, 295 T. Loi 280, 293 T. Long 324 T. Neua 283, 295 T. Nora 324 T. Phake 323 Taihlong 307 Taikat 385 Taje 382, 390 Tajik 234, 236–238 Tâjikî 336 Tajio 382 Taki Taki 52 Takia 396–397, 400

Language Names Index 449
Takuu 404 Tâleshî 336 Taloki 382 Talondo’ 382 Tamachek 149 Tamahaq 133, 135 Tamajaq 125, 133, 135 Taman 290, 297 Tamang 331, 336 Tamarkhole 324 Tamasheq 125, 128, 133, 135 Tamazight 124–126, 128, 133, 135, 137 Tambotalo 406 Tamil 305, 308–309 Tanema 404 Tangam 317 Tangkhul 322 Tangkic 362 Tanglang 288, 296 Tangoa 406 Tangsa 321 Tanimbili 404 Tanimuca 43 Tapayúna 36 Tapieté 17–19, 25 Tapirapé 34 Târâlî Khâm 332 Târâlî Magar 332 Taraon 285, 318 Tarascan 7 Tariána 38, 55 Tariano 42, 55 Tarifit 125–126, 133, 135 Tarok 153 Tarpia 385, 408 Taruang 285, 296 Tashelhit 125–126 Tasmate 406 Tat 239, 250, 253, 256 Tatar 215, 226–227, 230, 258 Tatet 307 Tati 266–267, 277 Tâtî 336 Tatuyo 43 Taulil 387 Taulipáng 39 Taungyo 286

450 Language Names Index
Tause 385 Taushiro 48, 55 Tavoyan 286 Tawahka 71 Taworta 385 Taznatit 133, 135 t e11 pjas11 289 Tchumbuli 153–154, 158, 162 tə21 ʔlɯ33 284 tə33 ʔlu53 284 Te’un 383 Teco 62 Teda 149 Téhñu 307 Tehuelche 11, 16, 25 Teke 169 Teko 67, 69, 78 Telugu 305, 308–309 Temashin 133, 135 Tembé 35 Temiar 282, 294 Temne 157 Ten 283, 295 Tench 404 Tenetehára 35 Tengsa 322 Tenharin 34 Tenis 387, 390 Tennet 200 Tepeth 200 Ter Saami 215, 220, 222 Terena 38 Tereno 38 Teribe 76, 78 Terraba 75–76 Teushen 11 Thaayorre 362, 364–365 Thadou 322 Thai 280, 288–289
T. Dam 283 Thakali 331–332 Thangmi 328–329 Thao 381, 390 Tharu 339 Thâruvânî 339 Thavung 281, 294, 301 Thet 290

Thompson 116, 120 Thulung 327 Tialo 382 Tibetan 306, 311–312, 316, 329, 332–335 Ticuna 43, 48 Tiddim Chin 323 Tidikelt 133, 135 Tikúna 41 Tilung 327 Timbíra 37 Tinan 333 Tindi 240, 249, 253 Tinigua 23, 25 Tirahi 264–265, 270, 274–275 Tirâhî 338 Tiriyó 39, 52 Tiro 270, 272 Titsch 223 Tivoid 149, 174 Tiwa 319 Tiwi 362, 364–365, 370 Tkhumi 268 Tlahuica 61 Tlingit 121 to33 luoʔ55 284 Toba 16, 25
T. Mascoi 18, 25 T. Qom 18 Tobati 385, 390, 408 Toda 308–309 Tofalar 242, 248, 253, 257 Tofamna 385 Toga 406 Töitschu 215, 223 Tok 396 T. Pisin 377–378, 396–397 Tol 71 Tol Jicaque 78 Tolo 284 Tolowa 121 Toluo Gelao 295 Tolupan 71 Tomadino 382 Tombelala 383 Tomo So 149 Tonga’ 282, 294 Torá 32, 41, 55

Toram 176 Torne Valley Finnish 220 Torwâlî 338 Tosu 285 Toto 320 Totoli 383 Totonaca 80 Totoró 21, 25 Toyeri 12 Tregâmî 264, 270, 272, 337 Trio 39, 52 Triw 281, 294 Tromowa 312 Trukhmen 215, 227 Trumái 30, 41, 55 Ts’amakko 197, 200 Ts’ao 186, 189 Ts’ixa 189 Tsachila 21, 25, 27 Tsafiki 21, 25 Tsakhur 240, 250, 253, 256–257 Tsakonian 215, 225 Tsamay 197 Tsat 282 Tsetsaut 119 Tsez 240, 249, 253, 257 Tshangkha 335 Tshangla 311–312 Tshara 182, 189 Tshoa 189 Tsimane 49 Tsohom-Djapá 39 Tsum 335 Tubatulabal 122 Tucano 43, 47, 50 Tujia 286, 296 Tukano 40–41, 44 Tul·u 309 Tule 22, 25, 157 Tum 281, 294 Tumtum 200 Tumzabt 125, 133, 135 Tunayana 52 Tundra 213 Tundra Nenets 241–242, 244, 248 Tunebo 22, 25 Tunen 175

Language Names Index 451
Tuotomb 175 Tuparí 35–36 Tupí-Guaraní 34 Turaka 387, 390 Turi 308 Turkic 234 Turkish 213, 224, 230, 275 Turoyo 268, 274–275
°
Tuscan 223 Tuscarora 93, 120 Tutchone 119 Tutuba 406 Tuyuca 43 Tuyúka 41 Tuzanteko 62 Txapakúra 41 Txikão 39 Txukahamãe 36 Txunhuã-Djapá 39, 55 Tyap 149 Tz’utujiil 66, 82 Tzeltal 80 Tzotzil 80
U’wa 22, 25 Ubykh 6, 236, 239 Uchumataco 19, 25 Udi 240, 250, 253, 256, 259 Udihe 242, 248, 253, 256 Udmurt 215, 227 Uhunduni 385 Uighur 291 Uitoto 42 Ujir 383 Ukarãgmã 38 Ukhwejo 175 Ukrainian 226, 258 Ulchi 248, 253, 257 Ulta 248 Ulwa 74, 78 Umbugarlan 362 Ume Saami 215, 221 Umutina 36, 55 Ungarinyin 363, 365 Upper Arun· 325 Upper Sorbian 215, 223, 229

452 Language Names Index
Ura 406 Urak Lawoi 283, 295 Urakhi 257 Uraon 310 Urarina 47 Urdu 305–306, 310, 339 Urmi 268 Uru 11, 19, 34 Uruak 45, 55 Uruava 404 Urubu-Kaapór 34 Uru-Chipayan 19 Uru-Eu-Wau-Wau 34 Urum 230 Urupá 41, 55 Usku 385, 390 Uspantek 66 Uspanteko 69 Uw-Oykangand 354 Uya 387 Uzbek 236, 238, 271
Vaiphei 323 Vakhi 236–237, 250, 253, 257 Valencian 218 Valpei 406 Vamale 406 Vano 404 Varohio 61, 78 Vedda 305 Vehes 388, 404 Venetan 223 Veps 215, 220, 222, 256 Vepsian 242, 248, 253, 256 Veron 270 Vi6n· uprîya Man· ipurî 340 Vietnamese 290, 306 Vilela 16, 25 Vinmavis 406 Vojvodina Rusyn 215, 225 Volapük 213 Vot 256 Vote 215, 221–222 Votic 242, 248, 253 Vumbu 170, 176 Vunapu 406

Wab 388, 404 Wagiman 362, 365 Waiãpi 35 Waigali 264–265, 270, 272, 276, 337 Waíkana 41 Wailapa 406 Waima’a 384 Waimirí 39 Waimirí-Atroarí 39 Wai-Wai 39 Waiwai 52 WakhÌ 337 Waksachi 94, 122 Wali 200 Walloon 215, 223 Walpiri 370 Walser 223–224 Wambule 327 Wampur 404 Wanano 41, 43 Wancho 321 Wangmakhar 313 Wanji 236 Wano 386 Wao Tiriro 50 Wapixana 38, 50 Wappo 122 Warao 45 Warapu 388, 390 Wardaman 363, 365 Warekena 38, 44–45 Wargla 133, 135 Warí 41, 386 Warlpiri 345, 351, 356–357, 362, 365,
371 Warrau 51 Waru 383 Washo 122 Wastek 82 Wataluma 404 Water Koch 320 Watut North 404 Waumeo 76 Waunana 25 Waurá 38 Wayampí 35 Wayána 39, 52–53

Language Names Index 453

Wayãpi 53 Wayoró 35, 55 Wayuu 44 Wayuunaiki 21, 25 Weenhayek 19, 25 Welsh 208, 215, 217, 219, 229–230 West Frisian 215, 223, 229 Western
W. Daly 362, 364 W. Desert 343, 362, 365 W. Flemish 222 W. Mari 215, 226–227 W. Neo-Aramaic 267–268, 274 Wichi 25 Wichita 116 Wik 373 W.-Mungkan 351, 360, 362, 364–365,
371 Winneba go 95 Wintu 94 Wintun 122 Witsuwit’en 90 Wiwa 22, 25 Wiyot 92, 121 Wo’tiheh 23 Wobe 149 Wolof 149, 151 Woria 386, 390 Wot 264–265, 270 Wo8apûr 338 Wotapuri 272
W.-Katarqalai 264–265, 270 Wotiheh 25 Wotu 383 Wounaan 22, 25 Wukchumne 122 Wurrugu 343 Wusi 406 Wyandotte 92
Xakriabá 36, 55 Xambioá 37 Xapho 290 Xavánte 36 Xerénte 36 Xetá 35, 55 Xhosa 181, 185

Xiandao 286 Xibo 290, 297 Xikrin 36 Xinka 67, 69, 78, 82 Xipaya 35, 55 Xiri 185–186, 188 Xixia 292 Xokléng 37 Xuri 266
Yaaku 193–194, 200, 203 Yabarana 44–45 Yacham 322 Yaghnôbî 237–238, 250, 253, 337 Yagua 43, 47 Yahgan 12, 17, 25 Yajich 16 Yakkha 325–326 Yakkhaba 325 Yakut 242 Yamalo-Nenets 241, 244–245 Yamamadí 37 Yamana 12, 17, 25 Yambasa 174 Yaminahua 47–48 Yamináwa 40 Yamphu 325 Yanam 41 Yanan 122 Yanesha 46 Yangben 174 Yanggal 346, 365 Yangkaal 346 Yangkam 145, 150–151, 157–158 Yanhangu 364–365 YàNkàm 151 Yanktonai 95 Yankunytjatjara 351, 365, 369 Yanomae 41 Yanomám 41 Yanomami 41, 45 Yapunda 388 Yarawi 388, 390 Yaru 20, 25 Yaruro 45 Yasa 175 Yathê 37

454 Language Names Index

Yauyos 20, 25 Yavapai 101, 103, 117 Yavbé 94, 101 Yawalapití 32, 38, 55 Yawanawá 40 YÀzghulÀmÌ 236–237, 250, 253, 337 Yazva Komi 226, 229 Yebá-masã 41 Yekuána 39, 44 Yeni 171 Yenisei 236 Yeral 45 Yerong 284, 295 Yerukala 309 Yevanic 215, 225, 229 Yi 280, 284 Yiddish 2, 132, 212–213, 215, 217, 226–
227 Yidgha 270, 272, 337 Yimas 388 Yimchungrû 322 Yimikirli 371 Yine 46 Yir-Yoront 368 Yofuajá 18 Yoki 386, 390 Yokuts 92, 94, 122 Yol-mo 336 Yolngu 373
Y.-Matha 362, 365 Yora(nahua) 47 Yoruba 149, 151, 154, 160 Yotafa 408 Younuo 285, 295 Yowlumni 122 Yu:lngu 371 Yuacare 49 Yuba 336 Yucatec 60, 69–70 Yucateco 80 Yuchi 87, 93, 106, 117–118 Yuco 21, 25 Yucpa 21, 25 Yucuna 42 Yudjá 35 Yug 236, 253 Yugur 291, 297

Yuhúp 40, 42 Yukagir 234, 241–242, 249, 253, 257 Yuki 92, 122 Yukpa 44 Yukulta 346–349, 365, 370 Yulu 200 Yuma 121 Yuqui 49 Yuriti 43 Yurok 121 Yurt Tatar 230 Yuruna 35 Yurupari-Tapúya 38 Yuwana 45
Z’angkar 335 Zaba 285, 296 Zaiwa 318 Zande 149 Zangs-dkar 335 Záparo 47, 50, 55 Zaparoan 11, 50 Zapoteco 61 Zarma 149 Zarphatic 218 zɑw55 zo33 288 Zay 197, 200 Zâzâ 336 Zazao 404 ZÈbÀkÌ 337 Zeem 157 Zeme 322 Zemiaki 337 Zenaga 125, 128, 133, 135 Zhangzhung 333 Zhuang 280 Zia 96 Zo 35, 323 Zo’é 35 Zoró 33, 35 Zulu 181 Zumaya 175 Zuni 87, 96, 116 Zuruahá 37 Zway 197, 200 Zyryan 226

