Hoofdstuk 01.Boven 15-10-2002 11:08 Pagina 9
Part I The Amerindian peoples and languages

Hoofdstuk 01.Boven 15-10-2002 11:08 Pagina 10 Map 1.1. Suriname in greater Guyana, 1654

Hoofdstuk 01.Boven 15-10-2002 11:08 Pagina 11
CHAPTER I
The native population
MIGRATIONS AND IDENTITIES
Eithne B. Carlin and Karin M. Boven
I see my life go drifting like a river from change to change; I have been many things –
A green drop in the surge, a gleam of light Upon a sword, a fir-tree on a hill,
An old slave grinding at a heavy quern, A king sitting upon a chair of gold –
And all these things were wonderful and great; But now I have grown nothing, knowing all. Ah! Druid, Druid, how great webs of sorrow Lay hidden in the small slate-coloured thing!
W.B. Yeats (1892)
Introduction
This chapter tells of the demise of nations, of yet another sad episode in the history of humanity: the conquest, subjugation, and subsequent decimation of the native population of the Guianas. It is a chronicle based on (scant) oral and written history alike of the lives and migrations of the people who populated an area, part of which – unknown to many of the aboriginal inhabitants – later came to be called Suriname.
Before the arrival of the Spanish, the Guianas were an animated arena of minipowers, populated by various related and unrelated groups of people whom we now by accident of history call (Amer)Indians.1 There were apparently no clear-cut territorial claims between the groups themselves. Rather, villages of the different groups lay interspersed with each other along the rivers and mobility was high. Neighbouring groups, regardless of whether they were related or not, could become friends or enemies, and quite often were consecutively both. People intermarried, and villages organized large feasts and dances where political allegiances were decided and undone. Life was not greatly dissimilar to that of the white men, as yet unsuspected.

Hoofdstuk 01.Boven 15-10-2002 11:08 Pagina 12

12

Eithne B. Carlin and Karin M. Boven

The world of these people was, however, also a complex one because danger, not only from man and beast but also from spirits disguised as man and beast, lurked behind every tree. Not surprising thus that when Amerindians discovered the first white man on their territory, speculation as to whether he really was a human and not just a spirit, the latter of which was more likely, was rife.2 Unlike the ingeniousness of their Caribbean island relatives, we have no reports as to whether the native population of the mainland had devised any methods of finding out whether these whites were human or not. We owe the following not entirely far-fetched anecdote to Claude Lévi-Strauss (1952:12):
‘In the greater Antilles, a few years after the discovery of America, while the Spaniards were sending out Commissions of investigation to discover whether or not the natives had a soul, the latter spent their time drowning white prisoners in order to ascertain, by long observation, whether or not their bodies would decompose’.
The line between history, reality, and myth is a thin one in the Amerindian communities, yet it is also one that is based on a Weltanschauung that differs radically from the European one where, for example, we can talk of a diversity of cultures, but basically a unity of nature. The Amazonian world, however, according to Eduardo Viveiros de Castro (1998) is based on the principle that the spirit forms a unity that is manifested in corporeal diversity. Hence a spirit can manifest itself in the form of any animate being, thus increasing the virtual population of the world. It is this conceptualization that cannot be ignored in helping to understand the reactions of fear and animosity that ensued after the collision of cultures, and the changes that were to come about as Europeans and later Maroons moved into Amerindian lands. Indeed, the Caribs on the Guiana coast referred to the white men as palana akïlï (sea spirits) ‘spirits from the sea’, a term that is still used in one form or another among most Amerindian groups in Suriname today.3
We can assume that those groups of the forested interior of the Guianas were generally undisturbed by the Europeans’ initial attempts to usurp their lands, although they would likely have heard from their coastal friends (and enemies) that a non-Amerindian enemy had been spotted. Nevertheless, from the first moment of the Spanish invasion of the Caribbean islands, the native population had begun a losing battle to defend their territory. And since we know that prior to and during the Spanish conquest the Caribs had been highly mobile throughout these islands and that in the early seventeenth century the Caribs from the coast of Guiana were very much familiar with Trinidad, whence came the Yao, a Cariban group that had fled from the Spanish there, the Amerindians of at least the coastal area knew all too well of the Spanish force. Danger lay, however, as it mostly had before the European invasion, in enemy raids among the Amerindian groups themselves, an activity that became more lucrative after the arrival of the Europeans, since any captives could be sold to or traded with these as slaves.
Slavery, at least in the form practised by the Europeans, was unknown to the native population although there was a system of subjugating captive men and integrating them

Hoofdstuk 01.Boven 15-10-2002 11:08 Pagina 13

I The native population

13

into the group by means of the institution of being pëito ‘servant’ (in the Cariban languages) or mako ‘servant’ (in Arawak). The relationship that resulted from the state of being pëito was, however, a reciprocal one with an underlying hierarchical basis.4 Indeed in the languages that are not yet extinct, these terms are still used to refer to someone in the employ of another, as in Trio, for example, ranti ipëito [government his-servant] ‘someone who works for the government (minister, security person etc.)’. Generally a pëito became a brother-in-law to the ruling family. That is, he was given a wife, and thus he and his children could enter into the kinship structure. Whether those who traded in slaves for the Europeans knew anything of what this foreign system entailed remains conjectural. At any rate, by the mid-eighteenth century the colonists had already come to the realization that male Amerindians were totally unsuited both to slavery and working on the plantations. Hence the male Amerindian slaves were assigned such jobs as hunting and fishing, which were in line with their own cultural tasks.

River systems constitute a means of communication rather than frontiers
We know little of the Amerindians in the coastal region, and even less about those in the interior, until the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries, which can be characterized as a busy time for the various Amerindian groups, who were making and holding alliances with the French and then the English and the Dutch with an aim to usurping the power of the Spanish, with whom the Arawaks had sided. Yet all the while, normal life was being lived, wars were being fought between Amerindian groups themselves: Robert Harcourt, for example, talks of ‘allyed nations [… against] the Charibes’ in 1608 (Harris 1928:75). The Amerindians had simply gained another enemy, one who could be used in their own wars.
Three main groups stand out in the early post-Columbus period, namely the Warao, the Caribs, who, if one believes the writings of the Spanish, enjoyed a reputation no less impressive than that of the Vikings in their heyday, and the Arawaks.5 The Caribs and the

Hoofdstuk 01.Boven 15-10-2002 11:08 Pagina 14

14

Eithne B. Carlin and Karin M. Boven

Map 1.2. The Dutch colony of Guiana
Arawaks lived on the Caribbean islands that were visited before incursions into the mainland, and in the coastal region of what has been termed the Wild Coast. The Warao, found in the writings of Sir Walter Ralegh and Lawrence Keymis in 1596,6 are described by the former in 1596 as being very manly and brave, and although there are reports of the Warao attacking other groups, they were generally not considered to be a hostile people (Schomburgk 1848; Keymis 1968). The Caribs were fierce enemies of the Spanish Crown, of the Arawaks, and of almost everyone else too. The Arawaks, on the other hand, who are described as complacent and ‘indolent’ subjects, were friends of the Spanish Crown and of almost everyone else too, except for the Caribs whom they liked to deliver to the Spanish and later to the English as slaves (for their part the Caribs raided the Amerindian groups of the interior for slaves7). More importantly the first European arrivals, and later also the colonizers, made a sharp division between being ‘Carib’ and being ‘Arawak’, a division that was not without consequences. Caribs, on the basis of their being Carib, a term which for the Spanish in the early sixteenth century was synonymous with ‘anthropophagous’, were to be captured and enslaved, according to a decree issued in 1503 by Isabella, Queen of Spain (Whitehead 1988:172-73). The Caribs were a thorn in the eye of

Hoofdstuk 01.Boven 15-10-2002 11:08 Pagina 15

I The native population

15

the Spanish, a force to be conquered. Their knowledge of the Caribs, however, was initially largely based on reports they received from the Arawakan groups on the islands who had long suffered under attacks from the Caribs, and who insisted that the Caribs killed and ate their male captives. It is now taken as highly unlikely that human flesh was a staple of the Caribs. Rather the evidence, including that from the oral histories of several groups of the Guianas, points to ritualistic consumption of war trophies (Whitehead 1984); understandably enough, no present group admits to these acts of their ancestors. Instead they ascribe them to neighbouring groups and also to Europeans. Moreover, since anyone carrying out the act of cannibalism was a justifiable candidate for slavery, and given the fact that the Spanish workforce on the islands fluctuated greatly, it was in the interest of the Spanish to accuse as many people as possible of anthropophagy.
By the time the English arrived on the mainland, the Caribs had already experienced the Spanish and the French, both of whom they had resisted admirably. For example, when between 1503 and 1506 the French attempted to settle on the island off Cayenne, which was at that time called Gowateria, they were all slaughtered by the Caribs who then burnt down the settlement (Sausse 1951). Another group that is featured on many maps from the early period lived further inland. These were the large and fearsome group of ‘headless’ Indians, the Ewiapanoma, expert warriors who fought with enormous clubs, bows and arrows, and whose heads were in their chests, or so the story goes …

The Europeans
The Europeans who made inroads in the Guianas were those who were at war with each other in this formative period of Europe, namely the Spanish, English, French, and Dutch, who had extended their battlefield to the Caribbean. Indeed it was a Spaniard, Alonso de Hojeda, who first sailed by the coast of Suriname in 1499. At the end of the sixteenth century English explorers and traders sailed back and forth along the coast, trading and hoping to find gold, but as far as we know there were no attempts at permanent settlement. Thereafter came the French, whose stay was shortlived, then the English who set up a permanent post which was seized by the Dutch in 1667. While national borders, mostly along ‘natural’ boundaries such as rivers, were drawn up and re-drawn in the subsequent centuries to demarcate what we now know as the Guianas, including adjacent areas of Venezuela and Brazil, they held little relevance for the native population which hitherto had used the river system as a means of communication between and among groups rather than as a means to keep out the enemy.
The Europeans, seeking their own or their nations’ fortunes, and later the African slaves, brought in to work the plantations, unwittingly brandished a weapon more deadly than the guns and gunpowder the former carried; they brought diseases for which no immunity existed in the Amerindians initiating a massive decline in the numbers of the native population. Many of the groups who survived moved further into the forest, which, until the expeditions of nine-

Hoofdstuk 01.Boven 15-10-2002 11:08 Pagina 16

16

Eithne B. Carlin and Karin M. Boven

teenth-century explorers, was almost inaccessible to Europeans, and as their numbers dwindled, smaller groups came together to form larger groups. As the Maroons fled to the forest in the early eighteenth century, the Amerindians moved even deeper into the forest, later to return north to intensify trade with the Maroons. And it is there today, contiguous to the Maroons and southwards, that we find small groups of Amerindians for whom the encounters that occurred with outsiders over the last five centuries are still a vivid memory.
In the following we attempt to move, sometimes in the face of the scarcity of sources taking large leaps, through the centuries of European presence in the Guianas, focussing, as far as possible, on the native population in present-day Suriname and its immediate environs. The Amerindian groups are discussed here in time schemas, namely the periods 1600-1700, 1700-1850, and 1850-1950, with the last-mentioned period setting the scene for the present-day identity and location of the remaining groups. One of the recurrent themes that emerges as this chapter progresses, is that of migration and re-groupment, often making the chronology of the distinct groups elusive. That is, individual groups and villages are not easily followed in time since internal wars were taking place that affected social and political structures. Villages were being abandoned, for example, after a chief died, and many different groups were continually coming together to form larger, multiethnic amalgamations. Since the history of the groups of the interior of Suriname differs starkly from that of the coastal groups in that the former only came to be better known through expeditions to the interior, whereas the latter, through their accessible location, were more directly affected by the European outthrust and by the trading contacts they held with Europeans from the end of the sixteenth century, we deal in the following section first with the coastal groups and then with those of the interior.
1600-1700: trading along the coast
By the year 1604 the Spanish had taken possession of the major Caribbean islands of Cuba, Hispaniola, Jamaica, and Puerto Rico. They had also constructed settlements at Cartagena and Cumaná (present-day Venezuela) that were flourishing; their hold on Trinidad, however, was unstable due to the rebellious nature of the native population (Williamson 1923:9-10). On the mainland, the Spanish never acquired an unambiguous hold on the area east of the Orinoco. Spanish attempts at a settlement of Cayenne in 1568 were thwarted by the Kari»na and Parakoto (another Cariban group), as were various subsequent attempts by the French and Dutch (Hurault 1989:28).8 In contrast to the English and French, who had business interests along the coast of Guiana, the aim of the Spanish was to seek treasure and subdue and Christianize the pagan natives who had, however, no desire to be Christianized and subjugated. It is likely that there were English on the mainland of Guiana before 1595 (English merchants had undertaken several voyages to Brazil from 1530 onwards) since Ralegh charged two expeditions to search south of the Orinoco for alternative routes to El Dorado in 1596, the second of which led Leonard Berry to the Corentyne where he came upon another Englishman John Ley, a lone explorer who had been lured to the coast of Guiana by Ralegh’s reports (Lorimer

Hoofdstuk 01.Boven 15-10-2002 11:08 Pagina 17

I The native population

17

1994). Ley charted the rivers and the inhabitants of Guiana up and down the coast from the Amazon to the Orinoco, leaving us, in reports of his three voyages there, lists of names of different native groups and their alliances over time, which can be found in Lorimer (1994). While most of Ley’s information is about the coastal groups, he does mention that he heard from these about a group called Akuriyo living in the mountains who had ‘noe haier on their heades They have their heades Endented quarterwise, before, behinde and on both sides’ (Lorimer 1994:207). Unfortunately, in 1604 when the English under the command of Charles Leigh (no relation to John Ley) first attempted a settlement near the Oyapock River, where Ley had left behind a factor (business agent) in 1602, John Ley died before having had the chance to write up his presumably extensive ethnographic notes (Lorimer 1994).9
At any rate, after a flurry of activity in the final years of the sixteenth century, actual colonization began in the first two decades of the seventeenth century with the English, French, and Dutch vying for power. Their main interests, in contrast to those of the Spanish, were purely economic in nature; thus they saw in the native population possible trading partners rather than a force to be subjugated. Besides, the Europeans knew that if there was any gold to be found, they could only be led to it by the Amerindians. By the time of Keymis’ journey in 1596, the originally Trinidadian Yaos, some of whom were already Guiana-bred, and possibly Guiana-born, had been undertaking trading trips to Trinidad to sell urapo ‘Brazil wood’ to the French (Keymis 1968:B3). And the journey from the Orinoco Delta to Trinidad was a frequent one for the Warao, too, who were renowned for their strong seafaring boats. From the beginning of the seventeenth century onwards, the Amerindians of the coast would first ascertain that the arriving Europeans were not Spanish, whereafter they could trade with them. All the groups of the coastal mainland were engaged in trading with the English and later the Dutch, their wares being canoes, wood, hammocks, wax, balsam, oil, and spices such as cinnamon and nutmeg, the availability of goods depending on the environs of the group. The business acumen of the Caribs of the coast grew with the demands of their trading partners, and by the time of the Dutch occupation of Berbice, they were making boats of all sizes. The Akawaios (a Cariban group), who lived further inland (and still live in Guyana), reputed masters of the art of making arrow poison, and who were the travelling salesmen par excellence of the time, also dealt in slaves whom they raided from among their immediate neighbors of the interior. The Amerindians, in turn, received firearms, cloth, machetes, knives, fishhooks, combs, mirrors, and beads (Bancroft 1769:206).
In addition to being useful as trading partners, all the powers subsequent to the Spanish who came to colonize Guiana brought with them, in the eyes of most of the Amerindians, the advantage of being adversaries of the Spanish. This fact is clearly reflected in the early descriptions of the reception of these nations by the Amerindians – notwithstanding the oft-times rosy-hued interpretation lent to European encounters with Amerindians. When the French, Dutch, and English arrived on the mainland they were met with delight, and both the Kari»na and the Arawaks saw this as their chance to kill

Hoofdstuk 01.Boven 15-10-2002 11:08 Pagina 18

18

Eithne B. Carlin and Karin M. Boven

two birds with one stone, namely their Amerindian and Spanish enemy alike. Moreover, the Spanish occupation of the Orinoco Delta and the area to the west of it had drastically changed the political arena in the Guianas by causing a major disruption in the distribution of the Amerindian groups that made itself felt as far as Cayenne, since many groups, among which the Warao, the Yao, and the Parakoto, having fled their homelands, moved into the Kari»na and Arawak areas to the east. These, in turn, understandably enough offered resistance and tried to ward off the Amerindian intruders. And to this end, any alliance with the Europeans was not to be underestimated. One reads in the English relations of gifts being exchanged, of the Kari»na waiting for the English to return with arms to fight the Spanish and their local enemies, of alliances being made during long negotiations and closed by both parties spitting into their hands and shaking them as a sign of partnership, and feasting (Harris 1928; Keymis 1968). The Yaos, who in 1596 sought help from the English to fight their Arawak enemies, had already formed an alliance with the Arawaks, Sepayos, and Parakotos less than two decades later against the Kari»na (Harris 1928). In 1651, two Kari»na chiefs of the Suriname River went to Barbados to negotiate with Lord Willoughby the English plans to settle in their country. Hence the later and short-lived designation of Suriname as Willoughbyland, interpretable in Amerindian terms as Willoughby i-pata ‘Willoughby his-village’, whereby ‘village’ or ‘place’ is a clearly delineated inhabited area ruled by a chief.10 The initial enthousiasm of the English for Guiana and its inhabitants can be read in almost all the early records. Apparently even the climate was favourable in those early days, since for example, although Willoughby’s scouts, whom he had sent to reconnoitre the Guiana coast and make a deal with the native population, had stayed in Suriname for five months, Willoughby reports that ‘amongst forty persons not one of them had so much as their head ache’ (Williamson 1923:153, 162). While the English and later the Dutch records of this period report of their being used as pawns in the wars among the different Amerindian groups, they were all too aware of their rather precarious situation in trying to keep the favour of as many groups as possible. But as long as their economic interests flourished, and for as long as they still retained hope that they would find gold and diamonds, they found ways to keep all parties satisfied. But who were the parties exactly?
It is precisely in this century that we are confronted with a plethora of (sometimes unidentifiable) names of Amerindian groups.11 It is often the case, however, that we find different names referring to the same group or the same name being used to refer to different groups. Unfortunately this onomastic chaos was to remain characteristic of the historiography not only of Amerindians in Suriname, but of those in the Guianas and in South America in general. The sources from 1600 onwards do, however, give us some indication of who was where in this century. Besides the Kari»na, Arawaks, Waraos, and Parakotos living along the coast, there were also the Yaos, who were clearly recognizable because of their body scarifications, and the Nepuyo (Cariban), both of whom were spread over the coast of Guiana and in Trinidad. In addition, there were the Sepayos, who, according to De Goeje, spoke an Arawakan language that was, however, not closely related to Arawak as it was spoken in Guiana (Taylor 1977:15-6).

Hoofdstuk 01.Boven 15-10-2002 11:08 Pagina 19

I The native population

19

In Suriname itself after the Kari»na had completely destroyed an English and French settlement in 1645, peace was made and soon the Kari»na were welcoming the English to Suriname. However, it was not long before the Kari»na realized that the colonizers were expanding and taking much more land and control than the original agreement had stipulated.12 This realization came at a time when internal battles for power among the English themselves, generally based on governorship and having the colony officially recognized, with Willoughby as ‘Proprietor of Suriname’, were bitter and undermined the harmony that had existed and had held the English together. Key figures of the English authorities who could not be bribed were incarcerated in the Torarica jail pending shipment back to England. And as if this were not enough, an epidemic had struck the colony with devastating effects.
So it was that by the time the Dutch arrived at the mouth of the Suriname River in 1667, the days of the English in Suriname were numbered. It was this state of utter chaos that became the Dutch possession. The slaves were rising up against the cruel treatment they were receiving and were presumably already forming Maroon communities in the forests;13 by the end of the seventeenth century a new group had been born, namely the Karboegers, Kari»na-speaking people of mixed black and Amerindian origin who lived along the Coppename River.14 Similarly when the Dutch took over, the Kari»na and Arawaks, among whom the English had negotiated peace treaties, were in a state of revolt. Thus one of the first things that the new Dutch governor Van Sommelsdijck did in 1686 was to draw up a treaty between the Kari»na and the Arawaks to end hostilities. At the same time, he declared three groups, the Kari»na, Arawaks, and Warao to be free and unenslaveable, except as punishment for certain crimes. The groups of the interior, however, did not enjoy these rights, and hence the Kari»na were free to sell their captives of the interior groups as slaves to the colonists (Goslinga 1985:272).
1600-1700: the interior
During all of this vigorous interaction between the coastal groups and the Europeans, the groups of the interior were largely unknown. However, the Englishman Unton Fisher was entrusted by his fellow-Englishman and expedition leader Harcourt in 1608 with the investigation of the upper regions of the Maroni River, where Harcourt suspected gold deposits, but which journey he himself had had to abandon earlier.15 From both Fisher’s and Harcourt’s detailed mapping of every village they passed through, from the mouth of the Maroni up to one hundred leagues (roughly four hundred and eighty kilometres) from the sea, we have alternately Kari»na, Arawaks, Parakotos, and Yaos and many villages with two or more groups apparently living together peacefully. Wiawia(m) was, for example, described as, ‘a great towne of Paragotos and Yaios, foure leagues to the West of Marrawini’16 (Harris 1928:118). Eleven days from Wiawia(m), that is, about one hundred leagues from the sea, Fisher was still in Kari»na country. Still four days upstream was a Kari»na village called Moreshegoro which was ruled by a chief called Areminta. From Areminta and the other Kari»na, he heard that six days’ journey beyond Moreshegoro there

Hoofdstuk 01.Boven 15-10-2002 11:08 Pagina 20

20

Eithne B. Carlin and Karin M. Boven

lived ‘diuers mighty Nations of Indians, hauing holes through their eares, cheekes, nostrils, and nether lippes’ (Harris 1928:120), who were bigger and more powerful than all other Amerindians. Embellishment begets embellishment, and finally to these groups was also ascribed the attribute of enormous ears – possibly a reference to extended earlobes due to heavy earrings.17
The list of names Fisher gives is worth looking at here. The names are reproduced in Table 1.1 along with the supposed equivalent, where known.

Table 1.1: Fisher’s list Fisher’s list Craweanna Pawmeeanna Zuikeanna Peewattere Arameeso Acawreanno Acooreo Tareepeeanna Corecorickado Peeauncado Cocoanno Itsura Waremisso

Supposed equivalent
Sikïiyana
Aramiso Akuriyo Akuriyo Taripiyana Kirikirikoto Pijanakoto Kukuyana
Aramiso

Meaning
Pigeon people Agouti people Capuchin monkey people Green parrot people Harpy eagle people

We can recognize from this list that Arameeso and Waremisso refer to the same people, namely the Aramiso (see below). Similarly the Acawreanno and Acooreo are likely the same, namely the Akuriyo (see below). At least seven of the names that remain refer to Cariban groups, some of which we do not hear about again until the twentieth century. Although the village names that Harcourt and Fisher give are no longer traceable, they do mention some hydronyms, such as Topananwin which in all likelihood is the Tapanahoni, which in both Trio and Wayana is Tapanani, and Anapee, which is probably the Wanapi River. Thus Fisher’s report as found in Harcourt’s relation places these groups south of the Tapanahoni around the Oelemari River at the beginning of the seventeenth century. Neither the Kari»na nor Fisher gave any details of these people or what they were doing, but we can assume that there were probably some trade dealings with the Cariban groups further north. However, the questions that remain might well have been answered had Fisher not drowned by accident when returning to the coast, as far as we know, without leaving as much as a wordlist of the different languages that he reputedly learned to speak well. For the remainder of this century there is a gap in information about the movements of the groups mentioned by Fisher.

Hoofdstuk 01.Boven 15-10-2002 11:08 Pagina 21

I The native population

21

A further group was to join those met by Fisher towards the end of the seventeenth century,

namely the Wayana, a Cariban group. Had the Wayana met the Spanish, they might have

formed a lasting relationship based on their love for ceremony, embellishment, and conquest.

However, as far as we know, it was not to be. The Wayana lived on the north bank of the

Amazon River, out of the line of the Spanish and later Portuguese explorations; likewise they

were too far south from the area of French possession (see also Rivière 1963:177-83). Ever

nomads, as they moved north, the Wayana passed by the settlements on the Paru River, and

these were in a constant hum of activity. People were trading not only their own manufacture,

but also European goods that had been filtered initially up from the settlements on the mouth

of the Amazon, and later down to

the Tumuchumac through the

R.M ana R. Ira
o

ommewijne

Mana (Amana)
He(Ermrre
a

Cottic

((??SAAarprroopuuawrwao)wa ) C

winin)a

R.

hands of the Maroons who, by the

R.

couC(bou(nbsot)a

end of the eighteenth century had a monopoly on all trade. Wives were being negotiated or cap-

tured, stories were being told,

mostly about some neighbours

not present or non-existent. Initi-

ation rites were being performed:

for example, the eputop ‘stinging’

R. Courc o

ib

whereby initiands had a mat-like

garment that was saturated with

Mountains)

( ? Matawere

(?Tapuruman) (?Mawpanana Mts)

stinging ants or wasps pressed against their body. This rite of passage, found among many Amazonian groups, was to make

Top ana win

hardy warriors and good hunters

(? Moreshego)

Ya ( R.Inine (Auine)

Waoouune)

of the boys and hardworking women of the girls.18 And pïjai
‘shamans’ were keeping the balR ance between life and death by

(Arroua) raoua . Marouini

R R. A

curing illness on the one hand, and on the other causing deaths

which had to be avenged in war (Boven 1999).19 And the Wayana,

possibly more so than any other

R.Ita ny .M
o i ni
or Na pi (Aanapi) wo

group we have knowledge of,

R were masters of war; until the

ar u

b)

middle of the eighteenth century

R

o

the chiefs who organized them

Map 1.3. The Maroni River as explored by Fisher in 1608 were more appropriately charac-

Hoofdstuk 01.Boven 15-10-2002 11:08 Pagina 22

22

Eithne B. Carlin and Karin M. Boven

terized as military warleaders, the japoto (cf. also the Kari»na designation for chief, yopoto). In fact, warfare with surrounding tribes seems to have formed an integral part of the social and cultural life of the Wayana. That is, like the other groups, they waged war to obtain women, to take revenge, and to settle trade disputes. But the Wayana, too, had made alliances and had begun integrating other groups such as the Upurui and the Aparai (both Cariban). Together they came to make up the group we now know as the Wayana.
Such was the cycle of life, one which kept the Wayana on the move, further to the north through the Tumuchumac mountain range. But they were not spared from the Trio (Cariban) groups who were well armed and who, since the contact between the two groups was close, had enough reasons to attack them. According to the oral traditions of both groups, Trio and Okomoyana (Cariban) warlords from the town of Samuwaka moved up through the Tumuchumac to where the Wayana had fled from their other enemies, the Kari»na (Tayra) and the Wayãpí (of the Tupian language family), and waged a series of bitter wars until few Wayana remained (Koelewijn 1987). However, most of the groups had fallen on hard times since food resources had become scarce in the environs of the larger settlements, as the following section, ‘The Samuwaka Summit’, suggests.

The Samuwaka Summit: undated
On a day long before the present, a meeting was called in the town of Samuwaka ‘Big Sand’ in the Pará region of present-day Brazil to discuss the dire situation in which the townspeople found themselves. Resources were low and dwindling, action had to be taken. Present at the meeting were representatives of all the different (but related) groups living at the settlement, namely the Okomoyana ‘Wasp people’, the Aramayana ‘Sweat bee people’, the Pïrëuyana ‘Arrow people’, the Maraso ‘Jacou people’, the Aramiso ‘Pigeon people’, the Tïrïjo, and the Akïjo.20 The Akuriyo ‘Agouti people’ lived at a distance, though still close enough to wage war and take hostages, in the area whence we assume most of the inhabitants of Samuwaka had come, that is, from the area around the Palumeu, Tapanahoni, and Maroni Rivers.21 Each of these groups spoke mutually intelligible dialects. The Okomoyana and Akuriyo, who were mutual trade partners and who also intermarried, were feared by the other groups on account of their reputation of being fierce warriors. That meeting in Samuwaka sealed the fate of many. With resources slowly being depleted there was no option left but to split up and migrate to the north, trying to circumvent the war that was raging between the muchfeared Wayãpí and the Wayana. With heavy hearts the elders closed the meeting by singing spirit songs, each group their own.22

Many years were to pass before the survivors of these groups would meet up again under even more dire circumstances, one result of which later was the amalgamation of some smaller groups to become the Trio group which was based around the Tapanahoni River.
Although marronage began in this century (see Arends, Chapter IV and Smith, Chapter V), it was not until the middle of the eighteenth century that the Maroons would reach the Tapanahoni and cause the native population to move back further south into the forest. It was, however, not a case of avoidance at all costs, since the Maroons, who from early on had remained in contact with the coast (see Arends 2001), had the advantage of bringing trading

Hoofdstuk 01.Boven 15-10-2002 11:08 Pagina 23

I The native population

23

P – Palumeu T – Tëpu K – Kwamalasamutu

P
ni o
T

n

ah

goods to the centre and south of the country. Thus instead of an outbreak of

a

p

violence, as might have

T a

been expected with foreign

instrusions into their habi-

K

S i pa

w ni

Samuwaka

Su rina B r azil m e

tation area, what was later to become an avid trading centre rose up between the

We st P ar u
i li

Amerindians and the

Maroons along the Tapana-

E ast

honi, the Upper Maroni and

Pa ru

the Lawa Rivers; indeed,

according to the Wayana,

they were invited by the

Ndyuka to come to live on

Map 1.4. The approximate location of Samuwaka on the West Paru23

the Tapanahoni to be able to trade more intensively. It is

not implausible that the

trade pidgin that arose from the contact between Maroons and the Amerindian groups has its

Kari»na input from this earlier period, later to be expanded by the Trio and Wayana language

groups. We can assume that there was already trade between the Kari»na (and probably

Parakotos) along the Maroni River and the groups that Fisher names, since at least the Akuriyo

were acting as middlemen in the trade with the groups further to the south beyond the

Tumuchumac range of mountains.

1700-1850
As the groups scattered from Samuwaka, the details of the whereabouts of those who survived become vague and cover in a broad band the entire south of present-day Suriname. In the relevant period we have only sporadic indications of names and places, some of which can be correlated with groups that are mentioned earlier. The Aramiso (cf. Fisher’s list of names in Table 1.1) and Aramayana started their trek back to the northeast, (the Aramiso were met by two French Jesuits to the south of the Waki River in 1674) the Trio moved due north and in a westerly direction and met up with a closely related group the Pianakoto ‘Harpy eagle people’ on the Upper Corentyne, and all in all they covered the entire area from the west of the Corentyne in the west of the country to the east of the Maroni.24 It was in this vast area that they too met up with the Maroons around the end of the seventeenth and through the eighteenth century, and with the Europeans in the mid-nineteenth century. By the mid-eighteenth century we lose track of many of the groups mentioned in the interior, for example, those of Fisher’s list in Table 1.1 above. However, the name Akuriyo appears in Antonio Caulin’s (1966) history of New Andalucia in the 1770s, as do the ‘very brave’ Kirikiriscótos who can only be the Corecorickado of

Hoofdstuk 01.Boven 15-10-2002 11:08 Pagina 24

24

Eithne B. Carlin and Karin M. Boven

Fisher’s list in Table 1.1, and the Trio subgroup Kirikirikoto25 ‘Green parrot people’, as well as a group Caulin calls the Arinagótos. Thus, as was the case in the time of Ley in the early seventeenth century, the name Akuriyo was used at least in terms of reference, to subsume many of the groups in the interior of the country and in particular those referred to by Fisher. For example, during the slave revolts, the Trio were mentioned – as an Akuri group called Trio – by a Dutch postholder in connection with an incident involving Maroons on the Lower Tapanahoni in 1796. For this reason, it is unlikely that the name Akuri necessarily referred only to the ancestors of the present-day Akuriyo. Rather the term subsumed all the Trio groups of which the Akuriyo form a subgroup. The Amerindians of the interior were felt to be hostile in this period, as can be deduced from John Stedman’s comment in 1796 on the Pianakoto (Cariban) who were ‘living far inland’: ‘The Piannacotaus […] of this tribe the only thing that I can say farther is that they would murder all the christians in Guiana, if they had the opportunity’.
No doubt the Pianakoto had the same sentiments about the white men. In fact the Pianakotos’ experience of white men was that they killed the men and carried off the women of the group. Hence, barely a century later, in 1843, as they were paddling up the Wanamu River near the Corentyne River with a boatload of dogs to trade with their neighbours, they did not hesitate for a moment, but took flight as they sighted the expedition of Robert Schomburgk (the boundary commissioner of Guyana and a scientific explorer) frantically trying to catch up with them. It should be noted that Schomburgk’s delight at seeing the Pianakoto and his urgency in trying to come into contact them was not purely out of academic interest. Rather, the expedition was behind schedule and supplies needed to be replenished (Schomburgk 1845). However, the Europeans were not the only cause of concern for the Pianakoto; rather they had mistaken Schomburgk’s Amerindian guides for the bellicose Sikïiyana, a related group about whom we know little apart from their reputation of being hostile. The extent of the migrations that were taking place becomes evident here, since it is not implausible that the Zuikeanna, who in Fisher’s days were living to the east of the Maroni, is the same group as the Sikïiyana near the Corentyne in 1845. At any rate, after some days, inhibitions were overcome and from there the Pianakoto accompanied Schomburgk to the Trio, whose settlement was five days away. The Trio, likewise after some initial hesitation, heartily welcomed the white man. They had, no doubt, already heard from the Pianakoto that he had some fascinating equipment with him, instruments not available from their trading partners, the Maroons. However, at that time Europeans had the reputation among the forest groups not only of spreading their diseases to the Amerindians, but also of snatching Amerindian children whom they subsequently ate.26 Hence, as a precautionary measure, the day that Schomburgk left the Trio, the village was evacuated before goodbyes could be said. The Trio, or Drio, as noted by Schomburgk, had already been trading for a number of decades with the Maroons further east on the Tapanahoni, to the north of where they live today. In order to facilitate trading, the Maroons, Trio, Wayana, and Caribs had developed a pidgin language that was based on Ndyuka, itself a creole language, and elements from (at least these) three Amerindian languages.27

Hoofdstuk 01.Boven 15-10-2002 11:08 Pagina 25

I The native population

25

The Trio-Ndyuka pidgin: a short extract
While the pidgin has now been replaced by Sranan, some old Trio men still remember how they bargained with the Maroons in the pidgin. Many people had one particular Maroon trading partner, when either of the trading partners had something to trade they would call the other, and he would come. Sometimes payment for goods could take up to a year, that is, when the trading partner was in the vicinity again. Thus the entire trading enterprise was based on trust; each party had the obligation to uphold his part of the bargain and each became a pawana ‘friend, trading partner’ of the other. The institution of -pawana wehto ‘being a friend, trading partner’ exists to this day, and is one that involves a host of obligations on either side. The Trio were, and still are, renowned for their excellently trained hunting dogs, and to this day, these dogs are sold to Maroons. The goods offered by Maroons were, for example, cloth, beads, knives, machetes, and files.
The following is an excerpt from a short text recorded in 1999 from Captain Tëmenta in Tëpu. Note that the noninitial morpheme -so is probably derived from the Trio desiderative marker -se ‘want’. In Trio this morpheme always follows a noun or verb whereas in the pidgin it generally precedes the verb. In the pidgin, however, it also occurs in contexts, for example, in sentence 9 below, where it clearly does not mean ‘wanting’, see also George Huttar (1982) and Huttar and Velantie (1997). The -me suffix on the word esime, the root of which is Ndyuka, ultimately from the English ‘haste’, is the Trio facsimile marker; most words borrowed into Trio and that function as nouns or adverbs, acquire this marker. The pidgin also has moime ‘nice, good’ from the Dutch mooi ‘nice’; compare also modern day Trio oroko-me ‘working’. Most verbs are from Ndyuka, for example, luku ‘look’, suku ‘search for’, kon ‘come’, wakka ‘go’, teke ‘take’, and some nouns such as matti ‘friend’. The pronouns pumi ‘I’ and piyu ‘you’ are based on Ndyuka. Some nouns, for example, katari ‘carrying basket’, are from Trio. Others, for example, kaikusi ‘dog’ are from another Cariban source such as Kari»na or Wayana. Negation is formed by means of the Trio morpheme -wa, which, as in Trio, is suffixed to a verb, for example, wakka-wa ‘not going’ and silo-wa ‘not being’ in sentence 9. The source of other words is not so clear, for example, awana, which I have tentatively glossed here as ‘friend’, is possibly from Trio pawana ‘friend’; the reduplicated sound symbolic word tokotoko in sentences 8 and 9 may be from either Trio or Ndyuka; tokoo is the sound a particular bird makes early in the morning. (The abbreviations T and M stand for Trio and Maroon respectively.)
1. T so piyu kon matti So, you have come, friend
2. M hehe pumi kon yes, I have come
3. T so, sama so viyu, heee awana, awana matti awana pumi matti so pumi so luku hehe so, what do you want? yes, friend, friend, my friend, I want to look, yes
4. M pumi kaikusi pumi suku ` pumi wakka I am looking for a (hunting) dog, I’m looking (travelling looking)
… pumi kon … pumi so teke pumi se teke … … I have come, I want to take my dog, I want to take it
5. T aumeni how much?
6. M pumi katari so I want a carrying basket
7. T so, hehe, pumi wani marïja, mm epimusu, mm soutu, mm sipara so, yes, I want a knife, mm red cloth for kamisa, mm salt, mm a machete
8. M soo watembi wakka tokotoko so what time will you go, early in the morning?

Hoofdstuk 01.Boven 15-10-2002 11:08 Pagina 26

26

Eithne B. Carlin and Karin M. Boven

9. T nónó tokotoko wakkawa kasaba-so silowa no, no, I’m not going early, there’s no cassava (bread)

10. M pikiime esime wakka pumi wanni esime pumi wakka I want to go quickly, I want to go quickly

11. M

hhmm, tli, tli, tli pumi wani disi katari sale disi kasaba sale disi maka sale mm, three, I want three, I want three of these carrying baskets, bring this cassava, bring it, have (them) bring it

12. T ma, esime teke well, take them quickly!

Eithne B. Carlin

The pidgin was also used for general communication, since the Maroons are known to have obstructed as best they could the Europeans’ attempts to contact the Amerindians by telling tall tales of what the white men would do if they actually did come into contact with the native population (Franssen-Herderschee 1905). The trade between the Maroons and the Amerindian groups was an extensive one indeed, from the Maroni River, along the Tapanahoni River (some Trio lived lower down the Tapanahoni than they do now) to the southern outposts near the Paru. But not every Maroon could be a trading partner. A commitment had to be made, a blood-oath ceremony had to be performed in order for the Maroons, or any other distant Amerindian group for that matter, to become partners committed to carrying out their part of the deal. The institution as such was, and still is, termed -pawana iwehto and -pawana iweitop by the Trio and Wayana, respectively, and means ‘being partner or friend of s/one’.28 The mutual trust that was aspired to was an important aspect of a trade contract, especially since a year or more could pass before one or other party was paid. That is to say, the Trio or Wayana might give a dog or arrows one year and be paid in beads, machetes, saws, cloth, and so forth, the following year. Nonpayment was paramount to starting a chain of death by cursing. Hence the institution of being someone’s trading partner was a weighty responsibility; similarly today, the Trio do not treat friendship lightly. It is an honour one has to earn and a commitment one has to make. Nevertheless, in spite of their being partners, or on account of their being the Amerindians’ only partners offering trading goods from the outside world – indeed the Maroons had claimed they had a village near the sea where they manufactured all the trading goods themselves – at least the Trio complained that the Maroons drove a hard bargain.29
Outside the Trio group were the Wayana who had come to be known to the French under the name Roucouyenne on account of their elaborate body painting with roucou ‘red dye’. They can be found around 1729 in the area of the upper reaches of the Oyapock River, just to the south of the Aramiso group, according to a map printed by French mis-

Hoofdstuk 01.Boven 15-10-2002 11:08 Pagina 27

I The native population

27

sionaries.30 By the time that Claude Tony, a free mulatto, who had been accompanying the

French botanist M. Patris on his journeys to the interior of present-day French Guiana,

met the Wayana in 1769, some of the group had moved north and were living on the

Tamouri and Waki Rivers in close contact with the Aramiso, the Aramakoto, the Kaikushiana31 (Cariban), the Aparai and Upurui

(Cariban), and with the Tupian groups Emerillon

and Wayãpí. As Tony passed through the villages,

he counted an average of forty to fifty inhabitants

per village. Contacts were not always of a peace-

ful nature, but it seems that groups in distress

were always sheltered. For example, a few weeks

before Patris’ 1769 journey, the Aramiso had

given refuge to a group of about fifty Emerillon

who had been attacked and driven out of their

village by the Kari»na who also had fierce battles

with the Wayana. However, defending them-

selves, in particular against the Wayãpí, who

were being supported and supplied with arms by

the Portuguese, had taken its toll, and in 1787,

twenty-three years after Patris’ expedition, the

explorer J.B. Leblond estimated the number of

Wayana to be between two and three thousand (Schoepf 1972).32 The Wayana were not compla-

The tukusipan ‘village meeting house’ in Tëpu

cent or easily overthrown. Rather, Tony, who spent three weeks in the Wayana villages

under constant guard, describes a setting that should best be termed a highly disciplined

and most elaborate military stronghold. We summarize Tony’s description here.

As Patris and Tony approached the first settlement (probably more appropriately de-

scribed as a camp) on arriving in Wayana territory, a young Wayana man ran off to raise

the alarm in the village that foreigners had arrived. As these reached the first house a

young man appeared, tall, well-built, and armed but of pleasant countenance. The

Aramiso interpreter accompanying the foreigners rushed forward to greet the Wayana

and explain the purpose of their intrusion, after which they all set off on a three-hour trek

to meet the chief. They were led to a house in the middle of a man-made mound where

they found a chief and about a dozen men, all armed. In view of the fact that there were

no women present to distract them, Tony concluded that these men formed the guard.

Although Patris knew this chief from his previous visits, the latter made no reference to

this. Rather, he showed the group the way to the village, which was four leagues away,

along a very sophisticated pathway which was cordoned off by a balustrade. The path

itself consisted of three parallel paths just where it entered the village. On arrival there,

the group was met by well-armed Wayana dressed in feather adornments who formed a

close circle around the central hut, which Tony calls the tapui and which nowadays is

Hoofdstuk 01.Boven 15-10-2002 11:08 Pagina 28

28

Eithne B. Carlin and Karin M. Boven

referred to as the tukusipan. The guards were facing away from the house. The chief greeted the visitors and one of the guards stepped out of place to allow them to pass through to the house in single file, after which the guards turned to face the house. The ensuing meeting took hours. This introduction procedure, apart from the highly militarized prelude among the Wayana, that Tony witnessed is similar in many respects to those found in early seventeenth-century sources and also to those adhered to by many groups in Suriname until the present day. Three aspects stand out as being of paramount importance, namely formality and respect, extended discussions, and hospitality. In the view of many Amerindians, the only saving grace the white men had was their powerful talk, putting them almost on a par with the Amerindians despite their not having a clearly definable literary genre of ceremonial dialogue such as the Amerindians had. And in most of the villages Tony encountered, there was an enforced stay of at least eight days,

Ceremonial dialogue among the Trio
Like many Amerindian groups of Amazonia, the Trio had a practice of using ceremonial dialogue, a stylized, ritualized register of language that was competitive in nature, a type of verbal duelling. When a stranger came to a village he was obliged to introduce himself to the village leadership using the ceremonial dialogue. Its purpose was to reveal the stranger’s intentions in the village, which could be to ask for a woman in marriage, or for trade. Given the power that language holds among the Trio – it is in language that a person’s true character or spirit can be seen – it was crucial for the visitor to prove himself in this verbal duel, to negotiate his acceptance in the village. By using the ceremonial dialogue, which by definition was only mastered by older, wiser men, the speaker had to convince his interlocutors that he had good intentions and that he was not dangerous to the community. The outcome of the dialogue was always uncertain and if the stranger did not manage to convince the village leadership of his good intentions, then the impact on the village could be very negative; that is, violence or war could ensue. Not all trading contexts required the use of the dialogue, rather, if it was the case that one of the traders did not want to sell a particular object, or if he thought he was not getting a high enough price, one of the trading partners could suggest a verbal duel to settle the matter.
The Trio ceremonial dialogue distinguished at least two types, one more powerful than the other. The dialogue referred to as taame kato ‘taame saying’, or sipësipëman was the dialogue that was often used between relatives or friends after a longer period of absence or to ask for a woman’s hand in marriage. The stronger variant was termed no kato ‘no saying’, a dialogue type that was characterized by its sheer strength of impact. The Trio refer to the no kato variety as being karime which means physically strong but verbally ‘persuasive’ (Rivière 1971:299). The expression no ka-kë [no sayimp] meaning ‘be assertive, put your foot down!’ is still used by the Trio today. The no kato dialogue was difficult to perform, it was a formal register which made use of archaic linguistic forms, and it often lasted from the early afternoon, through the night, and into the next afternoon without a break. The more there was at stake, the more difficult the dialogue was since the participants had to be verbally forceful and creative for long periods of time. The end of the dialogue was signalled by a closure phase in which acceptance of the stranger’s presence was indicated or, in the case of failure of acceptance or a breakdown in the negotiations, by one of the participants getting up and leaving. The latter case was dangerous to the village and hence not desirable.
The no kato, which consisted of three identifiable phases, the opening, negotiation, and closure, was sung in the latter two phases rather than spoken. Each speaker took turns in performing; the person who was listening and waiting for his turn responded after each short phrase by uttering mm mm, and the end of each turn was signalled by the speaker saying mmm mmm whereupon the second person took over (see Carlin 2002). An exerpt from the ceremonial dialogue as performed on request by two older men (K and Ë) in Kwamalasamutu in 1998 is given in the following.

Hoofdstuk 01.Boven 15-10-2002 11:08 Pagina 29

I The native population

29

K sewëerëhpa

I have come

Ë

mm

K jurakanumunme

while walking (going)

Ë

mm

K serëmaotï

today

Ë

mm

K ëeporinme wïja

I found you

Ë

mm

K see wïrë

that’s the way I am

Ë

mm

K urakanunjewa

not walking

Ë

mm

K irëpororëken wï

I don’t stop

Ë

mm

K irë apontërërëken

only there

Ë

mm

K jipakorotaorëken

only in my house

Ë

mm

K jipataporëken

only in my village

Ë

mm

K mërapononna jiweike

because I’m alone

Ë

mm

K urakantënenna

with no-one to say ‘come on’

Ë

mm

K mm nnakene karahke

that’s how I am

Ë

mm

K see jiweimeirë

that’s the way I am

Ë

mm

K jiwëturumerehpa

that’s the way I talk

Ë

mm

K ëikarërëken

I’m just alone

Ë

mm

K nnakene kara, mmm

that’s how it is

While the ceremonial dialogue as a linguistic register is no longer used, strangers to a Trio village are to this day still expected to attend a meeting with the village leadership on arrival in the village to state their intentions and to let the leadership know that they are not dangerous, angry, or sick. Strangers are potential killers. For example, whole populations have been decimated by the diseases of strangers, or a stranger can be someone who harbours some ill-will against a village, and who can curse a villager, thereby causing his death.

Eithne B. Carlin

since that was the time needed for the villagers to prepare cassava drink to entertain the guests. However, from the time of Tony’s visit onwards, there is a steady decline in numbers. We assume with De Goeje that it was around this time, namely at the end of the eighteenth century, that the Wayana started to merge with other groups such as the Upurui (De Goeje 1946:100).
In the meantime missionary activity had (re-)commenced in the coastal area with the arrival in 1735 of Moravian missionaries in the Guianas.33 After initial difficulties in proselytizing the slave community, they moved on to the Amerindians on the coast, in particular the Arawaks. By comparison with the neighbouring colonies this was indeed rather late: the French had already begun evangelization among the Kari»na to the east of the Maroni from the middle of the seventeenth century onwards. The Moravian venture was, however, doomed to fail for several reasons. Disease and famine were widespread among the Amerindian communities, forcing them to leave the mission stations or to die in them. In addition, this was also the period in which Amerindians were being called upon by the Dutch authorities to track down runaway slaves who in turn made the missions that housed the Amerindians the target of their attacks (Van Baarle 1999). Nonetheless, despite the Moravian missions among the Amerindians being a failure in the religious sense, it is from this period that we have the first extensive published grammatical descriptions and wordlists of Arawak, beginning with Johan Fischer’s 1799 story of the Holy Week in Arawak (Van Baarle 1999).34

Hoofdstuk 01.Boven 15-10-2002 11:08 Pagina 30

30

Eithne B. Carlin and Karin M. Boven

These Moravian works were only just preceded in publication by the French missionary Father Pierre Pelleprat’s work among the eastern Kari»na group which had come to be known by the term Tïlewuyu, the ‘pure’ Kari»na, to distinguish themselves from the western group, the Karboegers (Muraato) who had become settled as a group by the time of the Moravian Theophile Schumann’s visit to them in 1755 (see Smith, Chapter V).35 By the middle of the nineteenth century, interaction between the Amerindians on the coast was on the increase. The Catholic Church had started up missions among the Amerindians in Suriname in 1817, from which reports we know that some Kari»na already spoke Sranan (Vernooij 1989:83). With the impending abolition of slavery, their services in tracking down runaway slaves for the colonists were no longer required. Thus apart from missionary activity, the lives of both the Kari»na and the Arawaks – the Warao were much weakened in numbers and were mixing with the Arawaks – were not much influenced by the politics of the colony itself. Contacts with outsiders were mainly trade contacts, which grew with the two settlements on either side of the Maroni, namely Albina, established by August Kappler in 1846 on the site of a former Kari»na settlement called Kuma:ka, and St. Laurent-du-Maroni, established by the French in 1857 as a penitentiary, and likewise built on a former Kari»na site.36
1850-1950
After leaving Samuwaka on that unspecified day, the various groups of the Trio afforded each other the space necessary for ensuring food resources from the forest and set up small but adjacent villages in the south of Suriname and the adjoining area in Brazil. Throughout the nineteenth and twentieth centuries, the Amerindians of the interior still lived in fear of their lives when they heard of white men approaching their area. In the last three decades of the nineteenth century, the French, especially Jules Crevaux and Henri Coudreau, were active in exploring the interior, recording wordlists of the various languages, but their reception was not always equally amicable since disease was ravishing the population (Crevaux 1883; Coudreau 1893). In 1878 Crevaux came upon villages that were burying their dead en masse as the result of a smallpox epidemic (Crevaux 1883:275). Disease warfare, inadvertent or not, is a powerful weapon, and the only countermeasure was to avoid contact. By the turn of the last century, however, the Dutch too had begun to send explorers and scientists into the interior to chart the country. On account of there being long periods of time between one expedition and the next (with the exception of the three Dutch expeditions of 1905, 1907 and 1910), there was no possibility for either party to become acquainted with the other, and thus the fear grew on both sides.37 Besides, each expedition visited different areas and therefore different people. In the meantime, the Trio pïjai had prescribed spirit sessions which involved series of long, elaborate dances to summon the protection and aid of the relevant spirits in warding off the white men, whose status as humans the Trio were perhaps not entirely convinced of, and in a manner of speaking the remedy worked (the forces the white men were dealing with were more fiscal and logistic than esoteric in nature). But not for long. And when they did come, given their reputation of being kidnappers and cannibals, all the children

Hoofdstuk 01.Boven 15-10-2002 11:08 Pagina 31

I The native population

31

and women were sent to sleep in

the forest at night, and a supply

of poisoned arrows was kept at

hand.

By the time of the Dutchman

C.H. de Goeje’s expeditions in

the first few decades of the twen-

tieth century, the location of the

groups of the interior had be-

come more or less permanent

and is that which is found to the

present day. It is to De Goeje’s

expeditions that we attribute

most of our knowledge of the

Amerindians of the interior. The

group we now know as the

Wayana, consisting of the re-

maining Roucouyenne, Upurui,

and some Aparai, lived at the

headwaters of the Paru, Yari, and

Maroni Rivers. Their numbers

A former Trio pïjai from Tëpu, Captain Tëmenta

had been reduced to one thou-

sand by 1907 and three decades later to six hundred (De Goeje 1908; 1946). The situation

of the Trio groups was not dissimilar: reduced in numbers, they had retreated further up

the Palumeu River. De Goeje (1908) estimated their numbers to be eight hundred. We can

assume that it was sometime prior to the Dutch expeditions that the Trio groups started

to merge. That is to say, by the middle of the twentieth century, after most of the different

groups had died of disease or been killed in wars, the descendants of those groups who

met that distant day in Samuwaka had come together again in the south of Suriname

forming an allegiance of necessity, under a new name, one that has become the symbol of

a group consisting of several individual groups, namely Tarëno ‘the people here’, who are

now known to the national communities of Suriname and Brazil by the names Trio and

Tiriyó respectively.

Ironically enough the Akuriyo proper, who for centuries lent their name to all and

sundry, are generally not included now under the names Tarëno or Trio, for the reason that

their later history is quite apart from that of the other Trio groups. The Akuriyo were a

nomadic group consisting of at least two subgroups speaking two different dialects – the

Akuriyo language is genetically very close to present-day Trio. According to their own

oral history, they practised agriculture in the past (see Jara 1991), and after they had been

driven further south due to the Maroons settling on the Tapanahoni, they had retreated

to the Oelemari River and its creeks. Like the Trio and Wayana, they too traded with the

Hoofdstuk 01.Boven 15-10-2002 11:08 Pagina 32

32

Eithne B. Carlin and Karin M. Boven

Maroons, often acting as middlemen for the groups who lived along the Paru River. The fierce reputation they enjoyed acted as a deterrant to other groups and resulted in their being undisturbed in the forest for the most part. Furthermore, the main river system, which carried people to and fro, was a threat for the Akuriyo, so that unlike most other groups, they kept very much inland from the riverbanks living instead along the smaller creeks. Although the Akuriyo were always on the move in the forest, they generally stayed within a certain radius which they came to know quite well, as is evident from an excerpt of the life of Irita (who died in 1998), one of the last Akuriyo to leave the forest.38
The immediate neighbours of the Akuriyo were the related Wayarikoele, first mentioned by Crevaux in 1883, and another group that went under the name of Triometesen (which was a descriptive term rather than a name, literally meaning ‘ones as the Trio’). Indeed, we assume with De Goeje (1946:239) that these two groups were one and the same. All in all, these three groups, separate groups or not, were nomadic and seem to have kept very much to themselves. With the arrival of the Dutch expeditions, the strategy of the Akuriyo was to keep well out of everyone’s way. Since the Maroon trading partners of all the groups had a vested interest in holding their monopoly, they too had spread rumours that the white men’s purpose in entering Amerindian territory was to kill all Amerindians in sight. They too doubtless knew the stories of how the white man had kidnapped Trio children, to eat them or learn the Trio language from them, and it was a known fact that white men brought deadly diseases. However, the fateful day finally arrived when they had their first identifiable (recorded) encounter with Europeans in the last century, namely on the Oelemari River in August 1937 during the Southern Border Expedition led by Admiral C.C. Käyser. Gifts were exchanged, but not trusting the situation entirely, the Akuriyo retrieved what they had given Käyser before they broke camp and retired to the forest. A second expedition under Father Ahlbrinck was organized the following year to look for those who had come to be known as the Wama, the name given to the Akuriyo by a Wayarikoele woman whose death marked the extinction of the group. It is not clear where the name Wama came from; according to Manfred Rauschert the people lived near a creek called the Wama; or it is quite possible that when asked who the group of people were who had been met by the Käyser expedition, the woman replied, ‘I don’t know’, or, ‘iuwama(-kï)’, as the related Triometesen said (the Trio for ‘I don’t know’ is jiwame), but at any rate, until the 1960s the name Wama was used to refer to the Akuriyo.39 The Akuriyo gave Ahlbrinck some words in their language, but a day later they had retreated again into the forest. For the next thirty years after the Ahlbrinck expedition, the Akuriyo were to live as shadows, undetected in the vast forest. In 1940, just after the Ahlbrinck expedition Lodewijk Schmidt, a Creole who had accompanied previous expeditions, began to conduct a survey, over a period of three years, of the Trio and Wayana numbers and villages. In all he visited some twenty-five Trio and twenty Wayana villages, recording demographic facts and villagers’ names across the entire breadth of Suriname from the Lawa River almost to the Corentyne and extending into the Parú area of Brazil. The Akuriyo were nowhere to be seen.

Hoofdstuk 01.Boven 15-10-2002 11:08 Pagina 33

I The native population

33

At the time of Schmidt’s survey the process of amalgamation of the smaller remaining groups in the interior of Suriname was nearing its culmination, namely the constitution of the Trio and Wayana groups as we know them today had taken shape. We know that by the middle of the twentieth century the Upurui had become so completely absorbed by the Wayana that they had ceased to exist as a separate group, unlike the Aparai who, although many had indeed become assimilated with the Wayana, still retain a separate identity. Thanks to the work of Protasio Frikel, a Franciscan priest in Brazil, our knowledge of the intricate relations between the groups who lived between the Corentyne and the Maroni, including those that make up the Trio, was greatly expanded in the late 1950s when he began to chart the Amerindian groups living in the northern Pará region of Brazil and adjacent areas and classify their languages. Frikel (1957) calls the entire Trio group, consisting of those groups given in the first column of Table 1.2, Pianakoto-Trio. By way of comparison, the second column of Table 1.2 shows Fisher’s list from 1608.

Table 1.2: Frikel’s Trio group and Fisher’s list

Frikel’s list (1957)

Fisher’s list (1608)

Kukuyana

Cocoanna

Akuriyo

Acooreo (Acawreanno)

Tiriyometesen

—

Wayarikure

—

Pianoí

Peeauncado

Pïreuyana

—

Okomoyana

Aramiso

Arameeso (Waremisso)

Aramayana

—

Arimiyana

—

Maraso (Pianakoto)

— (Peeauncado)

Craweanna

Pawmeeanna

Zuikeanna

Peewattere

Tareepeeanna

Corecorickado

Itsura

Meaning — Agouti people (ones as the Trio) — Harpy eagle people Arrow people Wasp people Pigeon people Sweat bee people Spider monkey people Jacou people (Harpy eagle people) — — — — Capuchin monkey people Green parrot people —

In addition, Frikel’s list in Table 1.2 is almost identical to that of the attendants of the Samuwaka Summit given previously. It is likely that the Kukuyana are the Cocoanno of Fisher’s list from 1608, and that the present-day Akuriyo are indeed the descendants of Fisher’s Acawreanno or Acooreo (see above) since it was not until the eighteenth century that the name spread as a cover term for all Amerindians of the interior. If this latter were true, then perhaps this is an indication that the Akuriyo did have a more sedentary agri-

Hoofdstuk 01.Boven 15-10-2002 11:08 Pagina 34

34

Eithne B. Carlin and Karin M. Boven

cultural past, as has been suggested by Jara (1990). Included in Frikel’s study as groups living adjacent to and well known to the Trio, we
find the Taripiyó in the Tumuchumac mountains who are likely Fisher’s Tareepeeanna ‘capuchin monkey people’ from taripi ‘capuchin monkey’. In his later work, Frikel (1971) also includes the Kirikirigoto, the Corecorickado of Fisher’s list and the ‘muy valientes’ Kirikiriscotos of Caulin (see above), living as the Trio. Thus, in spite of all the migrations that were taking place over a period of at least four hundred years, the descendants of the groups that are mentioned at the beginning of the colonization period are still found in the same general area as that in which their ancestors lived, that is, along the Maroni, Tapanahoni, and Sipaliwini rivers, along the Tumuchumac mountains and on the savannah into Brazil. Until the 1960s the Trio and Wayana still lived in small, consecutive, yet clustered villages of between thirty to fifty people. Indeed at the time of Schmidt’s survey in 1940 there were more Trio in Brazil than in Suriname, with the total numbering 687, and equal numbers of Wayana in both countries with a total of 358. Since Schmidt had missed out two larger Wayana villages, we can assume that their number is somewhat higher than what is given here.
While the Akuriyo are linguistically very close to modern-day Trio, they are not referred to by the term Tarëno, mainly because they were not involved in the initial formation of the group. In fact they did not join the Trio until the early 1970s, as shown in the following section.

Modern life: all for one and one for all?
In 1968, a chance meeting between the Akuriyo and some Wayana hunters by a creek off the Litani began a chain of events that sent the Akuriyo hurtling through time into the twentieth century. At least since the Ahlbrinck expedition, the Akuriyo (or Wama) had come to be known in Suriname as ‘wild Indians’ due to the fact that they lived as huntergatherers in the forest. The report from the Wayana of the location of this group led to concerted missionary activity to contact them. With the help of Wayana and Trio guides the missionaries eventually succeeded in their quest, and in the early 1970s some Akuriyo finally agreed to move to the Trio villages of (Përëru) Tëpu and Alalaparu, where the weaker members died. In fact, within two years 25% of the Akuriyo population in these villages had died (Kloos 1977:21-22). At least one family, consisting of a woman and her two children, was still in the forest, apparently quite unaware of the fact that most (or all?) of their Akuriyo relatives no longer lived nomadic lives in the forest. That there was little contact between the different Akuriyo groups is evident from the fact that the woman’s husband, who was known to and assumed alive by the Akuriyo who had already settled among the Trio, had in fact died some thirteen years previously. After being contacted in 1975, they were brought to Tëpu where the son died. The mother, Irita, lived almost thirty years in Tëpu before she died, but in all that time, in spite of being the

Hoofdstuk 01.Boven 15-10-2002 11:08 Pagina 35

I The native population

35

talkative type, it is said that she never managed to speak Trio fluently. The Trio, many of whom from the early 1960s onwards had become Christians, took upon themselves the task (or perhaps were assigned the task by the missionaries) of being guardians of the Akuriyo. Although the Trio had the utmost respect for the intense knowledge of the forest that the Akuriyo had (and still have), the latter were doomed to be classed as socially inferior in the Trio villages, a situation obtaining till the present day.
Before the Akuriyo were being sought in the forest, a second amalgamation of groups had begun to take place late in the twentieth century in the villages of Alalaparu and later Kwamalasamutu ‘place of bamboo and sand’.40 This second re-grouping came about as a result of Operation Grasshopper, initiated in 1960. This operation was to make the interior of the country, including Trio and Wayana territory, accessible by cutting air- Irita, one of the last Akuriyo speakers, who died in Tëpu in 1998 strips at strategic points. In that same year, an American missionary group (Door-to-Life mission) made preparations to set up stations in the interior. They started with a station near the Palumeu airstrip, followed a few months later by a station near the Alalaparu creek in the Sipaliwini basin. The missionaries, who had previously been among the Waiwai group in Guyana, brought with them some Amerindian assistants, all of whom spoke Waiwai, a Cariban language, to help with the evangelization of the Surinamese groups. Very much weakened both in numbers and in health – there had been reports of an influenza epidemic decimating the Trio in 1952 – the inhabitants from contiguous villages flocked to these two missionary centres, which in the meantime had been taken over by the West Indies Mission, mainly for medical aid. The result of these centres was a stabilization, and later upward turn of the demographic facts, and if one thinks of Samuwaka, a return to larger villages, albeit with less autonomy now for the groups. That is, there are now no longer one or two chiefs per group, but two or three chiefs per village. The missionary assistants brought from Guyana were installed in the newly constructed Trio villages, and generally go under the name Waiwai. In fact some of these were Shereo, a subgroup of the Waiwai; some were Tunayana ‘Water people’, a supposedly mythical group who lived as amphibians and slept under water; others were Katuena, a subgroup of the Tunayana; a few were Mawayana ‘Frog people’ a group who speak an Arawakan language that has undergone Cariban influence. Most

Hoofdstuk 01.Boven 15-10-2002 11:08 Pagina 36

36

Eithne B. Carlin and Karin M. Boven

N

W

E

S

G U YA N A

n

Nickerie 22 1

1

2

1

1 1

2

2

Paramaribo 11

2 12
1

122221122

C R

Commewijne R ver Marowijne R
ver

i

1 1 1
2 Albina 1 2
i
FRENCH GUIANA

o ppename River Sarama cca i v er rin ame River

Corantij R iv er

Language legend 1: Kari»na 2: Arawak 3: Wayana 4: Trio 5: Akuriyo 6: Tunayana 7: Sikïiyana 8: Mawayana

Kuruni

Palumeu River
li i
K uru n i Riv er

3 Su

a nah ni Ri ver

o 34
Ta p

Palumeu 3 4

3

3

River

Përëru Tëpu 45

el

emari O

L i tanie Riv e r

4 5 Kwamalasamutu

8 76

Si pa R ver wini

4 Sipaliwini

BRAZIL 0

50 km

Map 1.5. Approximate geographical distribution of the Amerindian languages

of these groups from the west now live in Kwamalasamutu, the village which the inhabitants of Alalaparu set up after resources in the latter became scarce. Kwamalasamutu is now the largest Trio village in Suriname (see also Carlin 1998). The present-day situation in Suriname is that the Trio inhabit four villages, Palumeu, Tëpu, Kwamalasamutu, and Sipaliwini. The population make-up of Kwamalasamutu, ensuing from the second amalgamation of groups, is given in Table 1.3.
Table 1.3: Second amalgamation of groups in Kwamalasamutu Trio (result of first amalgamation) Tunayana Mawayana Sikïiyana Akuriyo

Hoofdstuk 01.Boven 15-10-2002 11:08 Pagina 37

I The native population

37

Outside the village, that is, in the na-

tional context, all these groups refer to

themselves as Trio (Tarëno) and speak

Trio as their first and primary language,

yet within the village each group

remains distinct, with at least some old

people still able to speak the original

language of the relevant group. Most of

these former languages will not survive

the next decade. The Wayana likewise

live in Palumeu, Pïrëuimë (Apetina)

along the Tapanahoni River and in sev-

eral villages on both sides of the Lawa

and Maroni Rivers, on the Surinamese side, in the villages Abunasunga,

Some Mawayana: the Japoma family in Kwamalasamutu

Kawemhakan (Anapaikë), and Kumakahpan.

Most of the Akuriyo now live in Tëpu, with a few families in Kwamalasamutu. In

summary, the present-day Amerindian section of Surinamese society consists of eight

distinct ethnic groups, as given in Table 1.4.

Table 1.4: Amerindian groups in Suriname in 2000, according to language family41

Language family Language

Location

Arawakan

Arawak/Lokono

coastal area

Mawayana

Sipaliwini River

Cariban

Kari»na

coastal area

Trio

Palumeu, Tapanahoni, and Sipaliwini Rivers

Wayana

Palumeu, Tapanahoni, Maroni, and

Lawa Rivers

Akuriyo

Tapanahoni and Sipaliwini Rivers

Sikïiyana

Sipaliwini River

Tunayana/Katuena Sipaliwini River

From the 1960s the successive governments in Suriname had neither the inclination nor adequate manpower to hold even sporadic checks on what was going on with regard to their fellow-citizens of the interior, and so the missionary schools had very much their own curriculum and the missionaries very much their own agenda, that is, for as long as it lasted, because all services came to a halt with the onset of the war of the interior in the 1980s. Just as the Europeans moved the stage of their wars with each other from Europe to the Caribbean in the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries, thereby involving the native population there, likewise the Amerindians became a pawn in the power struggle that arose between the military (headed by Desi Bouterse) and the Jungle Commando (led by

Hoofdstuk 01.Boven 15-10-2002 11:08 Pagina 38

38

Eithne B. Carlin and Karin M. Boven

Ronnie Brunswijk) in 1986. Under the name of Tukayana, which is the name of the spirit in

Kari»na mythology that functions as an intermediary between the terrestrial and celestial

worlds, a group of Kari»na and Arawaks began to attack both Maroon and the Arawak settlements that were not willing to comply.42 Young fighters from some Trio villages were

later enlisted to help in attacks against the Maroons, but again divisions arose since some

were pro-Brunswijk and some pro-Bouterse. The war of the interior was one of the most

futile events in the entire history of Suriname involving the blatant misuse of Amerindians

who had an even more inferior position in national politics than the insurgent Maroons. It

was only at this point when all other efforts to undermine the power of the military had

failed that Maroons, marginalized and hardly respected, were considered by some

Surinamese-in-exile to form a possibility to curb the power of the military (Buddingh’

1995). All to no avail as it turned out, and the entire episode had a similar effect on the

infrastructure of the native communities as it

did on that of the Maroon societies, namely it

led to an undermining of the authority of the

elders that is evident even today, and it resulted

in a generation of young men and women who

underwent the trauma of a war they could not

understand. The more tangible effects of the war

were the abandonment of the schools, leaving

an entire generation of children illiterate in all

languages; the almost total isolation of the

Amerindian villages, since in the coastal area

either roads were blocked or impassable and in

the interior, flights were few and far between;

and a shortage of manufactured goods from

town due to fewer flights. Like many Maroons,

the Wayana, who lived on the eastern border,

fled to French Guiana at this time, and almost

the entire village of Tëpu fled to Brazil. Thus

any developments that had been achieved prior

A Tunayana couple: Sinkara and her husband Mereka in Kwamalasamutu, 2002

to this point were either put on hold or nullified. While some semblance of normalcy re-
turned to the Kari»na and Arawak villages in

the coastal area after the war, with at least primary schools resuming, the interior until

the present has remained a highly neglected region. Kwamalasamutu and Pïrëuimë

(Apetina) have more or less functioning government primary schools. Three schools have

functioned sporadically in the last two decades, namely in Palumeu, Tëpu and Kawem-

hakan, and the inhabitants of two other Wayana and Trio villages have never had any

schooling whatsoever. Since the mid-1990s non-governmental organizations have been

initiating many short-term and a few long-term projects to facilitate the development of

Hoofdstuk 01.Boven 15-10-2002 11:08 Pagina 39

I The native population

39

the Amerindians. The importance of schools in the interior is seen by the people them-

selves in the fact that the language of instruction is Dutch, the official language of

Suriname, a language to which otherwise the Trio and Wayana have little exposure but

which offers the only means of understanding politics in the national context, as well as

upward social mobility for these groups. One project, launched in 1998 by the privately

set up Margreet Kauffman Foundation (MKF), started with a school in the mixed

Trio/Wayana village of Palumeu, and has already surpassed most expectations, with the

school also being used as training ground for Trio and Wayana teaching assistants from

other villages. The MKF, which works closely with the Ministry of Education, is presently

extending its education project by building a school also in Tëpu at the behest of the Trio.

In general, however, such projects have to date been more successful in the Kari»na and

Arawak villages, also because easier and less expensive access allows projects to be more

readily monitored. Indeed after one and a half centuries of acculturation of the Kari»na

and Arawaks to the urban setting, the transmission and internalization of a Gedankengut

not unlike the western one, and the

utter lack of knowledge on the part

of these groups about the lifestyle

and needs of their interior counter-

parts, the gap between the Amer-

indians of the coast and those of

the interior has grown so great as

to almost obscure their ultimate

common ancestry. In spite of this,

various organizations that were

formed by the groups of the coast –

some of these organizations have

The Wayana storyteller Iliwa and her daughter

their roots in the Tukayana move-

ment – to protect the rights of Amerindians in Suriname now include the groups of the

interior in their struggle for human rights without any differentiation in needs the coastal

and interior groups might have. Most of the upper-class Kari»na and Arawaks who have

key positions in these organizations are well educated and politically highly aware and

competent representatives vis-à-vis the Surinamese government. Furthermore, many of

them speak the official language, Dutch, at home, rather than Sranan, the lingua franca, or

their former languages. Hence, in principle they are more easily able to anticipate the

stance and follow the reasoning of both the national and international bodies.

Unfortunately few of the development aid projects have managed to convey a sense

of self-worth not to mention self-empowerment to the relevant communities. One well-

known exception is the relatively prosperous Kari»na village of Galibi. The Surinamese

government tends to leave Amerindian social and economic development up to the non-

governmental organizations, except for election time when villages are visited, presents

are given, and promises are made. In fact, in February 2000 a rather bizarre offer to settle

Hoofdstuk 01.Boven 15-10-2002 11:08 Pagina 40

40

Eithne B. Carlin and Karin M. Boven

Sohkisu ahkëtëhpe

aaaakmuiteke

Kanpai ijatuhpë eeku
KuaraSmabeeakjeouekkaunpu Kanawapan turu (Sir Walther Raleigh’s vallen)

Paikïrï eeku

KakahpijaAnraeePwkëarueeiekuKaranna Isiri

Kumuimë eeku

Wïïse tëpu
Kwamalasamutu

eeku

Kutari ikeni
Karina enmïtïppë Ituru
Ëkëi eeku PasMisMiïkeoaenkkouëmjeaneeku

Warapa

Piritu eeku

Sakuru ikeni

O nopira

(340)

(299) Pakoko

eeku

(284)

TëtakapirKeannaeemkui t ë

o eeku kë

Siwiri eeku WPaïti oemt ou eeeekkuu

Pëpë eeku

Tonka Ikutupë aajeï eeku

WEREHPAI ri

eekukapAariitwaeweaekeueku

Maripa eeku

Wïrapa eeku

(286)

K

a

Arimin ikui itïhtahpë eek
Mokoko eeku

a u

SI

ka Muura

Waikapuri rau eeku
(292)

Kana wën

Ankai ewi (290) PALIWINIanuhtoKumuiimtuWëruatnëepiume eeku

Kaik aimë

Kuwe eeku

Pai

Jawi eeku

eeku Sipa Warapa eeku

Miikirimë eeku

Kaikui eeku Mami Kuwi tëpu

Kumuitr To top

Map 1.6. Land use area around Kwamalasamutu
the long neglected question of landrights was made to the Amerindian and also the Maroon communities by the Paramaribo authorities in which they were promised rights to land within a five to ten kilometre radius of their villages, a so-called economic zone. That mayhem did not break out can be ascribed to disbelief rather than to the relevant parties’ lack of understanding of what was being offered. However, the entire proceedings of the two landrights meetings, each of which lasted two days, give a clear picture of how the Surinamese Amerindians are perceived by both their countrymen in general and the government in particular. Indeed no government of Suriname, whether colonial or autochtonous, has ever formulated a policy to protect or even implement the basic rights of the Amerindians, those that in the constitution, as well as in international law, are assured to every citizen of Suriname. On the contrary, if there was a way not to have to address the Amerindian issue, which according to the authorities and in the perception of the indigenous population of Amerindians and Maroons, mainly consisted of unresolved land rights questions, then that path was taken. That there are several Amerindian groups with different histories, lives, and needs is ignored by one and all: one possible

Hoofdstuk 01.Boven 15-10-2002 11:08 Pagina 41

I The native population

41

exception here is the first Dutch governor of Suriname decreeing that Caribs, Arawaks, and Waraos were not to be enslaved, a ruling that did not apply to the Amerindians of the interior. At any rate, the then president of Suriname, after some reconnaissance trips to the interior, invited all the dignatories of the interior to a meeting in Paramaribo in February 2000 to discuss the question of landrights. Since nineteen languages in all are spoken in Suriname, eight Amerindian, seven creole, and four Eurasian languages, interpreters were used for the duration of the meeting. Of these nineteen, two are more commonly used than the others, namely the lingua franca, Sranantongo, and the official language, Dutch (see also Carlin 2001). The Trio and Wayana formed one group with one spokesman, the granman (paramount chief) of the Trio. Indeed great was the shock and indignation when the president announced the granman of the Trio to be the head of all the Amerindians in Suriname, a decision that after the meeting was quickly reversed for the Kari»na and Arawaks, who incidentally had not even been invited to the meeting, but not at that time for the Wayana, who until the end of the Wijdenbosch regime, were officially represented by the Trio. Since the Trio interpreters are more competent in Dutch than in Sranan, they used Dutch, which then had to be translated into Sranan before being translated into Ndyuka or Saramaccan for the Maroons who use less Dutch: the Trio, for example, in contrast to the Wayana, consider Sranan to be a low prestige language and prefer to speak Dutch with the authorities (Boven 1997; Carlin 1998). The coastal Kari»na and Arawaks, with the exception of the leadership of the Amerindian organizations, are more competent in Sranan than Dutch. A veritable Babel thus, leading to a change in strategy during the second meeting in April/March where the only medium used was Sranan, except in emotional and juridical treatises by some Kari»na leaders who were now present in their own right. It is almost superfluous now to say that the different frames of reference of the coastal and the interior groups led to utter confusion and a severe undermining of their already rather shaky positions vis-à-vis the authorities. The Trio manner of conducting negotiations was formerly one of stylized speech filled with metaphors and hidden meanings, a performance of the verbal art. The metaphors used in 2000 by the Trio granman were neither understood nor appreciated, rather they were the cause of some mirth; in this case the reactions of the coastal Amerindians and the government to the Amerindians of the interior were similar.43 While there was no clear outcome, as such, from these meetings apart from the signing by some parties of a protocol written in legal Dutch which no one had read, understood, or translated beforehand, it will be interesting to see whether and how subsequent governments will resume the issue.
In the meantime, whether the government follows up the landrights issue or not, the Amerindian territory in the south of Suriname, in particular that of the Wayana, is being inundated with both legal and illegal goldminers, mainly Maroons and garimpeiros from Brazil. The concession holders, by whatever rights, issue the concessions, both for goldmining and lumbering, from Paramaribo or Cayenne. The consequences of, in particular, the goldmining activities have been devastating with illness and deformity at birth on the increase because mercury is flushed into the rivers, poisoning the staple food of the

Hoofdstuk 01.Boven 15-10-2002 11:08 Pagina 42

42

Eithne B. Carlin and Karin M. Boven

Negotiations at the buskondre dei (land rights meeting) in February 2000 in Paramaribo. Back from left to right: Ipomadi Pelenapïn, Armand Karwafodi, Nardo Aluman, basja Kuliempë, Ricardo Pané (standing), granman Anapaikë (back to camera). In front left, two Trio from Pirëuimë
inhabitants of the Wayana and Trio villages. Prostitution is rampant in the goldmining camps; the HIV virus has reached the Amerindian villages; the first deaths of AIDS have already occurred; and social disintegration is becoming evident.
Conclusion
Looking back over the history of the Amerindian groups some recurrent patterns are discernible that help us to understand why the Amerindians were powerless in the face of most of the events that occurred. First, economic considerations played a major role: at the beginning of the seventeenth century the coastal groups were engaged in trading with the Europeans and with the groups of the interior; in some cases trading also involved capturing Amerindian slaves from an enemy group, thus deepening the already existent gap between the groups themselves. When the Europeans began to settle in the country, unlike the Amerindian leaders who were leaders on a smaller scale, they deemed to have control of the entire country, or at least of that area which they knew and to which they had access. From the initial status of more or less equal trading partners, evident from the efforts on the part of the Europeans to appease and to defuse any potential conflicts and thus maximally defend their own quite dependent position vis-à-vis the native groups, the Amerindian groups were demoted to incidental forces within the larger context of the Europeans’ greed for land, land that was not under the rule of any one group.44 In particular, the widespread distribution of the ethnically different Amerindian groups, then as today, was hardly conducive to a mass joining of forces against a white enemy

Hoofdstuk 01.Boven 15-10-2002 11:08 Pagina 43

I The native population

43

who had superior military power. Besides, when the European diseases, against which the Amerindians had no immunity, spread, the numbers of the native population were reduced drastically. The decline in numbers forced smaller groups to amalgamate to form larger units. Several confrontations with the Europeans, however, did occur when a change in lifestyle was forced upon the Amerindians, as was the case when missionary activity played a role. Yet these struggles were restricted in locality and did not have any wide-ranging implications. When the slave trade from Africa began, thus tilting the scales with regard to their usefulness to the Europeans, the native population came to play a minor role in their own land, a situation that has remained till today. In short, the reduction in numbers of the Amerindian groups as well as a shift in political and economic power relegated the native population to the sidelines where they were at best tolerated and at worst ignored. They had become irrelevant factors in a society that came to be dominated indirectly and later directly by the African and the Asian element.
In spite of the fact that many of the native groups that were presented in this chapter no longer exist, Suriname today boasts the highest number of Amerindian groups in one country in the entire Caribbean, namely eight different Amerindian ethnic groups who speak different languages belonging to two distinct language families, the Cariban and the Arawakan, two of the largest linguistic genetic units in all of South America – less than a century ago these two were augmented by a third language family, namely the isolate Warao, that died out in Suriname within the first three decades of the twentieth century.45 Four of these languages, namely Akuriyo, Tunayana, Sikïiyana, and Mawayana will die out in the coming two or three decades since they are no longer being transmitted to children. Rather, their children learn Trio, the dominant language in the villages, Kwamalasamutu and Tëpu, where these languages are spoken. The other four languages may have slightly longer to live but unless a concerted effort is made to reinstall the languages of the coast, most of whose (former) speakers now speak Sranan and/or Dutch (see also Carlin 2001), the prognosis is gloomy. In view of their history, and compared to the rest of the Caribbean where the original native populations and their languages did not even survive the first century of the European invasion, it is remarkable that these peoples and languages in Suriname have survived for so long; today the Amerindians number roughly ten thousand people in total. Each of these Amerindian groups holds a wealth of cultural heritage, one that will be lost forever unless steps are taken to revive it and let it flower.

Notes
1 Since terminology for the native population in the Caribbean and the Americas differs from one country to the next and even within each country, we use the group names where possible and use the inclusive terms Amerindian and native population where necessary. In Suriname the term inheemsen ‘indigenous people’ is often used, especially by the organizations set up to represent the rights of the native population; on the grassroots level the Dutch term indiaan ‘Indian’ is used.

Hoofdstuk 01.Boven 15-10-2002 11:08 Pagina 44

44

Eithne B. Carlin and Karin M. Boven

2 For a vivid analysis of Amazonian Amerindian cosmology, see Viveiros de Castro 1998; for the transformational world of the Surinamese Trio, see Rivière 1994 and Carlin 1999.
3 This spelling is from Collomb and Tiouka (2000:31); Courtz (1997:74) gives the spelling as paranakyry. 4 See also Rivière 1969:81. 5 We are using the term Carib as a cover term for those Amerindians who were referred to by that name in ear-
lier sources; for reasons given below not all those people who were subsumed under the name Carib were necessarily ethnic Caribs, rather they may have been a distinct Cariban group or even Arawakan groups. To make a distinction, we use the autonym Kari»na to refer to the actual ethnic group. The terms Cariban and Arawakan are used to refer to any group of people speaking a language belonging to the Cariban or Arawakan language families, respectively. The Kari»na are thus members of the Cariban language family, and the Arawaks (or Lokono) are members of the Arawakan language family. 6 There the Warao are referred to as Tivitivas. 7 For Amerindian participation in the slave trade, see Whitehead 1988, especially Chapters VII and VIII. 8 As far as possible we use the modern spelling of the group names or a unified spelling based on the modern languages, rather than the spelling used in the relevant source. 9 The analysis and summary of John Ley’s voyages to the Guiana coast, found in Lorimer 1994, contains such observations as how the Amerindians he met there lived, who their enemies were, how well they knew the constellations of stars, and what kind of navigational skills they possessed. 10 Even today for those people in the south of Suriname who are unaware of the structure of the state, the concept ‘Suriname’ is difficult to grasp since it in principle does not refer to an inhabited area with a ruler. 11 By way of caveat to the reader, given the ephemeral nature of names in this area, we cannot prove beyond a doubt that the names of those groups mentioned in the early seventeenth century in the interior of the Guianas refer to groups of the same blood in later centuries; however, some correlations between past and present names and those designated would seem to be highly likely, and these are discussed as relevant. 12 To our knowledge there is no information about whether this agreement was only oral or whether a written form ever existed. 13 Williamson 1923:166 ff. See there also reference to Byam’s journal p.182. 14 The Karboegers are referred to by the Kari»na themselves as the Muraato (see Smith, Chapter V); for a history of the Kari»na in the Coesewijne/Coppename area, see Teunissen et al. 2001. 15 This paragraph is based on Harcourt’s relation, including the appendices he added later, reprinted in Harris 1928. 16 The reference to Wiawia, also spelled Viawia and Wiawiam in the appendices, is marked by the following note in the margin: ‘Viawia, a Towne of 20 houses’. 17 According to John Ley’s description barely a decade before, it was the Kari»na on the Maroni who had very large ears with their earlobes lying on their shoulders (Lorimer 1994:215). 18 For a description of the initiation rite, see Boven 1996. 19 For similar functions of the pïjai among the Kari»na, see Aluman 1999. 20 Only translations that we know to be certain are given. Frikel (1957:559) gives the meaning of Tïrïjo as ‘Club people (murder people)’ but the etymology just does not hold. Likewise we have no meaning for Akïjo. 21 See Rivière 1963: 166-76. 22 This narrative is based on those found in the text collection by Keisi [Cees Koelewijn] 1984, vol.I:230-50; vol.II:251-7, as well as a recorded text entitled ‘Samuwaka’ narrated by Tëmenta to the first author in Tëpu in 1999; see also the history of the Trio peoples, written by Karin Boven and the Trio communities of Tëpu and Kwamalasamutu (Amazon Conservation Team 2001). 23 See Map 1.5 for location of present-day Trio villages. 24 The two French Jesuits were Jean Grillet and François Béchamel, who, besides converting the Amerindians to Christianity were also searching for (the golden) Lake Parima which they believed to be ‘not forty leagues’ from the location of the Aramiso; see De Montézon 1875:265 and Goodman 1975:26. Schomburgk (1845:84) refers to the Trio as being a sister tribe of the Pianakoto. 25 Caulin 1966:99. Since he had not been able to find any literary references to the Kirikirigoto, Rivière (1963 and 1969) doubted their existence. Rivière does not mention the Caulin or Harcourt sources. 26 See, for example, Koelewijn 1987, stories number 89-91. 27 The trade pidgin was heard by Crevaux in 1878, published in Crevaux (1883); De Goeje gives some examples

Hoofdstuk 01.Boven 15-10-2002 11:08 Pagina 45

I The native population

45

of it in De Goeje 1906 and 1908, and more recently Huttar (1982) and Huttar and Velantie (1997). De Goeje (1946) postulated that there may have been two distinct pidgins, one which had more French input and which was used between the Wayana and the Aluku. A comparison of the Wayana/Aluku wordlist with the Trio/ Ndyuka one corroborates this, but the data are too few to be conclusive. 28 In Wayana the term -pawana in its former usage is now only known by old men, and has been replaced by the word yepe ‘my friend’. 29 See Roth (1929:101) cited in Rivière (1963:176). 30 This map was based on the accounts of two Jesuits, Jean Grillet and François Béchamel; see De la Condamine 1745:184. 31 Whether the name Kaikushiana is a reference to the name of the Kari»na warlord Kaikushi who launched many attacks on the Europeans, or whether it is a group name, that is, ‘Jaguar people’, or whether it refers to the fact that their main trading product was hunting dogs, we do not know since kaikusi (kaikui in Trio and Wayana) in the eastern Cariban languages denotes both jaguar and dog. The western languages such as those of the Waiwai group use sapari for dog and kamara for jaguar. 32 De Goeje (1941:72) was not sure of his source and gives Leblond’s estimate as ‘4000?’ 33 See Vernooij (1989) and Lenders (1996) for earlier Roman Catholic and Labadist missionary activities. 34 For early Arawak wordlists, see Benjamin 1991; for missionary work on Arawak, see Van Baarle 1999. 35 Collomb and Tiouka 2000:46-47; Courtz (1997) gives Tyre’wuju meaning ‘eastern Indian’. The alveolar flap is generally orthographically represented by l in the French works and by r in Dutch works, see also Hoff (1968:26) for the name tïre:wuyu, as well as for the early sources on the Kari»na language. The groups of the interior with whom the Kari»na were in contact generally referred to the Kari»na as Tayra. 36 For the history and ethnography of the Maroni River Kari»na, see Kloos (1971). 37 Schomburgk expedition: 1843; Barrington Brown expedition: 1871; Crevaux: 1878, and ten years later Coudreau. The Dutch expeditions were the Tapanahoni expedition: 1905; Tumuchumac expedition: 1907; Corentyne expedition: 1910. 38 The first author had the opportunity to record some of Irita’s life story in 1997. See also Findlay 1975. 39 Manfred Rauschert, personal communication 2000; De Goeje 1946:268. 40 Nationally these Trio villages are known by the spelling given here; the Trio spelling is Araraparu and Kwamarasamutu or Kuamarasamutu respectively. 41 We have included all the larger groups but not instances of, for example, one or two Kashuyana who live in Kwamalasamutu. 42 Brana-Shute 1993. Other variants of the name Tukayana are Tucajana or Tukuyana. See also Cirino 2001 and Boven (forthcoming). 43 When the then president repeated his offer of ten kilometres of land around each village, the Trio paramount chief said: ‘Mr. President, you are giving me a bird’s cage but no bird to go with it’. 44 We should like to point out that by using the term ‘more or less equal’ we are not denying the fact that in hindsight the Amerindians got the lesser part of the bargain since the goods they obtained through trade were not riches nor the means to generate riches; the goods received by the Amerindians were mirrors, machetes, and the like. However, the value of goods is determined for a large part by a culture, mirrors, and machetes, just as gold and certain tree species, were seen as desirable and valuable items by the Amerindian and the European cultures, respectively, dictated in part by their scarcity or difficult accessibility within either of the two cultural groups. By way of comparison, the cowrie shell in West Africa, for example, was for decades regarded as much more valuable than gold. 45 Warao is, however, still spoken in Venezuela and possibly by a few old speakers in neighbouring Guyana.

Hoofdstuk 01.Boven 15-10-2002 11:08 Pagina 46

