NOMINAL AND VERBAL MORPHOLOGY IN THE VOCABULARIO CONIVO (1800) AND THE DICCIONARIO SIPIBO (c. 1815)
BEATRIZ CHRISTINO Universidade de São Paulo
RESUMEN
En la última década del siglo XVIII, misioneros franciscanos consiguieron reiniciar la evangelización de los indígenas de la región de los ríos Huallaga y Ucayali (hoy, Amazonia Peruana). Como parte de ese proceso, fueron fundadas, por Buenaventura Marqués (?–1822), la misión de San Antonio de Canchahuaya entre los Conivo en el año 1793, y la misión San Luis de Charasmaná entre los Sipibo en 1809.
Buenaventura Marqués compuso en 1800 el Vocabulario Conivo (impreso por primera vez en 1931) que he comparado al Diccionario Sipibo. Compuesto también por misioneros franciscanos españoles que permanecen no identificados, ese diccionario fue editado en 1904 por el etnógrafo alemán Karl von den Steinen (1855–1929) quien opinó que su fecha de producción podría haber sido entre 1810–1820.
El tratamiento divergente de los trazos morfológicos de la(s) lengua(s) descritas en los “Apuntes de gramatica [...]” del Diccionario Sipibo y en la sección gramatical del Vocabulario Conivo es el tema del presente texto. La postulación de un caso acusativo sin cualquier terminación específica, por Buenaventura Marqués, o marcado por la terminación -ra, según el Diccionario Sipibo, así como otras discordancias, no pueden ser consideradas reflejo de divergencias estructurales entre el Sipibo y el Conivo, puesto que ellos están relacionados a punto de que son actualmente considerados dialectos de una misma lengua Pano. Por eso, mi investigación buscó identificar justificativas para las diferencias en la descripción morfológica de las dos obras. Es plausible creer que éstas se vinculen al grado de conocimiento de la lengua descrita alcanzado por cada uno de los autores, asimismo a la manera como obtuvieron sus datos lingüísticos. Mientras que el autor de los “Apuntes de gramatica” del
 I am particularly grateful to Bruno Illius, Iris Bachmann and Aline Cruz for their very useful comments on a preliminary draft of this paper, to the CAPES (Centro de Aperfeiçoamento de Pessoal de Ensino Superior, Brazil), and to the DAAD (Deutscher Akademischer Austausch Dienst, Germany) for the scholarship that made my research possible.

92

BEATRIZ CHRISTINO

Diccionario Sipibo se muestra como un aprendiz de la lengua y declara haber compuesto los paradigmas cuestionando sus informantes, Buenaventura Marqués nada afirmó explícitamente a respecto de su dominio del Conivo o sobre el modo como recogió las informaciones que registró. Sin embargo, Buenaventura Marqués dio indicaciones a respecto de la frecuencia de uso de ciertas expresiones y a respecto de hábitos lingüísticos de los Conivo, lo que nos deja entrever la observación directa y aguzada de la comunidad lingüística.
1. Introduction This paper aims at analysing how nominal and verbal morphologies were
conceived in the Vocabulario Conivo (1800), by the Franciscan missionary P. Buenaventura Marqués (?1822), and in the Diccionario Sipibo (c.1815), also written in a Franciscan mission. This research is based on the published versions of the original texts by considering the morphological descriptions presented in their grammar sections, as well as the indirect information on linguistic categorisation provided by entries in the Spanish-Conivo and the Spanish-Sipibo vocabularies. We also looked for similarities with descriptive solutions adopted by the missionaries and recent linguistic studies, such as Valenzuela (1997) and Illius & Weiβhar (1990).
The comparison between the Vocabulario Conivo and the Diccionario Sipibo raises an interesting question: why are the morphological categorisations presented in each one different? This seems challenging, since both works were written by Franciscan missionaries whose ultimate goal was to spread the Christian religion in a location settled in the Peruvian Amazon, the Ucayali River basin. In addition to that, the Sipibo and the Conivo1 belong to the Panoan ethno-linguistic family, which shows a considerable degree of cultural and linguistic homogeneity (Erikson 1998[1992] and Loos 1999). The Pano languages were referred to as such for the first time by Raoul de la Grasserie (1839–1914) in a paper examining words from seven different languages, recorded by missionaries or travellers (Grasserie 1890).
According to the recent panologists, there are thirty or so Pano languages. Even though many Pano nations are considered to be extinct, the Pano occupies still nowadays quite a large area. The borders of their territory are the upper Solimões (5 S), the upper Purus (10 S), the Ucayali river and its tributaries (75 W), and the upper reaches of the Javari, Juruá and Purus rivers (70 W). (Erikson 1998[1992]:239).
1 Although recent authors prefer other spellings (Shipibo-Conibo, Illius & Weiβhar 1990 or Shipibo-Konibo, Valenzuela 2002a, 2002b), we have decided to adopt Sipibo and Conivo in order to retain the same spelling as the missionary works. In quotations, of course, we follow the spelling given by the sources rather than the current Spanish orthography.

THE VOCABULARIO CONIVO AND THE DICCIONARIO SIPIBO

93

It is probable that the earlier contact between Pano nations and Europeans took place during an expedition led by Juan Salinas de Loyola in 1557. After that, other Spanish expeditions found Pano natives, such as the one organised by Pedro de Ursula in 1560 which gave the first reports of the existence of the Mayoruna.
The history of the missionary activities among the Pano reveals a great deal of turbulence. A Franciscan mission in the Sipibo region founded by friar Caballero in 1657 had to deal with Indian rebellions in the years 1661, 1665, and 1667. The conflicts ended only in 1670, when the Shetebo Indians were moved to La Laguna, a Jesuit mission. A new succession of Indian rebellions started in 1689, disturbing the missionaries’ plans and resulting in their departure at the end of the century. The situation was similar in the eighteenth century, once the missionaries experienced unsuccessful attempts at evangelizing the Pano people. In order to retaliate, the Franciscan missions built around 1757 were destroyed by the Shetebo ten years later. In around 1790, the Franciscans began once more to convert the natives who lived in the region of the Huallaga and Ucayali rivers. The foundation of the Mission San Antonio de Canchahuaya among the Conivo natives by Marqués in 1793, and the foundation of the Mission San Luis de Charasmaná among the Sipibo natives in 1809 were part of this process.
2. The “Fragmentos del Arte” from the Vocabulario Conivo and the “Apuntes de grammatica” from the Diccionario Sipibo Marqués, who headed the Ucayali Franciscan Missions for many years,
composed the Vocabulario Conivo in 1800 for the “Colegio de Ocopa” in the Manoa mission. Two versions of this work are known today. One of them, a still unpublished manuscript preserved in the British Library (identified by the number MS Add 25,321) contains only the Spanish-Conivo vocabulary. Another currently held in the Biblioteca Nacional de Lima and published in 1931, also contains the Vocabulario de la lengua Pana reformado and the Fragmentos del Arte del Idioma Conivo, Setevo, Sipivo, y Casivo o Comavo que hablan los Indios así llamados que residen a las márgenes del famoso río Paro, alias Ucayali, y de sus tributarios Manoa, Cushibatay, Pisqui, Aguaytia y Pachitea (Marqués 1931[1880]:198-228 and 117-130).
In an attempt to demonstrate Marqués’ morphological categorisations, we have chosen “Fragmentos del Arte”, i.e. the grammar section of his Vocabulario Conivo, to make a comparison with the respective sections of the Diccionario Sipibo, whose identity is unknown; a Franciscan had copied an earlier manuscript containing the Sipibo-Spanish vocabulary, made by another

94

BEATRIZ CHRISTINO

member of the religious order and wrote the Spanish-Sipibo vocabulary and the grammatical sections. This Diccionario Sipibo was published in 1904 by the German ethnographer and linguist Karl von den Steinen (1855–1929), who estimated that it had been written in around 1810–1820. The manuscript includes the “Apuntes de gramatica que preguntando he reunido” (published as Anonymous 1904:80-89), and a grammar inserted at the end (in the published version, Steinen reproduced it not as a whole, but each of its parts accompanying the corresponding part in the “Apuntes”).
3. Descriptive differences between the Vocabulario Conivo and the Diccionario Sipibo The works analyzed are comparable not only because they were composed
by Franciscans who lived in the Ucayali River region at roughly the same time, but also because of the strong similarity between the linguistic data. In fact, Sipibo and Conivo are so closely related that today they are considered varieties of a single Panoan language. Indeed Erikson (1998[1992]:241) mentions the existence of five Sipibo-Conivo mutually intelligible dialects.
The small, almost insignificant, degree of distinction between them was already recognized by Marqués and by the author of the Diccionario Sipibo, despite the fact that there is no mention of this work in the Vocabulario Conivo and vice versa. Through direct observation, the missionaries realized that different tribes could communicate with each other without problem.
Marqués defined the Conivo language as:
lengua general entre las naciones Séteba, Xípiba, Hámue–huáca, Sénsi y Cápanáua y otras, pues tienen muchos terminos y vocablos comunes, y con facilidad dichas naciones se entienden unas con otras. Así lo tengo visto, y experimentado. (Marqués 1931[1800]:197; emphasis mine)
[general language among the nations of the Setebo, Xipibo, Hamue–Huaca, Sensi and Capanaua and others, since they have many expressions and words in common, and those nations understand each other easily. I have seen and experienced it myself.]
The complete title of the grammar section of the Vocabulario Conivo, which includes as synonyms “Conivo, Setevo, Sipivo [Sipibo] y Casivo o Comavo” (Marqués 1931[1800]:117) quoted above provides further evidence of Marqués’ perception of their linguistic relation.
Even though the author of the Diccionario Sipibo did not mention a general language, they described an analogous situation to that referred to by Marqués, since the first page of his work informs us that:

THE VOCABULARIO CONIVO AND THE DICCIONARIO SIPIBO

95

[Sipibo or Chipibo] tiene relacion con el Pano, Remo y Cunibo; demanera que sabiendose bien el Chipibo, se habla el Pano, Remo y Cunibo; por que son casi lo mismo con poca diferencia. (Anonymous 1904:1; emphasis mine)
[(Sipibo or Chipibo) is related to Pano, Remo and Conivo; so that if one knows Chipibo well, one can speak Pano, Remo and Cunibo; because they are almost the same with little difference.]
The reported assertions allow us to say that Marqués and the author of the Diccionario Sipibo had the same object of study: the Sipibo-Conivo language. By considering how its nominal and verbal morphologies were treated in each work, we can determine that the two Franciscans conceived crucial aspects of this language in different ways.
4. Noun morphology Following a traditional descriptive model, Marqués and the author of the
“Apuntes de gramatica” (included in the Diccionario Sipibo) were concerned to show the “declinacion de los nombres” (“declension of the nouns”, Anonymous 1904:80). In the “Apuntes de gramatica” five cases were listed: nominative, genitive, dative, accusative and ablative. Marqués, in his “Fragmentos del Arte…”, also mentions a vocative, which would correspond to “Ola padre” [Hello father] and whose form was dependent on the sex of the speaker: a woman must say juu before the noun and a man, hee (Marqués 1931[1800]:118).
Both works identified an ending -na for the genitive, which agrees, to a considerable extent, with the ‘possessive-suffix’ -na (in agent function expressed as -ton or -tonin) described by Illius & Weiβhar (1990:573). -Na also indicates the dative, as noted in the “Apuntes de gramatica”. Marqués adopted another point of view regarding dative constructions. Even though he offered -na + ino to exemplify the dative form in the paradigm, he remarked that in Conivo there is no simple dative particle which could be compared with the Spanish “para” (English “for”), or the Quechua “pac” (Marqués 1931[1800]: 120).
Sometimes Marqués and the author of the “Apuntes de gramatica” interpreted the same linguistic forms in different ways. Whilst in the grammar supplement of the Diccionario Sipibo the endings -ba and -nu were considered totally equivalent and equally able to express the ablative form corresponding to “en el/ en la” (“in the”), Marqués made a clear distinction between the context of use of the endings he wrote as -iba and -no. First of all, in his opinion those endings were accusative markers, and should be translated by expressions like the Latin ad patrem (“to the father”). In addition, he asserted

96

BEATRIZ CHRISTINO

that the speaker was not free to choose one of them, for -iba must be attached to names referring to human beings and -no was restricted to place names (Marqués 1931[1800]: 119). Recent studies confirm this observation: Illius & Weiβhar (1990:572) define -iba as a directional Sipibo-Conivo particle, expressed only accompanying nouns of animate beings.
The two works diverge radically in their categorisations of the ending -ra and in their conceptions of the accusative form related to the direct object, in our terms, or to the “persona que padece” (“the person affected by the action of the verb”, Marqués 1931[1800]:121). According to Marqués in his Vocabulario Conivo, neither the nominative nor the accusative case in Conivo has a characteristic ending. He believed that misunderstandings were avoided by word order, since the agent (with the particle -ra, to which we shall return later) is followed by the patient. The sentence (1) Perura Juan rétequi translated as “Pedro mató Juan” (“Pedro killed Juan”) illustrates this point (Marqués 1931[1800]:121).
A different approach is adopted in the Diccionario Sipibo. Here, the author also conceived a nominative without a specific ending, but indicated the existence of an accusative marker, namely the ending -ra. This description becomes obvious in sentences as (2) Juni parantara piye, translated as “El hombre come platanos” (“The man eats bananas”; Anonymous 1904:81), but cannot explain other sentences given in the “Apuntes”. Among the quoted examples there are nominatives with the ending -ra, such as (3) Nucunpapara júque – “Mi padre vino” (“My father came”) and (4) Minpapara picási – “Vuestro padre tiene hambre” (“Your father is hungry”) (Anonymous 1904:83), as well as direct objects without this ending: (5) Amahuacaiba padrebu nidza gema ácque or “Los padres hacen un pueblo en los Amahuacas” (“The priests build a village among the Amahuacas”) (Anonymous 1904:81).
Whereas missionary works present the nominal Sipibo-Conivo inflection from a nominative-accusative perspective, modern research takes an alternative view. Different from Latin and Quechua, very familiar to the Franciscans, the case-marking in modern Sipibo-Conivo is characterized by a fairly rigid ergative-absolutive nature without showing any kind of split-ergativity (see Valenzuela 1999, 2002, 2002a). Loos (1999:241) and Illius & Weiβhar (1990: 570, 572) among others inform us that the Sipibo-Conivo ergative case takes the ending -n (which has many morphophonologically conditioned allomorphs), thus making the subject of a transitive clause the marked element of the case system. The subject in intransitive clauses and the object in transitive clauses represent the absolutive case, which does not exhibit any particular ending. Thus sentence (2) could be misunderstood, artificially built or only part

THE VOCABULARIO CONIVO AND THE DICCIONARIO SIPIBO

97

of a longer structure, not a real Sipibo-Conivo valid sentence (Bruno Illius, personal communication).
-Ra cannot then be considered an accusative marker, as was proposed by the author of the “Apuntes de gramatica”. It is interesting to note that in his Vocabulario Conivo Marqués described the ‘particle’ -ra in a way that could provide an explanation for the Sipibo sentences that do not fit the paradigm laid out in the Diccionario Sipibo. His analysis, in fact, is able to reason the structures of (3), (4) and (5), since he believed that -ra is not case-marking, but is rather attached as an ending to the first word of a sentence. This “exornativa del primer vocablo” (“embellishing particle of the first word”; Marqués 1931 [1800]:120) was, from his point of view, not part of the nominal morphology, but could be added to any word category in all possible forms. With respect to verbs, he pointed out the particularity that -ra does not occur at the final syllable, but is located before the verbal tense markings. Verbal forms included in the lexicographic section of the Vocabulario Conivo, such as éráque, “estoy” (“I am”) and pútoráque, “ya está harto” (“s/he is already fed up”) (Marqués 1931[1800]:192, 195) illustrate that assertion. Other examples can be found in the Spanish-Sipibo vocabulary of the Diccionario Sipibo, whose “Apuntes de gramatica” do not mention that -ra can occur in non-nominal contexts. This is the case with muexoraque, “estar quemado” (“to be burned”), biráque, “recibi” (“I received”) and husaraque, “dormir” (“to sleep”; Anonymous 1904:32, 66, 28).
Valenzuela (1997, 2002a) reveals that the current Sipibo-Conivo -ra functions as a ‘direct evidential/certainty marker’, which is added to the first major constituent of each declarative sentence. Only when a finite verb corresponds to the first major constituent, does -ra behave like a ‘second position clitic’ and is expressed before the final tense/aspect/illocutionary force markers. In that sense, she confirms what Marqués wrote of the position of -ra in verbal forms. Although the Franciscan defined -ra as an “exornativa del primer vocablo”, he quoted sentences able to suggest that also at that time it was to be joined to the first major constituent, such as: “Se hizo hombre en las entrañas de la Virgen María” – Virgen María pucu muerá junicato (“He turned into a man in the Virgin Mary’s womb”), “Está dentro de la iglesia” – rios tapi muerá iacai (“s/he is inside the church, lit. house of God”) (Marqués 1931[1800]:121-122).
The choice of the term “exornativa” (“embellishment”) makes it clear that Marqués associated this linguistic element neither with a grammatical function nor with a specific semantic content. “Exornativa” and “exornación” are derived from the Latin exornatio (Eng. “exornation”), a rhetorical notion linked

98

BEATRIZ CHRISTINO

to strategies, such as variation in vocabulary or the choice of figures of speech, used to bring beauty and elegance to the speech without introducing any other kind of change. In effect, Marqués was claiming that the presence of -ra could not modify the meaning of a word or part of speech (Marqués 1931[1800]: 120). He did not indicate any corresponding Spanish expressions for the particle -ra, except when it was attached to a nominative form. In such a context he considered it equivalent to the Spanish definite article. This idea can be related to the concept that articles are not a necessary grammatical category, since there are languages, such as Latin, which function without them. Indeed, the modern Pano languages do not have definite or indefinite articles (see Loos 1999:241).
On the whole, Marqués’ analysis of Conivo nominal morphology is quite consistent, and attentive to peculiarities of the language. The same cannot be said for the categorisation of nominal morphology presented in the Diccionario Sipibo, which interprets -ra as an accusative marker, thus assimilating Sipibo grammar to European and Quechua grammars to a higher degree, and failing to explain sentences collected even by the author himselve.
5. Verb morphology With respect to verb morphology, Marqués in his Vocabulario Conivo tried
to develop a categorisation that was able to deal with the particular nature of the Conivo, while the author of the Diccionario Sipibo opted for a more traditional type of categorisation that seems to reproduce a European way of thinking.
Marqués finished his “Fragmentos del Arte” by providing the conjugation of iqui. He grouped five different tenses of what he considered the Conivo equivalent of “ser” (“to be”): the present tense (“Tiempo presente”), the immediate past tense (“Pretérito de cosa que fué ahora, inmediatamente”), the recent past tense (“Pretérito de cosa que fué pocos días há”), the past tense referring to a year ago (“Pretérito que fué un año há”), and the remote past (“Pretérito de muchos años há”) (Marqués 1931[1800]:129-130).
Valenzuela (1997) recognized in modern Sipibo-Conivo two auxiliaries that can replace other verbs, namely -ik for intransitive verbs, and -ak for transitive ones. The former works as “be, do (intr.) and say” and corresponds to the form mentioned by Buenaventura Marqués as the copula. There are other coincidences between the paradigm organized by Marqués and the results of recent research. The Franciscan labelled as “Pretérito de cosa que fué pocos días há” (recent past) verbal forms containing -bas que (for the singular) and -bas icai (for the plural). Illius & Weiβhar (1990) and Valenzuela (1997)

THE VOCABULARIO CONIVO AND THE DICCIONARIO SIPIBO

99

named “a few days ago past”, a verbal tense whose characteristic ending is -ibá(t). Marqués’ past referring to many years ago presents the form -cato, as we see in his paradigm and in the exemplifying sentence quoted above “Se hizo hombre en las entrañas de la Virgen María” – Virgen María pucu muerá junicato (“He turned into a man in the Virgin’s womb”) (Marqués 1931[1800]:122). -Kato was described by Valenzuela (1997) as a combination of -kati(t), which marks remote “many years ago” past and -ke, the completive aspect suffix. This modern -ke can be related to Marqués’ -que, the ending used to indicate the singular forms of the immediate past of the copula. In the Spanish-Conivo vocabulary it is possible to find other examples with -que, such as caráque, “Ya se fué” (“s/he has already gone”) and bíque, bíraque, “recibí” (“I received”) (Marqués 1931[1800]:195, 183).
The paradigm constructed by Marqués seems to be Conivo-oriented not only because of the specific conceptions of the verbal tenses, but also because he was not concerned about finding an exclusive corresponding tense for each Spanish tense form. He translated as “fuí etc.” (“was”) three different verbal tenses of the Peruvian language: the immediate past, the remote past and the “a year ago” past (whose endings muec-e, for the singular, and muec anque, for the plural, seem to be absent from recent studies, Marqués 1931[1800]:129130).
The categorisation of Sipibo verbal morphology provided by the Diccionario Sipibo does not reveal such a degree of internal coherence. Indeed, one can hardly speak of “a” or “the” categorisation in that work, since the paradigms presented are not uniform. Those of the “Apuntes de gramatica” and those of the grammar supplement diverge to some extent. The information included in the latter inserted at the end of the manuscript not only serves to fill in the blanks of the previous grammar section, but also partially changes the way in which the verbal system is conceived.
Both grammatical parts of the Diccionario Sipibo give names to the Sipibo verbal tenses that belong to the terminology used to describe European languages. The “Apuntes de gramatica” shows the conjugation of three verbs, yqui, caai and nuiqui, translated respectively as “ser” (“to be”), “ir” (“to go”), and “amar” (“to love”) (Anonymous 1904:85, 41, 5), mentioning six verbal tenses. The paradigm starts, as expected, with the present tense whose quoted forms for the first person singular are ea eraque, “yo soy” (“I am”), earecái, “yo voy” (“I go”) and ea renúye, “yo amo” (“I love”). A co-existence of the endings -que and -ai, to express the Sipibo translation for the Spanish present tense, also occurs in sentences written in the Spanish-Sipibo vocabulary. In that list one may read: “Ati te llama, ati te dice” (“s/he calls you, s/he tells you”),

100

BEATRIZ CHRISTINO

miaraccai, miaccai, as well as “ya está” (“already is”), iráque (Anonymous 1904:8, 11). Similar to Marqués’ -que, the -que identified by the author of the “Apuntes de gramatica” probably coincides with the completive aspect suffix -ke, referred to by Valenzuela (1997; Illius & Weiβhar 1990 prefer the spelling -kï). Moreover, the -ai recognised by the Franciscan can be understood as equivalent to the current Sipibo-Conivo incompletive aspect suffix -ai (see Valenzuela 1997 and Illius & Weiβhar 1990).
It is difficult to find an ending that characterises the imperfect, according to the “Apuntes de gramatica”. The verbal forms differ for each verb and there is a considerable variation within each conjugation. Considering only the elements that are present in all persons and numbers, one can propose -nenoipaine, for yqui, “ser” (“to be”), -painu, for caai, “ir” (“to go”) and -ipe, for nuiqui, “amar” (“to love”) (Anonymous 1904:83, 86, 88). None of those tentative endings can be found amid the examples recorded in the SpanishSipibo vocabulary.
While some verbal forms from the imperfect seem to be composed of a simple union of personal pronoun, verbal root and tense marker, others puzzle the reader. Nunúipe is probably nu- (first person plural) + nú (verbal root) + -ipe (tense marker). However, the next verbal form is harder to understand: mibubirenúipe. Mibu could be a compound of mi, the second person singular pronoun and -bu, the optional Sipibo-Conivo plural marker (see Anonymous 1904, Valenzuela 2002a among others). Perhaps -bire is an expression associated with emphasis, since -bires in modern Sipibo-Conivo can be translated as “true” or “purely” (Valenzuela 1997).
Also considered during the analysis of the “Apuntes de gramatica” was the nature of the contrast between the “preterito perfecto” (“perfect”) and the “preterito pluscuamperfecto” (“pluperfect”). For the conjugation of caai (“to go”), there are only subtle differences between these tenses. In some cases, the verbal forms presented are strictly equal, such as arecáque, for the third person singular, and abúbirecáibaque, for the third person plural (Anonymous 1904:85). On the other hand, the verb nuiqui (“to love”) suggests that a distinction between the verbal tenses referred to does exist. Its “pluscuamperfecto” forms regularly include -ipei before the expression -nuibaque, which also appears in the “perfecto” forms (Anonymous 1904:87-88). The sequence -baque reminds us of the singular form of the Marqués’ ‘a few days ago’ past, namely -bas que.
For the verb yqui (“to be”), two “pluscuamperfecto” (“pluperfect”) paradigms were proposed. According to the paradigm on page 192 (numbering in the original version, reported by Steinen), the “preterito pluscuamperfecto” of

THE VOCABULARIO CONIVO AND THE DICCIONARIO SIPIBO

101

that verb is the equivalent of the Spanish form “habia sido etc.” and shows the following forms for the third persons singular: ea imáque; minqui-uánan, and areibaque. In the manuscript, the author mentions two pages later that another “pluscuamperfecto” in Sipibo could be understood, similar to “hubiera, habria y hubiese sido”, etc. and quotes as conjugated forms for the singular ea enqueaipe, minenoipe, and ancaenipe (Anonymous 1904:84).
Despite the association of those two different paradigms with the same label — “preterito pluscuamperfecto — the categorisation of the verbal morphology presented by the “Apuntes de gramatica”, the first grammatical section of the Diccionario Sipibo, seems to follow a scheme of direct correspondence between ‘Spanish form’ and ‘Sipibo form’. Since the forms “habria sido” and “habia sido” are distinct in meaning, there is no case of an identical Spanish translation for two or more Sipibo forms that would be comparable to the three past tenses related by Marqués for “fuí etc.” (“was”) in his Vocabulario Conivo. This suggests that the analytical conceptions on which the Diccionario Sipibo were based were much more Spanish-oriented than those adopted by the Vocabulario Conivo. An author not so attentive to the real linguistic situation could be responsible for a certain lack of uniformity revealed by some of paradigms of the “Apuntes de gramatica”, such as that recorded for the “futuro imperfecto” (“future imperfect”) of the verb yqui (“to be”): ea nenoinu / mia hiri / anunoique / nua noipainu / mibúnbinenoipe / abúbinenoipe (Anonymous 1904:84).
None of the six paradigms recorded in the grammar supplement of the Diccionario Sipibo has such a hybrid nature. Except for the “presente” (“present tense”) — associated with the endings -(r)ique for yqui, -ai for caai and -ye for nuiqui — and the “futuro imperfecto” (“future imperfect”) the other verbal tenses described in the supplement were absent from the “Apuntes de gramatica”: “subjuntivo presente” (“present subjunctive”), “preterito imperfecto, perfecto y pluscuamperfecto” (“imperfect, past perfect, and pluperfect”), “futuro perfecto” (“future perfect”), and the “ymperativo” (“imperative”). Instead of being a reunion of forms that do not have a clear common element (the situation of the paradigm quoted above included in the “Apuntes de gramatica”), the “futuro imperfecto” of yqui, according to the grammar supplement, is unequivocally characterised by the ending -bano, which occurs in an entry of the Spanish–Sipibo vocabulary: “Yo también comeré” (“I will eat too”), Engbi pibano (Anonymous 1904:41).
The imperative forms in the grammar supplement of the Diccionario Sipibo regularly show the ending -(h)ue  an analysis which is not rejected by recent studies. Valenzuela (1997) states that the imperative mood in modern Sipibo-

102

BEATRIZ CHRISTINO

Conivo is marked by the final -we. In the Spanish-Sipibo vocabulary, there are 91 examples of Spanish imperative sentences translated using Sipibo verbal forms ending in -(h)ue. Despite this high number, -(h)ue was not the only linguistic form chosen as corresponding to the Spanish imperative. For example, one can identify thirteen examples with the ending –sun, as “Haz un cigarro” (“make a cigarette”), Rumeiseisun or “Cocinalo” (“cook it”), Curahasun (Anonymous 1904:37, 27). Twelve further entries testify to the alternative use of -(h)ue or -sun. This is the case of “Amalo” (“love him”), Nihue, nihuasun and “Matalo” (“kill him/it”) Redteue, redteásun (Anonymous 1904:5, 48). It is worth mentioning that the entries containing Spanish imperative forms in Marqués’ Spanish-Conivo vocabulary, are similar to those exhibited in the Diccionario Sipibo. The ending -ue occurs in 38 examples provided by Marqués, five of which make explicit their imperative meaning, such as “canta” – imperativo (“sing” – imperative) buéuáue, and “ayuda” – imperativo (“help” – imperative) ácquiue (Marqués 1931[1800]:142, 138); two entries reveal the use of the ending -[a]sun and 13 offer two possibilities, such as “abre la mano”, (“open the hand”) muéque chó-puéasun, muéque chó-puéue (Marqués 1931[1800]:131). Perhaps there is a relation between the -[a]sun recorded by the Franciscans and the benefactive or malefactive (in that sense with intransitive stems) -xon used in modern Sipibo-Conivo (see Valenzuela 1997). Marqués indeed realised that the Conivo particle -su had such a function, since he considered it able to work as a dative sign, corresponding to the Spanish “para” (“for”) (Marqués 1931[1800]: 121).
The grammar supplement of the Diccionario Sipibo does not clarify how the past tense system works in Sipibo. It shows a “preterito imperfecto, perfecto y pluscuamperfecto” (“imperfect, perfect and pluperfect”) that, added to the past tenses listed in the “Apuntes de grammatica”, breaks with the direct correspondence between Spanish and Sipibo form identified in the earlier grammar section. In addition, a past tense system comprising “preterito perfecto”, “preterito imperfecto”, “preterito pluscuamperfecto” and “preterito imperfecto, perfecto y pluscuamperfecto” is not able to give an idea of the particular nature of each verbal tense. In fact, the author himself seems to have been aware of the descriptive inaccuracy. He did not hide his doubts about the exactness of the verbal paradigms recorded by his work, which he obtained from his informants using Quechua as a lingua franca:
En estos apuntes puede ser que haya cosas inexactas ó que no esten como deberian estar; por que me cuesta mucho hacer les entender lo que pregunto, sobretodo hablando de los tiempos de los verbos; y por eso yo dudo de la rectitud de ciertas respuestas. (Anonymous 1904:80; emphasis mine)

THE VOCABULARIO CONIVO AND THE DICCIONARIO SIPIBO

103

[It is possible that these notes contain inaccurate things or something other than it should be; because it is very hard to make them [his informants] understand what I am asking, particularly regarding verbal tenses; because of that I doubt the correctness of certain responses.]
It is plausible to assume that Marqués did not have such doubts and that he collected the data for his Vocabulario Conivo in a different way.
6. The author’s knowledge of the language described: the main difference between the Vocabulario Conivo and the Diccionario Sipibo We have already mentioned that Sipibo and Conivo are so similar that they
can be considered closely related dialects whose speakers had no problems understanding each other. Both variants probably shared identical verbal tense and nominal case systems. Therefore, there is no linguistic reason to justify the reported divergences between the Vocabulario Conivo and the Diccionario Sipibo regarding the analysis of their nominal and verbal morphology.
Remarks found in these works allow us to assume that such differences in categorisation can be related to the degree of acquaintance with the language described by each author. The feeling of lack of consistency identified in the Diccionario Sipibo as well as its causes, the existence of counter-examples in the section on nominal morphology and a verbal system without a clear logical organisation, are probably a consequence of the author’s inexperience with the language. He could not speak the Sipibo language fluently, which is why he had to ask questions in Quechua to native speakers in order to collect his data. His understanding of the language was probably restricted to a basic level, since he defined himselve as a beginner whose work was not so much a result of his linguistic knowledge as a way of achieving that knowledge. This idea appears in the very first page of the Diccionario Sipibo where the missionary observes:
escribo la lengua sin saberla preguntando á otros y al mismo tiempo apuntando; porque la escribo para aprenderla; asi es que si este libro llegará á manos de alguno y encontrase faltas en el Diccionario de Castellano á Chipibo, apuntes de Gramatica, etc. acuerdase que el que escribio no conocia la falta, escribiendo. (Anonymous 1904:1; emphasis mine)
[I am writing the language without knowing it asking others and at the same time taking notes; because I am writing it in order to learn it; such that if ever a person got hold of this book and were to find mistakes in the Spanish–Chipibo Dictionary and in the grammar notes, etc. he should recall that the person who wrote it was not aware of the mistake while writing it.]

104

BEATRIZ CHRISTINO

One might assume that these lines did not correspond to the truth, but were nothing more than a conventional rhetorical strategy to express modesty. It was (and is) common for a work usually to start with an excuse for the author’s possible mistakes and the Franciscans at the beginning of the nineteenth century considered it impolite and unsuitable, as do we nowadays, to affirm one’s own expertise. However, the emphasis on the author’s incomplete learning process is perhaps more explicit than would be required by rhetorical convention. In fact, the author highlighted his insufficient knowledge of the Sipibo language as a handicap that prevented any theoretical considerations about it on his part and determined the nature of his “Apuntes de gramatica”  a succession of paradigms followed by a few examples without any further explanation. According to him,
En estos apuntes no hago explicaciones de la gramatica; porque para hacer explicaciones de alguna cosa se necesita saberla y entender la primero; y yo realmente no la sé por ahora esta lengua. (Anonymous 1904:80; emphasis mine)
[In these notes I do not explain the grammar; because in order to explain something one has to know and understand it first; and I really do not yet know this language.]
In his attempt to achieve a starting point for the study of the Sipibo language, this author of the Diccionario Sipibo probably collected and reproduced data that he knew he could not fully understand.
The Vocabulario Conivo projects a different image of its author’s knowledge of the language described. Even though Marqués also alerts his reader on the very first page on the imperfections of his work, the text does not reveal any linguistic deficiencies. Moreover, it seems that he was quite sure about this grammatical description, since he refers only to the necessary improvements in lexicographical and orthographical matters, namely the need for better definitions and modifications of spelling (Marqués 1931[1800]:115).
In the grammar section of the Vocabulario Conivo, the “Fragmentos del Arte”, there are neither explicit comments on Marqués’ knowledge of Conivo nor any on his strategies for obtaining his linguistic data. One may assume that he had mastered the language and was an attentive observer of the linguistic community, since he made comments on the speech habits of the Conivo natives. He wrote, for example, “De este plural [without the ending -bo] usan más que de ebo ni nubo” (“They use this plural (without the ending -bo) more frequently than ebo ni nubo”; Marqués 1931[1800]:124, emphasis mine) and “Singular de noster, nostra, nostrum. Nom. ebona; nom. de plural, ebona bo, pero usan más de nuna o nuvina (“Singular of noster, nostra, nostrum. Nom. ebona; nom. de plural, ebona bo, but they use nuna or nuvina more frequently”; Marqués 1931[1800]:128, emphasis mine). The identification of

THE VOCABULARIO CONIVO AND THE DICCIONARIO SIPIBO

105

such tendencies would hardly have been possible had he had only indirect access to the Conivo linguistic reality by inquiring of informants. It is more reasonable to assume that he took part in a considerable number of everyday conversations and was consequently able to report on a norm and to achieve a more coherent and accurate morphological description than the one provided by the Diccionario Sipibo.
7. Conclusion We have shown different the morphological descriptions in two works
written by Franciscan missionaries, namely the Vocabulario Conivo and the Diccionario Sipibo. Furthermore, we were interested in what determined their respective approaches regarding their common object of study, since Sipibo and Conivo are considered dialects of the same Pano language.
Generally speaking, the descriptive solutions proposed by Marqués in his Vocabulario Conivo seem to be more attentive to the peculiar nature of the language described than those proposed by the “Apuntes de gramatica” and by the grammar supplement, both included in the Diccionario Sipibo. The author of the latter revealed how insecure he was in his knowledge of Sipibo and mentioned several misunderstandings during the data collection. Due to his insufficient mastery of Sipibo, he had to ask his informants in Quechua, a fact that is likely to have distorted the analysis. Based on comments about the speech habits of the Conivo written by Marqués, we assume that he gathered his data by direct interaction with his informants in their native language. This would explain the higher degree of accuracy achieved in his morphological description.
The comparison between the Vocabulario Conivo and the Diccionario Sipibo shows that members of the same religious order working at the same time with very similar linguistic data can produce considerably different outcomes, depending on personal circumstances and interpretations.
REFERENCES
A. Primary sources Anonymous. 1904. Diccionario sipibo. Abdruck der Handschrift eines Franziskaners
mit Beiträgen zur Kenntnis der Pano-Stämme am Ucayali herausgegeben von Karl von den Steinen. Berlin: Dietrich Reimer. Marques, Buenaventura. 1800. Vocabulario de la lengua Cuniba escrito por el Padre  Predicador en Ucayali alias Manoa, del Castellano al Cunibo... a favor del Colegio de Ocapa, 15 dec. 1800. MS Add. 25321, British Library, London. Marqués, P. Buenaventura. 1931[1880]. “Vocabulario Conivo”. Revista Histórica. Órgano del Instituto Historico del Perú 9:2/3.117-228.

106

BEATRIZ CHRISTINO

B. Secondary sources Billings, Sabrina, J., John P. Boyle & Aaron M. Griffith, eds. 1999. The Panels,
Theory and Linguistic Diversity. Chicago: Chicago Linguistic Society. Cunha, Manuela Carneiro da, ed. 1998[1992]. História dos índios no Brasil. São
Paulo: Cia. das Letras, Secretaria Municipal da Cultura, Fapesp. Dixon, R. M. W. & Alexandra Y. Aikhenvald, eds. 1999. The Amazonian Languages.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. Erikson, Phillip. 1998[1992]. “Uma singular pluralidade: a etno-história Pano”.
Cunha, ed. 1998[1992].239-252. Grasserie, Raoul de la. 1890. “De la famille linguistique Pano”. Congrès
International des Américanistes ― Compte rendu de la septième session, Berlin 1888, 438-449. Berlin: W. H. Kühl. Illius, Bruno. 1999. Das Shipibo. Texte, Kontexte, Kommentare. Ein Beitrag zur diskursorientierten Untersuchung einer Montaña-Kultur. Berlin: Dietrich Reimer. Illius, Bruno & Emmerich Weiβhar. 1990. “Eine Grammatik des Shipibo-Conibo mit Textbeispiel”. Illius & Laubscher, eds. 1990.563-587. Illius, Bruno & Matthias Laubscher. 1990. Circumpacifica: Festschrift für Thomas S. Barthel. New York & Paris: Lang. Loos, Eugene E. 1999. “Pano”. Dixon & Aikhenvald, eds. 1999.227-250. Shibatani, Masayoshi, ed. 2002. The Grammar of Causation and Interpersonal Manipulation. Amsterdam & Philadelphia: John Benjamins. Valenzuela, Pilar M. 1997. Basic Verb Types and Argument Structures in Shipiboconibo. University of Oregon, MA thesis. Valenzuela, Pilar M. 1999. “Adverbials, Transitivity, and Switch-Reference in Shipibo-Konibo (Panoan)”. Billings, et al., eds. 1999.35:355-371. Valenzuela, Pilar M. 2000. “Cuando los Otros no son los Mismos – Ideología y análisis gramatical: Un caso desde la Amazonía Peruana”. Lexis 24.1:49-81. Valenzuela, Pilar M. 2002a. “Causativization and Transitivity in Shipibo-Konibo”. Shibatani, ed., 417-483. Valenzuela, Pilar M. 2002b. Relativization in Shipibo-Konibo. A typologically oriented study. München: LINCOM Europa.

