Chapter Eight
The Spread of the Arawakan Languages: A View from Structural Phylogenetics
Swintha Danielsen, Michael Dunn, and Pieter Muysken
Introduction Over the last three decades the Arawakan language family has drawn increasing attention in a number of disciplines (cf. Hill and Santos-Granero 2002). The family is unique in South America in several respects. It has the widest geographical extension of a language family in the continent. Furthermore, the literature reports for many individual members of the language family considerable influence from other languages in their immediate surroundings. In this chapter we aim to accomplish four things. First, we present a first analysis of a database of structural (as opposed to lexical) features of the Arawakan languages (Dunn et al. 2008). Comparative linguistic work on Arawakan languages was generally based on lexical material, such as that by Payne (1991). Structural features have been compared, for example, by Aikhenvald (1999a), but not systematically. Second, we carry out an analysis of the structural database using isolation by distance measures. Our third objective is to present the outcomes of a statistical analysis of the distribution of the structural features, using the SplitsTree program (NeighborNet) to yield a classification of the
173

Swintha Danielsen, Michael Dunn, and Pieter Muysken
language family. Discrepancies between the classifications on the basis of structural features and the traditional lexical features may give us insight into the role of spread as a second language, as in the case of pidgins and creoles. The data may support Hornborg’s hypothesis that the Arawakan diaspora was in part a relatively recent phenomenon and that languages did not spread successively in one big migration phase, but rather in waves (cf. Hornborg 2005:603). Finally, we survey the data on the role of contact in shaping Arawakan languages.
Classifying the Arawakan Languages
Survey of Linguistic Analyses of the Arawakan Language Family
Since the language family was established in 1783 by Father Gilij, many languages were found to belong to it.1 The relationship is not only lexical, as shown by Payne (1991), but many morphosyntactic features recur in the languages of the family as well (cf. Aikhenvald 1999a). However, even though it is clear which language is part of the phylum, it is not at all clear how the languages are related internally (cf. Facundes 2002:80). Therefore the suggested subdivisions can differ considerably. This section surveys these and points to the major differences.2
Various preliminary reconstructions of proto-Arawakan and subclassifications in the family can be gathered from earlier sources (Mason 1950; Noble 1965; Loukotka 1968; Matteson 1972; Tovar and de Tovar 1984). Because by the late twentieth century only some fifteen Arawakan languages had been described (today the count is approximately twenty), we can easily draw the conclusion that these authors did not have enough available sources for a well-founded linguistic analysis. More serious classifications of Arawakan languages were attempted by Payne (1991), Kaufman (1994), and Aikhenvald (1999a/2002). In addition, there are individual comparative studies of subgroups of the linguistic family, for example, the Brazilian Arawakan languages (Derbyshire 1986), North Arawakan (Aikhenvald 2001), North Amazonian Arawakan (Ramirez 2001), pre-Andean Arawakan languages (Wise 1986), and other valuable studies (Facundes 2002; Adelaar and Muysken 2004).
Various suggestions have been made for the internal subdivisions of Arawakan languages. The different classifications were based on different linguistic features, making comparison difficult. Payne (1991) based his classification on lexical material, while Aikhenvald (1999a) based hers predominantly on phonology and morphology. It is common to use geographical closeness rather than linguistic evidence as the deciding factor in subdividing the languages, as in, for example, Ramirez (2001:3), who posits a great Western (forty-eight languages in eight geographical subareas) versus a small Eastern cluster (seven languages in two subgroups).
In this section two subdivisions are discussed in more detail.
174

The Spread of the Arawakan Languages

Table 8.1. Payne’s classification of Arawakan languages (1991:489).

Arawakan

Northern

Wapishana

Caribbean

Garífuna

TA-Arawakan

Inland

North Amazon

Resígaro

Río Negro

Achagua, Cabiyarí, Kurripako, Piapoco, Tariana, Yucuna

Yavitero

Eastern

Palikur

Central

Paresí, Waurá

Southern

Bolivia-Paraná

Terêna, Bauré, Ignaciano

Purús

Piro, Apurinã

Campa

Machiguenga, Ashéninka

Western

Amuesha, Chamicuro

Lokono, Guajiro

Payne’s classification. Payne (1991) compared twenty-four Arawakan languages and reconstructed 203 cognates for proto-Arawakan. His analysis is based on lexical retentions and he used the lexicostatistic method.3
Heckenberger (2002:112) infers from the cognate set: “Preliminary linguistic reconstruction (Payne 1991) of Proto-Arawak demonstrates that these groups . . . already had developed agricultural technology, including ceramics, diverse domesticated plants (e.g., manioc, corn, sweet potato, pepper, urucu, and tobacco), and possibly ‘domesticated’ . . . animals (e.g., agouti, paca, coati, and large fowl).”
However tempting this conclusion may be, it should be approached with care. In particular, resemblances in cultural (e.g., numbers and names of edible foods) and ecological vocabulary (e.g., names of specific plants and animals) may be more likely due to borrowing than resemblances in the core vocabulary (cf. also Payne on Resígaro 1985:229). If we categorize the cognate sets in Payne (1991) we find 41.4 percent cultural terms, animals, and plant names, and only 45.7 percent actually refer to core vocabulary (23.6 percent core nouns and verbs, 17.7 percent body parts, 4.4 percent kinship terminology). It is possible that a large part of the analyzed resemblances among the languages is due to contact and borrowing and not to shared ancestry. Without criticizing the method by itself, it is important to realize that the comparison of only the lexicon gives us limited information on the relation among languages; lexical borrowing is frequent in South America. Payne’s classification of the twenty-four Arawakan languages is presented in Table 8.1.4
Payne distinguishes six different geographical clusters and altogether mainly three levels of subclassification, with the exception of the Ta-Arawakan subgroup

175

Swintha Danielsen, Michael Dunn, and Pieter Muysken
Figure 8.1. NeighborNet representation of the relation of Arawakan languages in Payne’s lexical retentions model (1991).
within the Caribbean cluster. This classification is based on lexical retentions (cf. Payne 1991:489) and can also be represented in a more objective way in a NeighborNet figure (cf. Figure 8.1).
Figure 8.1 highlights the six main lexical clusters postulated by Payne (1991:489). In addition, more specific lexical clusters identifiable in Figure 8.1 are, for example, the two Campan languages Machiguenga and Ashéninka; also Bauré and Ignaciano, two closely related Bolivian Arawakan languages; and the northern group Garífuna, Guajiro, and Lokono. The languages Amuesha and Chamicuro seem to cluster somewhat as well.
Aikhenvald’s classification. Father Gilij already included the striking set of personal affixes for argument marking on verbs and possessor marking on nouns, thus grammatical morphemes. Indeed many morphemes have similar forms and func-
176

The Spread of the Arawakan Languages

Table 8.2. Morphological similarity of Arawakan languages.

Examples

Reciprocal (~Causative)

Attributive

Apurinã

-kaka

ka-

Piro

-kaka (also causative)

ka-

Iñapari

-haha

aa-

Bauré

-koko

ko-

Moxo

-kaka

ka-

Terêna

-koko

ko- (also causative)

Paresí

-kakoa

ka-

Piapoco

-yakaka

ka-

Resígaro

-kakavu

ka-

Tariana

-kaka

ka-

Yavitero

-tata (causative)

ka-

Privative mamamamomaomamamamama-

tions and occur in the same slot. This is not only true for the personal affixes but also for the attributive *ka- and privative/negative *ma- prefixes and the prevailing so-called absolute or thematic suffixes on verbs and nouns. Further on, a striking number of Arawakan languages have reduplicated the absolute suffix or some other verbal root suffix and thus derived the reciprocal suffix *-ka (sometimes the form deviates because of a different root suffix, but it is reduplicated; the function may also be causative). Table 8.2 presents a list of languages that contain the reduplicated reciprocal as well as an attributive and privative prefix that clearly go back to the same proto-form (in Iñapari attributive and Terêna privative the consonant was dropped, and in Paresí, Piapoco, and Resígaro one more element has been lexicalized with the affix).5
Aikhenvald (1999a, 2001, 2002) reconstructs an “archaic nucleus” of Arawakan languages, those grammatical characteristics supposedly already present in protoArawakan. She analyzed the languages phonetically, morphologically, and also to some extent syntactically. Her formal comparison of the Arawakan pronominal system is frequently cited (Aikhenvald 1999a:88). The comparison also includes a structural analysis of morphological categories and morphosyntactics of parts of speech; however, there is no quantitative analysis. Summing up, Aikhenvald suggests a new subclassification of the Arawakan languages family, which is represented in Table 8.3 and Figure 8.2.
This classification can probably be regarded as the most detailed and most reliable one to date, given the author’s expertise regarding the language family. The most striking contrast with Table 8.1 and Figure 8.1 is that there is a main subdivision between northern and southern Arawakan. The argument for this is mentioned by Aikhenvald (2001:171): the northern Arawakan languages are slightly

177

Table 8.3. Aikhenvald’s classification of Arawakan languages. (Aikhenvald 1999:66–67; 2002:282–285)

Arawakan North Arawakan
South and South-Western Arawakan

Caribbeanâ•/› â•E› xtreme North
Palikur Río Branco North Amazonian
Columbian South-Western Arawakan Paresí-Xingú
South Arawakan
Campa Chamicuro Amuesha

Island Carib, Garífuna TA-Arawak Palikur, Marawan, Aruán Wapishana, Mawayana Orinoco Middle Río Negro Upper Río Negro Resígaro, Yucuna, Achagua, Piapoco,
Cabiyarí, Maipure A-P-I Paresí-Saraveka Xingú Terêna, Kinikinau, Chané, Apolista,
Bauré, Trinitario, Ignaciano, Paunaca, Paiconeca, Ewanewê-nawê Asháninka, Ashéninka, Caquinte, Machiguenga, Nomatsiguenga

Lokono, Guajiro, Paraujano
Bare, Baniva, Yavitero, Mandahuaka, Yabana Cawishana, Manao, Bahwana Kurripako, Tariana, Warekena
Piro, Apurinã, Iñapari Paresí, Saraveka Waurá, Mehináku, Yawalapiti, Kustenau

The Spread of the Arawakan Languages
Figure 8.2. Aikhenvald’s classification of Arawakan languages in the shape of an (unrooted) tree.
less morphologically complex; that is, there are fewer morpheme slots in a verb. Northern Arawakan languages have generally only one prefix slot, tend not to incorporate classifiers or nouns into the root, and have fewer suffix positions as well. South Arawakan languages, on the other hand, can have additional prefixes after the personal prefix and before the root, and there may be two personal suffixes attached (referring to different other participants). In addition there is generally a more complex applicative system with many specifications. Within the two major groups the subdivisions are again basically geographic. This does not mean that these languages do not show signs of clustering, and the subclassification also partly coincides with others (such as Kaufman 1994 or Ramirez 2001). Most subgrouping goes as deep as four levels. Aikhenvald included the findings of Facundes (2002) on Apurinã, Piro, and Iñapari as belonging to a subgroup (the so-called A-P-I cluster). The close relation of Paresí and Saraveka presumably derives from the finding by CréquiMontfort and Rivet (1913:517), who actually noticed that the two languages were more closely related to northern Arawakan languages6 and could be the outcome of a separate migration from the north, apart from the other Arawakan languages in the same area (cf. also Métraux 1942:134). The most detailed subdivision can be
179

Swintha Danielsen, Michael Dunn, and Pieter Muysken
observed in the area of north Amazonian Arawakan languages, where Aikhenvald has worked with several of the listed languages. What most classifications, if not all, have in common is the outsider position of the languages Amuesha and Chamicuro within the language family (cf. Payne 1991:fig. 1; Kaufman 1994:57; Adelaar and Muysken 2004:424).
A New Analysis of the Internal Relations No thorough structural comparison including all Arawakan languages has been made so far. While the lexicon has been widely compared with the nowadays less accepted methods of lexicostatistics or glottochronology, a full comparative method reconstruction has not been carried out, and other systematic methods for validating the proposed subgroups have yet to be applied. This chapter presents a quantitative analysis of structural similarities among Arawakan languages based on a systematically compiled questionnaire of typological features (Dunn et al. 2008). The data are analyzed using network methods to visualize the patterns of interrelationship in a way that does not presume a genealogically consistent pattern but rather allows for the possibility of considerable horizontal transfer. The resultant network shows which languages seem to cluster and can be compared to the postulated internal relationships within the phylum presented in Figures 8.1 and 8.2.
Methods Relationships among the Arawakan languages were characterized by measures
of structural distance. A list of typological features was coded for each language in the sample, along with geographical coordinates. A test was carried out to measure the correlation between geographic separation of language pairs and their structural distance, measured as the proportion of the coded typological features that are different between the two languages. This measure (known as “isolation by distance,” IBD) indicates the degree of geographic order within the data. A high correlation indicates an orderly historical process, whether a simple model of languages splitting and resettling nearby or a signal of significant levels of language contact and concomitant horizontal transfer of structural features. Lower levels of correlation might indicate high levels of migration and/or a recent dispersal. As will be shown below, the situation for the Arawakan languages is nearer to the latter: the geographical proximity of a pair of languages does not strongly predict that they will be especially similar on a structural level.
Given the relatively low signal of isolation by distance, it is likely that the relationships among the Arawakan languages are not especially treelike. The structural data were thus analyzed using the NeighborNet algorithm (Huson and Bryant 2006), which produces a network visualization that can capture the effect of conflicting his-
180

The Spread of the Arawakan Languages
torical signals, such as might be produced by large-scale borrowing, dialect chain phenomena, and so forth. In a NeighborNet “splitsgraph,” languages are clustered according to similarity. In the graph, sets of parallel lines show competing ways of splitting the data into clusters, in contrast to a tree representation, which can only show a single split. Orthogonal parallel lines show conflicting signals, where two different splits of the data are possible, with the length of the lines showing the amount of evidence within the data supporting each split. For a detailed description of the application of this technique to linguistic data, see Bryant, Filimon, and Gray (2005).

The Questionnaires
To produce lists of grammatical features we used two questionnaires. One was the Constenla questionnaire (CQ), used in Constenla (1991) to study areal patterns in the transition zone between the Mesoamerican and the South American languages.7 The eighty-one features of CQ include different parts of general linguistic typology: phonology, morphology, and syntax (e.g., word order). An additional number of more specific Arawakan distinguishing features, often of a morphological nature, were added using the Danielsen questionnaire (DQ), partly based on the “archaic nucleus” reconstructed by Aikhenvald (2001). The DQ contains seventythree additional features, including the pronominal affixes, and attributive and privative, and also the place of attachment of affixes. Taking one example, causative is a morphological category marked on verbs in Arawakan languages. However, some languages have a variety of causative affixes with different meanings, and some use a causative prefix, others a suffix. Compare Bauré (example 1), Nanti (2 and 3), Paresí (4), Amuesha (5), and Lokono (6):8

(1) Ni=imo-kotoreko-wo=ro

1sg=caus-work-ipfv=3sgm

‘I make him work’

Bauré9 (South Arawakan)

(2) no=ogi-pig-ah-i=ro 1=caus:agnt-return-reg-real=3f ‘I returned your axe.’

pi-hacha-ne 2-axe-poss
Nanti10 (South Arawakan)

(3) te

tsini pakuh-akag-Ø-a=ri=me

neg

who drop-caus:infl-ipfv-real=3m=cntf

‘It’s not as if anyone induced him to abandon (his spouse).’

Nanti11 (South Arawakan)

(4) o?ka? ž-at-ež-ey ačkaš y-ač-or already eat-caus-rep-1pl dwarfs 1pl-mother-poss ‘The dwarfs have already fed our mother.’ Amuesha12 (South Arawakan)

181

Swintha Danielsen, Michael Dunn, and Pieter Muysken

(5) ahaka-ki-sa work-caus-ind ‘cause someone to work, give someone work’

Paresí13 (South Arawakan)

(6) ly-fara-kota

no.

3sgm-fight-caus it

‘He caused it to fight.’

Lokono14 (North Arawakan)

Examples 1 through 6 show that the simple question of the existence of a causative affix has to be differentiated to yield distinguishing results.
Other features include the existence of aspirated plosives (rather than a voice opposition) and morphophonological processes that have a voicing effect of plosives or nasalization of vowels. Some Arawakan languages have locative classifiers, and the word for “house” frequently has suppletive possessed forms.

The Language Sample
In the literature the given numbers of Arawakan languages vary extremely (from 41 to 154);15 Aikhenvald estimated forty living languages (1999a:65). In our analysis we tried to include as many languages as possible in the database, but the degree of reliability of the information available for each language is very different. Our sample consists of thirty-six languages, as indicated in Map 8.1. We considered, as sources for the investigation of the grammatical features, not only basic descriptive grammars but also grammar sketches, text samples, teaching materials, word lists, and specific or general articles where information on certain features could be excerpted (labeled as a “secondary” source in Map 8.1). In addition some questionnaires were double-checked with specialists working on a particular language (labeled as a “primary” source in Map 8.1).16 The reliability of the data was divided into four different levels. Level 1 is excellent information on the basis of detailed grammars or expert consulting; level 2 is still reliable but some information may have been analyzed by the authors themselves; level 3 is rather tentative data, predominantly analyzed on the basis of sketchy information or a few articles or older data; level 4 is really tentative, on the basis of one or two articles, which accounts for languages of which we have very little (published) information.

Results
We first present the results for the isolation by distance analyses and then those for the NeighborNet analyses.

182

The Spread of the Arawakan Languages
Map 8.1. The Arawakan languages of our sample and the reliability estimation of the input data.
Isolation by Distance Figure 8.3 plots the correlation between the geographic separation and the
structural distance between pairs of languages in the database. The overall measure of isolation by distance is r2 = 0.07, that is, that geography predicts only 7 percent of the typological similarity among the Arawakan languages. This is a very low figure. The data are further partitioned into northern (white) and southern (black) groups, matching Aikhenvald’s putative subgroups. The structural-geographic correlation within these groups is higher: within the northern group, geography predicts 18
183

Swintha Danielsen, Michael Dunn, and Pieter Muysken
Figure 8.3. Isolation by distance analysis of the Arawakan language sample. The measure of correlation for the “all together” category is based on the Northern (white), Southern (black), and mixed (gray) points.
percent of structural variation, and within the southern group, geography predicts 14 percent. While still on the low side, these figures suggest that the northern and southern groups are typologically more coherent than the family as a whole. The marginal histogram shows that the structural distances among the southern languages are distributed around a mean slightly higher than among the northern languages: the southern languages are typologically more diverse than the northern languages.
NeighborNet Analyses Figure 8.4 presents the results for the combined CQ+DQ questionnaires.
Languages postulated to belong to the northern branch of the family were marked by gray script and those of the south by black. A number of striking features come to the fore, which we will discuss one by one.
No major splits. In contrast to other well-established language families, such as Indo-European (cf. Atkinson and Gray 2006), the Arawakan language family does not show any clear tendency of a major split. These results were quite surprising for us, in particular in relation to the suggested models of subclassification, such as Aikhenvald’s in Figure 8.2, where a major north/south split is postulated.
184

The Spread of the Arawakan Languages
Figure 8.4. Structural analysis of thirty-one Arawakan languages (CQ and DQ features). Recency of expansion. The lack of major splits is compatible with a scenario in
which expansion was relatively recent. Clusters. In Figure 8.4 we can identify three clear clusters: the Campan lan-
guages, the A-P-I group (cf. Facundes 2002), and a southwestern cluster, including the closely related Bolivian Arawakan languages Ignaciano and Bauré. Guimarães de Carvalho Couto (2005) also argues that Kinikinau is closely related to Terêna, which is verified by a clear cluster in the net. Two of the northern languages cluster quite clearly: Baniva and Yavitero. For the rest of northern Arawakan languages there does not seem to be any clear structure.
Discrepancy with lexical classification. The outcome of the analysis of grammatical features is also different from the lexical analysis, where certain stronger clustering tendencies could be observed (cf. Figure 8.1). This discrepancy is sug-
185

Swintha Danielsen, Michael Dunn, and Pieter Muysken
gestive of processes of transmission through second language learning, possibly pidginization.
Diversity and direction of migration. One of the northern languages, Garífuna, even appears right among the other southern languages. Amuesha and Chamicuro do not cluster, even though this should be predicted from the lexical analysis. The configuration in Figure 8.3 is most compatible with the idea that there is ancient diversity in the north and more recent migration to the south. There is no evidence for a scenario where there was an early cluster in the south and subsequent migration to the north.
Multiple migrations. There is evidence for multiple southerly migrations, in that the southern groups do not cluster together as a whole.
In Figure 8.4 we omitted five languages, for which we had exclusively secondary data of very bad quality (level 4), because it seemed that those blurred the whole picture too much.
The Role of Language Contact For the assignment of Arawakan languages to the phylum, most accordance
is found on the level of basic verbal morphology, but the structural differences among the varieties are greater. It is possible that some Arawakan languages have become very different from proto-Arawakan, at least morphosyntactically. Within the undifferentiated group of northern Arawakan languages in Figure 8.4, a number of languages have been shown to have undergone extensive changes stemming from contact with other languages. Some of the cases of contact with Arawakan languages that have been described are listed in Table 8.4 (cf. Muysken 2011), and discussed subsequently.
A first special case concerns the Garífuna (Black Caribs), descendants of the Island Carib. Their history is a complex one and involves Arawaks, Caribs, and descendants of African slaves. Their Arawakan ancestors left Guyana, Surinam, and Venezuela in the second century AD, settling in the Greater Antilles. The Caribs left the Orinoco delta in the thirteenth century and conquered the Lesser Antilles. From the mixture of Cariban and Arawakan the well-known but now extinct language Island Carib resulted. The descendants of the original mixed communities formed new communities on Saint Vincent. There, a number of escaped slaves were adopted into the community. Finally the ensuing group, the Black Carib, were deported and thereafter settled on the coast of Honduras and then spread into Belize, Guatemala, and Nicaragua. Hoff (1995:50) argues that the contacts between the Kariña-speaking Caribs and the Igneri-speaking Arawaks took place in Kariña pidgin, which survived until the twentieth century along the northern coast
186

The Spread of the Arawakan Languages

Table 8.4. A schematic overview of contacts involving Arawakan languages.

Language

Arawakan in Contact With

Type of Contact

Linguistic Effects

Garífunaâ•/› â•I› sland Kariña/Kariña

Carib

pidgin

Male conquest of female Gender differences in community; pidgin use language use

Palikur

Carib and unknown Possibly shift to

other languages

Arawakan

Grammatical borrowing

Amuesha

Quechua

Close trading relationships

Intensive lexical and grammatical borrowing

Resígaro

Bora, Ocaina

Close contact in terms of dependency relations

Borrowing of nominal morphology and classifiers

Tariana

Eastern Tukanoan

Exogamous bilingualism Extensive grammatical borrowing

of the South American mainland (cf. Taylor and Hoff 1980:311). Taylor and Hoff (1980) conclude that the Carib elements in Island Carib actually derive from the contact with the Carib pidgin.
Palikur is spoken by slightly over 1,000 people in the border area of State of Amapá, Brazil, and French Guyana. The first historical records after contact with the Portuguese situate the Palikur slightly to the north of the mouth of the Amazon River. Since they became involved in conflicts between the Portuguese and the French colonial powers in Cayenne, they were forced northward and subject to bad treatment by the Portuguese. The language has undergone a number of grammatical changes, without a clear source as far as is known at this moment.
The Amuesha originally lived in a region stretching from the Department of Huánuco to the Department of Junín, immediately west of Quechua-speaking territories in the Andes of central Peru. Since the Cerro de la Sal (Salt Mountain) was located in their area, they had frequent contacts with traders from various places looking for salt. For several centuries contacts must have been intense even if the Amuesha now live further eastward in the Amazonian lowlands. Building on earlier work by Wise (1976), who definitely established both the Arawak genetic affiliation and pointed to the influence of Quechua on the language, Adelaar (2007) has provided a detailed analysis of the layers of Quechua influence on the language. What makes the Amuesha case particularly complicated is that there is evidence not just of Arawakan and Quechuan linguistic elements but of a third as yet unknown language as well, currently being investigated. The influence on Amuesha is not primarily from the Quechua lingua franca associated with the Inca Empire but rather from the neighboring Quechua dialects of central Peru that are part of the so-called Quechua I cluster (Adelaar and Muysken 2004). There is phonological evidence that these loans are quite old. However, there are also a few

187

Swintha Danielsen, Michael Dunn, and Pieter Muysken
loans, specifically referring to personal status terms, that must come from the later Inca period.
Quechua loanwords cover all word classes and include a striking number (at least sixty) verbs, often with core meanings. In addition, there are a number of suggestive structural resemblances between Amuesha and neighboring Quechua varieties in the negation system, an apprehensive construction, an applicative reversal construction, subordination, and double possessive marking. Altogether, however, Amuesha has not converged structurally with Quechua.
Payne (1985) has established that the genetic classification of Resígaro is squarely within the Arawakan language family, in spite of the many elements shared with Bora that Allin (1975) had discovered. Aikhenvald (2001) has further analyzed the considerable influence from Bora on the language, pointing to the predominance of borrowed Bora classifiers in Resígaro. This influence is currently being further studied by Seifart (2010) and Wloczkowska (2006), partly on the basis of new fieldwork data. In Resígaro 24 percent of the core vocabulary is of Bora origin, while there is no borrowing in the other direction.17 Resígaro has adopted a two-tone contrast, a phonemic glottal stop, and syllable structure restrictions from Bora. In the pronominal system, it has adopted the inclusive/exclusive distinction in the first person plural through a Bora pronoun.18 Of the fifty-six classifiers in Resígaro, only eight or nine have an Arawakan etymology, and thirty-six are from Bora. Striking and highly unusual is that borrowing is limited to the nominal domain and involves a high proportion of the nominal affixes and the pronouns.
Starting with the work of Arthur Sorensen (1967), it has been noted that the Içana and Vaupés river basins in northwest Amazonia, on the border of Colombia and Brazil, are a region with extensive multilingualism and language contact. The results of this have been documented in detail by many scholars, including Jackson (1983) and Gomez-Imbert (1996) from the perspective of the Tukanoan languages, Aikhenvald (1996, 1999, 2002) for the Arawakan languages, and Epps (2007) for the Makú languages. The most likely scenario is that originally the relevant part of the region was inhabited by the Makú, who were forest-dwelling semi-nomadic hunters, and that later the Tukano and the Arawak arrived, in that order. These latter groups lived along the rivers and were agriculturalists. The Arawak and the Tukano intermarried, in accordance with ideals of linguistic exogamy, so that many children grew up multilingually. However, all groups maintained their languages as separate entities, at least at the level of the lexical shapes and the morphemes (except for the existential verb ni-, which has spread across members of all three families); there is little lexical borrowing. The Arawakan language most directly influenced by Tukano is Tariana. In the processes of structural and semantic change, which has led to the emergence of a linguistic area in the Içana and Vaupés river basins, the Tukanoan languages have been the source of innovations. In other words, the change was unidirectional and involved a number of domains of the language. In phonology,
188

The Spread of the Arawakan Languages
nasalization, a particular pitch accent system, and a number of segmental features have spread from the Tukanoan languages (Aikhenvald 1999a:394–396). In the lexicon, particular features of the Tukanoan classifier system have spread to Tariana. Likewise, a particular organization of the numeral system has also been adopted by Tariana, as well as a split number system (based on animacy) and associative plural. A striking case of diffusion concerns the complicated Tukano five-way evidential system, into which tense, person, and number markings are embedded. In addition, there is evidence for the spread of additional tense distinctions marked by particles. In the case marking and alignment systems, Tariana adopted typical Tukano features as well, for example, in the system of animacy-based differential object marking, where human objects are always marked, animal objects are marked depending on the degree of individuation, and inanimates are not marked. While Arawakan languages originally probably had a system of noun incorporation, it does not occur in Tariana or in Tukano.
Conclusions
The conclusions drawn in this chapter are not definitive, but we hope they will contribute to the further debates concerning this language family and lead to further research. The isolation by distance measure indicates that geography predicts only 7 percent of the typological similarity among the Arawakan languages, a very low figure. There is an overall clustering of a northern and a southern group.
The analysis of the NeighborNet does not show any clear north/south distinction. The results suggest relatively limited branching within the language family and a disparity between classifications based on structural and lexical data. We may hypothesize that the Arawakan diaspora is a relatively recent phenomenon, that the languages did not spread successively in one big migration phase but rather in waves (cf. Hornborg 2005:603), and that spread was from north to south. The fact that many Arawakan languages were in intense contact with their neighbors further complicates the classification.
Hornborg’s hypothesis of ethnogenesis of Arawakan languages is interesting in respect to the interpretation of our results: “In view of its conspicuously riverine distribution, there is a distinct possibility that the Arawakan language family (i.e., proto-Arawak) . . . originated as a trade language of prehistoric Amazonia” (Hornborg 2005:602). The expansion of Arawakan groups has also been analyzed from the perspectives of archaeology, history, and anthropology, of which we mention here Oliver (1989), Hill and Santos-Granero (2002), and two articles by Hornborg (2005, 2007). In Santos-Granero (2002:44–46) the “Arawakan ethos” was summarized as consisting of the following important elements: no endo-Â warfare, alliances with other Arawakan peoples and sometimes also with cross-Â linguistic or transethnic alliances, and an emphasis on descent, hereditary rank (social hierarchy),
189

Table 8.5. Arawakan languages in this chapter.

Language Name ISO Code

Language Status

Achagua

Aca

Endangered

Amuesha Apolista Apurinã Aruán Asháninka
Bahuana Baniva Bare Bauré
Cabiyarí Caquinte Cawishana Chamicuro Chané Enawenê-nawê Garífuna

Ame — Apu Ara Cjo, cni, cpb,
cpe, cpu, cpy, prg — Bvv Bae Brg
Cbb Cot — Ccc Caj Unk Cab

Extinct
Extinct
Extinct Endangered Endangered Seriously
endangered Moribund Endangered Extinct Extinct Extinct Endangered

Guajiro

Guc

Ignaciano

Ign

Iñapari

Inp

Island Carib

Crb

Kinikinau

Ggn

Kurripako

Kpc

Kustenau

—

Lokono

Arw

Machiguenga Mcb

Manao

—

Endangered Extinct Extinct Moribund
Extinct Endangered
Extinct

Payne Model
X X X X
X X
X
X X X
X X X

Present Sample
X X X X
X
X X X
X
X X
X X X X X X
X X

Comments Speakers are bilingual
with Piapoco Difficult classification
Asháninka and Ashéninka are part of a wider dialect group
Difficult classification Difficult classification Partly mixed language
with Carib and European languages Moxo dialect (cf. Trinitario) Hardly distinguishable from Garífuna Closely related to Terêna
Closely related to Xiriâna (xir)

Table 8.5—continued

Language Name Mandahuaka Mapidian Marawan Mawayana Mehináku

ISO Code Mht Mpw — Mzx Mmh

Nanti

Cox

Nomatsiguenga Not

Paiconeca

—

Palikur

Plu

Paraujano Paresí Paunaca Piapoco Piro Resígaro

Pbg Pab — Pio Pib, cuj Rgr

Saraveka

Sar

Tariana

Tae

Terêna

Ter

Trinitario

Trn

Wapishana

Wap

Warekena

Gae

Waurá

Wau

Yabaâna

Ybn

Yavitero

Yvt

Yawalapiti

Yaw

Yucuna

Ycn

Language Status
Extinct Moribund Extinct Moribund Endangered
Extinct
Seriously endangered
Moribund Endangered Moribund
Endangered Moribund
Extinct Endangered
Endangered
Seriously endangered
Seriously endangered
Extinct
Almost extinct
Extinct Endangered

Payne Model
X X X X X X X X X
X X

Present Sample
X X X
X
X X X X X X X X X X X X
X

Comments
Closely related to Waurá
Not included in Aikhenvald
Presumably a dialect of Paunaca
Under strong language contact with Bora
Moxo dialect (cf. Ignaciano)
Closely related to Xiriâna (xir)

Swintha Danielsen, Michael Dunn, and Pieter Muysken
and ritual and religion. Another important feature is that Arawakan groups have maintained long-distance trade relations.
Notes
1. He called it the “Maipure” family, later renamed “Arawak” by others. However, the terms “Maipuran” (e.g., in Payne 1991), “Maipurean” and “Arawak” (e.g., Dixon and Aikhenvald 1999), and “Arawakan” or “Aruák” (Spanish and Portuguese versions, respectively) are still used synonymously by different authors.
2. It is possible that the focus of some listings of Arawakan languages was not exactly the detailed internal classification; some authors simply prefer a practical geographically clustered overview (e.g., Ramirez 2001:3).
3. Payne calls it the “Maipuran” language family. 4. All Arawakan languages mentioned in this chapter are listed in Table 8.5; cf. ISO codes and state of the languages there. 5. The attributive prefix ka- should not be confused with a root suffix -ka, which was reduplicated in so many Arawakan languages; this is a case of simple homophony. 6. This has also been taken into account in other classifications (cf. Kaufman 1994: 57). 7. For a broader comparison, the Sahul questionnaire (cf. Dunn et al. 2008) was used, but these results are not presented in this chapter. 8. Glosses: caus = causative, caus:agnt = agentive causative, caus:infl = influential causative, cntf = counterfactual, ind = indicative, ipfv = imperfective, m = masculine, neg = negation, pl = plural, poss = possessive, real = realis, reg = regressive, rep = repetitive, sg = singular. 9. Cf. Danielsen 2007. 10. Cf. Michael 2008:281, glosses slightly simplified. 11. Cf. Michael 2008:284, glosses slightly simplified. 12. Cf. Adelaar and Muysken 2004:429. 13. Cf. Rowan and Rowan 1978:xiv. 14. Cf. Pet 1987:68. 15. Ramirez (2001) lists 41; Aikhenvald (1999a), 61; Noble (1965), 89; and Loukotka (1968), 154. 16. Thanks to Lev Michael for filling in the Nanti questionnaire, to Marie-France Patte for checking the Lokono questionnaire, to Lucrecia Villafañe for letting us have her Paunaca data, and also to the students who double-checked a questionnaire each in Danielsen’s class at the University of Leipzig in 2008. 17. The high percentage of non-Arawakan vocabulary led to the earlier conclusion that it might be part of the Huitotoan family (cf. Payne [1985], who confirms its classification as Arawakan). 18. The first person plural inclusive/exclusive distinction was also innovated in the Campa language group in Peru, presumably under long-term Quechuan influence. This distinction has not been reconstructed for proto-Arawakan, and it cannot be found in other languages than those that were in contact with another language that had this category.
192

The Spread of the Arawakan Languages
References
Adelaar, Willem F.H. 2007. “The Quechua Impact in Amuesha, an Arawak Language of the Peruvian Amazon.” In Grammars in Contact: A Cross-Linguistic Typology, edited by Alexandra Y. Aikhenvald and R.M.W. Dixon, 290–312. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Adelaar, Willem F.H., and Pieter C. Muysken. 2004. The Languages of the Andes. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Aikhenvald, Alexandra Y. 1996. “Areal Diffusion in Northwest Amazonia: The Case of Tariana.” Anthropological Linguistics 38: 73–116.
———. 1999a. “The Arawak Language Family.” In The Amazonian Languages, edited by R.M.W. Dixon and Alexandra Y. Aikhenvald, 65–106. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
———. 1999b. “Areal Diffusion and Language Contact in the Içana-Valpés Basin, NorthWest Amazonia.” In The Amazonian Languages, edited by R.M.W. Dixon and Alexandra Y. Aikhenvald, 385–416. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
———. 2001. “Areal Diffusion, Genetic Inheritance, and Problems of Subgrouping: A North Arawak Case Study.” In Areal Diffusion and Genetic Inheritance: Problems in Comparative Linguistics, edited by R.M.W. Dixon and Alexandra Y. Aikhenvald, 167– 194. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
———. 2002. Language Contact in Amazonia. Oxford: Oxford University Press. Aikhenvald, Alexandra Y., and R.M.W. Dixon, eds. 2007. Grammars in Contact: A Cross-
Linguistic Typology. Oxford: Oxford University Press. Allin, Trevor R. 1975. “A Grammar of Resígaro.” PhD dissertation, Department of Linguis-
tics, University of St. Andrews, St. Andrews, Scotland. Atkinson, Quentin D., and Russell D. Gray. 2006. “How Old Is the Indo-European Lan-
guage Family? Illumination or More Moths to the Flame?” In Phylogenetic Methods and the Prehistory of Languages, edited by Peter Forster and Colin Renfrew, 91–109. Cambridge: McDonald Institute for Archaeological Research. Bryant, David, Flavia Filimon, and Russel Gray. 2005. “Untangling Our Past: Languages, Trees, Splits and Networks.” In The Evolution of Cultural Diversity: Phylogenetic Approaches, edited by Ruth Mace, Claire J. Holden, and Stephen Shennan, 69–85. London: UCL Press. Constenla Umaña, Adolfo. 1991. Las lenguas del área intermedia subtitle introduccion a su estudio areal. San José: Universidad de Costa Rica. Créqui-Montfort, Georges de, and Paul Rivet. 1913. “Linguistique bolivienne: La Langue Saraveka.” Journal de la Société des Américanistes de Paris 10: 497–540. Danielsen, Swintha. 2007. Baure: An Arawak Language of Bolivia. Indigenous Languages of Latin America (ILLA) 6. Leiden: CNWS. Derbyshire, Desmond C. 1986. “Comparative Survey of Morphology and Syntax in Brazilian Arawakan.” In Handbook of Amazonian Languages, vol. 1, edited by Desmond C. Derbyshire and Geoffrey Pullum, 469–566. Berlin: Mouton de Gruyter. Dixon, R.W.M., and Alexandra Y. Aikhenvald, eds. 1999. The Amazonian Languages. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. Dunn, Michael, Stephen C. Levinson, Eva Lindström, Ger Reesink, and Angela Terrill. 2008. “Structural Phylogeny in Historical Linguistics: Methodological Explorations
193

Swintha Danielsen, Michael Dunn, and Pieter Muysken
Applied in Island Melanesia.” Language 84 (4): 710–759. Epps, Patience. 2007. “The Vaupés Melting Pot: Tukanoan Influence on Hup.” In Gram-
mars in Contact: A Cross-Linguistic Typology, edited by Alexandra Y. Aikhenvald and R.W.M. Dixon, 267–289. Oxford: Oxford University Press. Facundes da Silva, Sidney. 2002. “Historical Linguistics and Its Contribution to Improving Knowledge of Arawak.” In Comparative Arawakan Histories: Rethinking Language Family and Culture Area in Amazonia, edited by Jonathan D. Hill and Fernando Santos-Granero, 74–96. Urbana: University of Illinois Press. Gomez-Imbert, Elsa. 1996. “When Animals Become ‘Rounded’ and ‘Feminine’: Conceptual Categories and Linguistic Classification in a Multilingual Setting.” In Rethinking Linguistic Relativity, edited by John J. Gumperz and Stephen C. Levinson, 438–469. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. Guimarães de Carvalho Couto, Valéria. 2005. “A lingua Kinikinau: Estudo vocabulário e conceitos gramaticales.” Master’s thesis. Universidade Federal de Mato Grosso do Sul, Três Lagoas, Brazil. Heckenberger, Michael. 2002. “Rethinking the Arawakan Diaspora: Hierarchy, Regionality, and the Amazonian Formative.” In Comparative Arawakan Histories: Rethinking Language Family and Culture Area in Amazonia, edited by Jonathan D. Hill and Fernando Santos-Granero, 99–121. Urbana: University of Illinois Press. Hill, Jonathan David, and Fernando Santos-Granero, eds. 2002. Comparative Arawakan Histories: Rethinking Language Family and Culture Area in Amazonia. Urbana: University of Illinois Press. Hoff, Berend J. 1995. “Language Contact, War, and Amerindian Historical Tradition: The Special Case of the Island Carib.” In Wolves from the Sea, edited by Neil L. Whitehead, 37–60. Leiden: KITLV Press. Hornborg, Alf. 2005. “Ethnogenesis, Regional Integration, and Ecology in Prehistoric Amazonia.” Current Anthropology 46 (4): 589–620. ———. 2007. “The Arawakan Expansion in Pre-Columbian Amazonia: Rethinking ‘Migration’ in Terms of Ethnogenesis.” Available at http://lacito.vjf.cnrs.fr/colloque/diapo ramas/Hornborg.pdf. Accessed July 18, 2011. Huson, Daniel H., and David Bryant. 2006. “Application of Phylogenetic Networks in Evolutionary Studies.” Molecular Biology and Evolution 23 (2): 254–267. Jackson, Jean. 1983. The Fish People: Linguistic Exogamy and Tukanoan Identity in Northwest Amazonia. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. Kaufman, Terrence. 1994. “The Native Languages of South America.” In Atlas of the World’s Languages, edited by C. Mosley and R. E. Asher, 46–76. London: Routledge. Loukotka, Čestmír. 1968. Classification of South American Indian Languages. Los Angeles: Latin American Studies Center, University of California. Mason, J. Alden. 1950. “The Languages of South America.” In Handbook of South American Indians, vol. 6, edited by Julian Steward, 157–317. Washington, DC: Government Printing Office. Matteson, Esther. 1972. “Proto-Arawakan.” In Comparative Studies in Amerindian Languages, edited by Esther Matteson, 160–242. The Hague: Mouton. Métraux, Alfred. 1942. The Native Tribes of Eastern Bolivia and Western Mato Grosso. Bureau of American Ethnology Bulletin 134. Washington, DC: Smithsonian Institution.
194

The Spread of the Arawakan Languages
Michael, Lev D. 2008. “Nanti Evidential Practice: Language, Knowledge, and Social Action in an Amazonian Society.” PhD dissertation, University of Texas, Austin.
Muysken, Pieter C. 2011. “Contacts between Indigenous Languages in South America.” In Historical Linguistics of South America, edited by Lyle Campbell and Veronica Grondona. Berlin: Mouton de Gruyter.
Noble, G. Kingsley. 1965. Proto-Arawakan and Its Descendants. Publication 38 of Indian University Research Center in Anthropology, Folklore and Linguistics. International Journal of American Linguistics 31 (3): Part 2.
Oliver, José R. 1989. “The Archaeological, Linguistic and Ethnohistorical Evidence for the Expansion of Arawakan into Northwestern Venezuela and Northeastern Colombia.” PhD dissertation,University of Illinois, Urbana-Champaign.
Payne, David L. 1985. “The Genetic Classification of Resígaro.” International Journal of American Linguistics 51: 222–245.
———. 1991. “A Classification of Maipuran (Arawakan) Languages Based on Shared Lexical Retentions.” In Handbook of Amazonian Languages, vol. 3, edited by Desmond C. Derbyshire and Geoffrey Pullum, 355–499. Berlin: Mouton de Gruyter.
Pet, Willem J.A. 1987. “Lokono Dian—The Arawak Language of Suriname: A Sketch of Its Grammatical Structure and Lexicon.” PhD dissertation, Cornell University, Ithaca.
Ramirez, Henri. 2001. Linguas Arawak da Amazônia septentrional: Comparação e descrição. Manaus: Editora da Universidade do Amazonas.
Rowan, Orland, and Phyllis Rowan. 1978. Dicionário Parecis-Português e Português-Parecis. Brasília: Summer Institute of Linguistics.
Santos-Granero, Fernando. 2002. “The Arawakan Matrix: Ethos, Language, and History in Native South America.” In Comparative Arawakan Histories: Rethinking Language Family and Culture Area in Amazonia, edited by Jonathan D. Hill and Fernando Santos-Granero, 25–50. Urbana: University of Illinois Press.
Seifart, Frank. 2010. “The Principle of Morphosyntactic Subsystem Integrity in Language Contact: A Case Study on Morphological Borrowing in Resígaro (Arawakan).” Manuscript. Leipzig: Max Planck Institute for Evolutionary Anthropology.
Sorensen, Arthur P. 1967. “Multilingualism in the Northwest Amazon.” American Anthropologist 69: 670–684.
Taylor, Douglas R., and Berend J. Hoff. 1980. “The Linguistic Repertory of the Island Carib in the Seventeenth Century: The Men’s Language—a Carib Pidgin?” International Journal of American Linguistics 46: 301–312.
Tovar, Antonio, and Consuelo Larrucea de Tovar. 1984. Catálogo de las lenguas de América del Sur. Madrid: Editorial Gredos.
Wise, Mary Ruth. 1976. “Apuntes sobre la influencia inca entre los Amuesha: Factor que oscurece la clasificación de su idioma.” Revista del Museo Nacional 42: 355–366.
———. 1986. “Grammatical Characteristics of Preandine Arawakan Languages of Peru.” In Handbook of Amazonian Languages, vol. 1, edited by Desmond C. Derbyshire and Geoffrey Pullum, 567–642. Berlin: Mouton de Gruyter.
Wloczkowska, Carolina. 2006. “Entlehnung von Bora ins Resígaro.” Manuscript. University of Bochum, Bochum, Germany.
195

