Quechua for Catherine the Great: José Joaquín Ávalos Chauca’s Quechua Vocabulary (1788) Author(s): Sabine Dedenbach‐Salazar Sáenz Reviewed work(s): Source: International Journal of American Linguistics, Vol. 72, No. 2 (April 2006), pp. 193-235 Published by: The University of Chicago Press Stable URL: http://www.jstor.org/stable/10.1086/507165 . Accessed: 18/05/2012 07:02 Your use of the JSTOR archive indicates your acceptance of the Terms & Conditions of Use, available at . http://www.jstor.org/page/info/about/policies/terms.jsp JSTOR is a not-for-profit service that helps scholars, researchers, and students discover, use, and build upon a wide range of content in a trusted digital archive. We use information technology and tools to increase productivity and facilitate new forms of scholarship. For more information about JSTOR, please contact support@jstor.org.
The University of Chicago Press is collaborating with JSTOR to digitize, preserve and extend access to International Journal of American Linguistics.
http://www.jstor.org

QUECHUA FOR CATHERINE THE GREAT: JOSÉ JOAQUÍN ÁVALOS CHAUCA’S QUECHUA VOCABULARY (1788)
Sabine Dedenbach-Salazar Sáenz
Bonn University
The eighteenth century has become known for its decreasing interest in and even its intentions to restrict the use of the Amerindian languages by the authorities in the Americas. However, overseas there was interest in indigenous languages, directed toward the multiplicity of human languages and their comparison more than toward the description of individual languages. Thus, in Russia, Catherine II founded an initiative to ﬁnd universals in the world’s languages. The Quechua vocabulary presented here was composed because of this and is one of only a few eighteenth-century manuscripts on Southern Peruvian Quechua which can be dated (1788); it is kept in the Archivo General de Indias, Seville. This paper presents a transcription of and a short analytic comment on this Quechua vocabulary, which is an important document because it gives us information about how an eighteenth-century Peruvian Quechuist saw the linguistic situation in the Andes and because through the lexical entries it offers phonological material which can help us gain more knowledge of a linguistically rather scarcely documented period.
[Keywords: Quechua vocabulary, eighteenth century, Peru]
1. Introduction. The eighteenth century has become known for its decreasing interest in the Amerindian languages and its intentions even to restrict their use. This is reﬂected in a number of laws and regulations, but also in the fact that very few new works in, for example, Quechua were printed during that century, and the fact that the Lima University Chair for Quechua was abolished.1 However, parallel to this ofﬁcial line, a certain ﬂourishing of the Quechua language throughout the eighteenth century can be noted. In the Andes, sermons were written, texts of dramatic works were circulated and plays performed on stage, and some mestizos defended the Quechua language. In Southern Peruvian Quechua,2 though, few new works were created,
1 “El mantener el idioma de los indios es capricho de hombres, cuya fortuna y ciencia se reduce a hablar aquella lengua, que también la aprende un niño; es contagio que aparta a los indios de la conversación de los españoles: es peste, que inﬁciona los dogmas de nuestra Santa fe . . . Es dar motivo a que no formen concepto de la Divina Magestad, ni de la del Rey de la tierra, ni den valor a los preceptos de sus justicias mayores, ni a lo que les predican o reprehenden los párrocos” (Nos Don Francisco Antonio Lorenzana, Arzobispo de Mexico . . . 6/10/1769:9– 10, Archivo General de Indias [AGI], Indiferente 1312, published in Konetzke 1964:97–98).
2 Southern Peruvian Quechua comprises Torero’s Quechua II C dialects, i.e., all Quechua varieties spoken from Ayacucho to the south. Ayacucho Quechua is spoken in the Departamentos Apurímac (West of Abancay), Ayacucho, Huancavelica, and in the Argentinian province of
[IJAL, vol. 72, no. 2, April 2006, pp. 193–235] ç 2006 by The University of Chicago. All rights reserved. 0020–7071/2006/7202–0002$10.00
193

194

international journal of american linguistics

although older ones were reprinted; however, the theatrical manuscripts lack exact dates, so it is difﬁcult to situate them unequivocally in the eighteenth century.3
There was also an interest in indigenous languages overseas, directed toward the study of the multiplicity of human languages and their comparison, more than simply toward the description of individual languages. In Italy, the expelled Jesuits, and among them especially Hervás y Panduro, dedicated much work to comparative linguistic study, and in Russia, Catherine II (who reigned from 1762–1796) showed an intense interest in the comparison of the world’s languages.
Given the state of Quechua studies in the eighteenth century, a vocabulary which was composed because of Catherine II’s initiative and is one of few manuscripts on Southern Peruvian Quechua which can be contextualized, dated (1788), and located (Archivo General de Indias [AGI], Seville) is certainly of interest.4 This paper presents a transcription of and short analytic comment on this Quechua vocabulary. It is an important document because it gives us information about how an eighteenth-century Peruvian Quechuist saw the linguistic situation in the Andes and, above all, because through the lexical entries it offers phonological material which can help us gain more knowledge of a scarcely documented period. Thus, I hope that this contribution will make the material referred to accessible for further study; I also try to show how we can use these data in historical ethnolinguistics, an aca-
Santiago del Estero. Cuzco Quechua is the variety spoken in the Peruvian Departamentos Apurímac (East of Albancay), Arequipa, Cuzco, Puno, and Moquegua, and most of its characteristic features (see below) are also present in Argentinian Jujuy Quichua as well as Bolivian and Chilean Quechua (Dedenbach-Salazar Sáenz et al. 2002:xiii and Mannheim 1991:113–14).
3 For attitudes toward Quechua in the eighteenth century, see Konetzke (1964), Solano (1991), Clément (1993). See re-editions such as Torres Rubio’s Quechua grammar and dictionary (1619) which received an appendix of a non-Southern (Chinchaysuyu) variety and some changes in the vocabulary (Torres Rubio and Figueredo 1700 and Torres Rubio, Figueredo, and Anonymous Jesuit 1754), and the re-edition of the Tercero Catecismo (1773). Thus there are few texts published in the eighteenth century and even fewer original ones, but also only a limited number of manuscripts. It is interesting that in the same century several works were written in what is now Ecuador (Nieto Polo del Águila [1753] 1927, Velasco [ca. 1788] 1964, the anonymous grammar [18th century] published by Dedenbach-Salazar Sáenz 1993, and Romero [1725] 1999). For an overview of what is known and located of eighteenth century Quechua (and Aymara) works, see Rivet and Créqui-Montfort (1951, vol. 1:135–221).
4 The document originally comes from Indiferente General 1342 and is now ﬁled with Mapas y Planos, Escritura y Cifra (EC), 35-44 (which contains all the language materials collected at the time). The Quechua document is number 40 of Escritura y Cifra. Description in the AGI: “AGI, Indiferente General, legajo no. 1342, documento 14: Carta del Virrey del Perú, Caballero de Croix*, a Dn. Antonio Porlier **, diciéndole remite traducidas en lengua índica las palabras castellanas que con Real Orden de 13 de Noviembre de 1787, see le dirigieron para este efecto [here as Appendix A] y que acompaña una (14a) lista de libros que por separado y en otro cajoncito de madera dirige en esta propia ocasión. Lima 28 Febrero 1789. = 2 hoj. [Appendix B]. Contiene

quechua vocabulary (1788)

195

demic area which is gaining increasing importance in the ﬁeld of Andean studies.5
2. The Archivo General de Indias’s indigenous languages collection and Catherine II’s project on the languages of the world. In order to please the Russian czarina, the king of Spain asked the viceroys of his colonies to obtain a translation of a word list she had provided into all important languages of the Spanish dominions. At the request of a royal decree (real orden) from the king of Spain, these lists were to be produced by the “best instructed and practiced persons in the languages of these territories.” The correspondence on this matter is accompanied by a list of the books (grammars and dictionaries) which were also to be sent and a list of 433 Spanish words to be translated.6
además (14a) Lista [duplicada] de los libros que remite = 2 hoj. + 2 hoj.; (14b) Traducción de las voces castellanas al quichua. 8 hoj. (ESCRITURA Y CIFRA, 40 [Appendixes C–E below]); (14c) Traducción de las voces castellanas al aymará. 8 hoj. (ESCRITURA Y CIFRA, 41).”
*Teodoro de Croix was the thirty-fourth viceroy of Peru from 1784 to 1790 (from José Toribio Medina, Diccionario biográﬁco colonial de Chile [1906] in Herrero and Aguayo 1986, I, 245, 105–14).
**Antonio Porlier y Sopranis, Marqués de Bajamar (1722–1813), was a member of the Audiencias of Charcas and Lima and of the Consejo de Indias before becoming Secretary of State in 1787 (from Agustín Millares Carlo, Ensayo de una bio-bibliografía de escritores naturales de las Islas Canarias [1932], in Herrero and Aguayo 1986, II, 729, 14–30). 5 See, for example, the studies by Husson (1985) and Mannheim (1991) as well as Itier (1995) and Dedenbach-Salazar Sáenz and Crickmay (1999). 6 “Real Orden Señor Presidente de la Audiencia de Guatemala = El señor Conde de Floridablanca me ha pasado el oﬁcio siguiente. Excelentissimo señor = Con el ﬁn de satisfacer los deseos que ha manifestado la Emperatriz de Rusia, he hecho uarios encargos para adquirir los Libros que contiene la adjunta Lista numero primero, pero aunque espero lograr algunos de ellos no tengo aun certidumbre y assi pido á Vuestra Exelencia que pues es cosa en que el Rey quiere complaser á dicha soberana, de [dé] Vuestra Exelencia comicion á las Personas que tenga por conueniente en las dos Americas para que adquieran con la posible brevedad y remitan uno ó dos exemplares de cada obra procurando al mismo tiempo el que se embien con igual prontitud traducidas en todos los Idiomas que se pueda de aquellos Paises las vozes que contiene el adjunto Papel Numero segundo indicando la ortograﬁa que se haya seguido para expresarlas. Dios guarde á Vuestra Exelencia muchos años San Ildefonzo nueve de Octubre de mil setecientos ochenta y siete = El conde de Floridablanca = Señor Don Antonio de Porlier = Y siendo la uoluntad de su Magestad que con la brevedad posible se practiquen las mas exquísitas diligencias para el logro de las obras que se expresan en la copia numero primero y la traduccion de las vozes que comprehende la del numero segundo ualiendose de las Personas mas instruidas y practicas en las Lenguas de ese Territorio; lo prevengo á V.S. de su Real orden y que remita a mis manos uno ó dos exemplares de aquellas si se encontrasen. Dios guarde a Vuestra Señoría muchos años. San Lorenzo trese de Noviembre de mil setecientos ochenta y siete = Antonio Porlier” (AGI 1787–92, no. 45, Año de 1790, Testimonio, fol. 4v–54 [underlining by SDS]). The model list can be found in the same document (AGI 1787–92, no. 45, Año de 1790, Testimonio, fol. 1v– 4r). Some of the word lists are accompanied by further linguistic studies

196

international journal of american linguistics

As a consequence of the activities which followed the decree, several word lists are preserved in the Archivo General de Indias (AGI 1787–92): on languages of the Philippines, Quechua and Aymara of the Andes, “Sáliba” (Sálivan) of the Orinoco,7 and from Middle America: the Mayan languages “Kiche”/“Quiche” (K’iche’), “Cacchiquel”/“Cacchi” (Kaqchikel), “Sutuhil” (Tz’utujil), “Poconchi” (Poqomchi’), “Pocoman” (Poqomam), “Chol,” and “Mam,” as well as “Subinha” (Subinhá, probably consisting of Tzeltal and Tojolabal); the Otomanguean “Pupuluca” (Popoloca) and the Mixe-Zoquean “Zoque” of Mexico, the Chibchan “Cabecara” (Cabécar), “Viceyta” (Viceíta or Bribri), and “Terraua” (Térraba or Tiribí) of Costa Rica, The “Jicaques (= Lean y Mulia)” (Jicaque) of Honduras, and “Zotul,” “Tzendal” (Tzeltal?), “Chanabal,” and “Chapaneca.”8 All of this material dates from the last two decades of the eighteenth century.
What was the motivation for the production of these vocabularies? Catherine the Great, a highly cultured and educated woman, planned the production of a universal and comparative dictionary of all the languages of the world, hoping to ﬁnd a primitive, original language. Having created a basic word list, she put Hartwig Ludwig Christian Bacmeister (1730–1806), a teacher and school inspector in St. Petersburg, who was active in many intellectual ﬁelds such as translation and linguistics, in charge of the realization of this project. He appealed to the scholars of the world for help in collecting language material. As can be seen in the AGI documentation, Catherine had also asked the king of Spain for his collaboration (see above). Later, Peter Simon Pallas (1741–1811), a distinguished scholar, professor of natural history, and member of the St. Petersburg Academy, became responsible for the project, and the ﬁrst edition of the comparative dictionary
(grammars) of the respective languages, as asked for in the royal decree, as well as catechetical texts. The materials from the Peruvian viceroyalty, however, consist of a Quechua and Aymara word list only and do not include—although they are announced—a Quechua grammar or a further list and two grammars for the Chilean language (most probably Mapudungun [Mapuche], which used to be called “araucano” in colonial times) (AGI 1788–89).
For a description and location of these materials and others of the “Russian collection,” as well as a summary of their origin and history, see Klein and Klein (1978). See also Adelung ([1815] 1976) and Epp (1984) for Catherine’s project.
I have not been able to ﬁnd the royal decree in question, either in the Indiferentes 1625 and 1626 which contain reales órdenes by Carlos III and Isabel la Católica, or in the inventories of reales cédulas which are mentioned by Muro Orejón (1957–58) as existent in the AGI and which refer to the year 1787. I have also consulted the books of Indiferente 513, 533, 535, 545, 546 which contain reales órdenes, cédulas, and decretos.
7 See Tovar and Larrucea de Tovar (1984:161–62). 8 The names of the languages are written here (in quotation marks) as they appear in the AGI documents. Except for the last four, they are all mentioned by Campbell (1997) (in parentheses).

quechua vocabulary (1788)

197

appeared in 1786.9 But it was only in the edition produced by Theodor Yankievich de Mirievo (1741–1814, chief school inspector) in 1790–91 that some Amerindian languages were represented, including “Maipurisch, Mexikanisch, Peruanisch, Surinamisch (Arawakisch, Kreolisch, Saramakisch, Tamanakisch) Suwazkisch” (Adelung [1815] 1976:99).10
It is unlikely that Yankievich would have been able to use the material (or a copy thereof ) which is now in the AGI in Seville, because the letter accompanying the Quechua vocabulary is dated 1789 and Yankievich’s book was published in 1790–91. That he used another source is also clear from the entries themselves: the word “tanta,” “Tahta,” for example, is written with a simple {t} and not with the double consonant, “ttanta,” as it is written by Ávalos (Yankievich 1790–91, vol. 1–2:163; Ávalos 39311).12 From these dates, it is also clear that the word list asked for in the penultimate decade of the eighteenth century was a second list (the ﬁrst containing 200 words) destined to be used in a continuation of the project. At present, it is not known why these materials were kept in Spain and not sent on to Russia.13 Alexander I, Catherine’s successor after her son Paul, was persuaded to provide the money for an extended edition of the vocabulary, of which Adelung (1768– 1843), director of the Asian Museum in St. Petersburg and a renowned philologist, was in charge (cf. Adelung [1815] 1976). The ﬁnal collection is still said to be kept in the Academy of Sciences in St. Petersburg (Fajnstejn 1990).
9 The information in this paragraph is drawn from a letter of Catherine quoted by Adelung ([1815] 1976:40), from Pallas (1786, vol. 1: Avis au public [p. 4]), Fajnstejn (1990), Gulya (1974:263–64), Haarmann (1976:[xi–xiii]), Lauch (1969:22–33), and Alexey Bogolubov, Coordinator of the International Book Exchange at St. Petersburg Hermitage, personal communication. See Lauch (1969:11–23) for a critical evaluation of Catherine’s absolutist reign.
10 See Kaltz (2005:chap. 1) for a summary of the history and contents of the dictionary editions.
11 The numbers refer to those I have added to the vocabulary in Appendix E. 12 Material on the Peruvian languages was provided by Murr who sent Bayer’s works on Aymara to Russian (Fajnstejn 1990 [I would like to thank Karl Gräwe for translating Fajnstejn’s article for me]; for Bayer, see Rivet and Créqui-Montfort 1951, I:173–76). Fajnstejn also quotes a letter written by a Spanish diplomat who, in answer to Catherine’s request, says that he found a Spanish ofﬁcer who was born in Peru and spent his childhood there and who translated the words in collaboration with a member of the Russian embassy. 13 Alexey Bogolubov was kind enough to show me Catherine’s library in St. Petersburg Hermitage in 1994, but according to him no papers referring to these Amerindian languages, or copies thereof, are deposited there. Neither does Adelung mention them. As to Spain, following the Revolution in France, an increasing opposition against any kind of innovation is noticeable on the Peninsula at the end of the eighteenth century. Moreover, the war against England in 1796 led to an economic crisis and competing ideologies within Spain (Morales Moya 1998:114–27). It is therefore possible that due to Spain’s internal problems, the papers were simply forgotten.

198

international journal of american linguistics

3. José Joaquín Ávalos Chauca—the author and his Quechua vocabulary. The document discussed here consists of a letter from the viceroy of Peru, Teodoro de Croix, to Antonio de Porlier, the secretary of state (Appendix A), and a list of accompanying books (Appendix B). These are followed by an introductory essay from the author of the Quechua vocabulary in which he offers some comments on the languages and dialects of the Peruvian viceroyalty (Appendix C) as well as his observations on Quechua orthography and pronunciation (Appendix D). He concludes with the vocabulary itself (Appendix E). The handwriting is the same throughout these texts (Appendixes C–E) and is consistent with the signature of José Joaquín Ávalos Chauca. We can therefore assume that it is the original manuscript.
As to the person of the author, he himself says that he is “capellan”14 ‘chaplain’, and that Quechua is the language of his “profesion è inteligencia” (Appendix C, fol. 2r).15 José Eusebio de Llano Zapata, a Peruvian creole who lived in the eighteenth century and was a great naturalist and writer, discusses indigenous scholars he knew, men who obtained university degrees and were ordained priests. He writes:
Today there are several other [Indian priests] no less learned than the two already mentioned. Among them, Don Joseph de Abalos has an incredible ability. When he was eighteen years old he defended public theses of Philosophy and Theology in one of the most famous colleges of Lima (the Pontiﬁcia Universidad de San Ildefonso). At fourteen he knew with perfection the Latin language and literature, rhetoric, biblical and secular history and had more than a passing knowledge of Canon Law, since he could repeat wordby-word the decrees of the Sacred Council of Trent.16
The presbítero “Dr. José Joaquín Ávalos Chauca (1733–?)” was professor of Quechua at the University of Marcos in Lima from 1780 until 1784 (Meneses
14 There is no single understanding of the ofﬁce of a “capellán” in the eighteenth century, as can be seen when consulting the Diccionario de Autoridades ([1729, II] 1990, I:140–41): (a) “El que goza renta Eclesiástica por razón ò titulo de Capellanía”, (b) “el Sacerdote que assiste à decir Missa en la Capilla . . .”, (c) “Capellán de altar. El que canta las Missas solemnes en la Capilla Real . . .”, (d ) “Capellanes de Choro. Cierto número de Sacerdotes que hai en las Iglésias Cathedráles y Colegiáles, los quales entran en el Choro . . .”, (e) “Capellán de Honór. El que dice Missa privada à las persónas Reales, . . .”, (f ) “Capellán del Rey, . . . El que goza Capellanía por nombramiento del Rey . . .”, (g) “Capellán mayór. Se llama la cabéza de la Comunidad de Capellánes . . .”, (h) “Capellán mayor de los Exercitos. . . . el que tiene facultad de conocer de las cáusas de los soldádos . . .”, (i ) Capellán mayór del Rey. El Preládo que tiene la Jurisdicion espiritual y Eclesiástica en Palácio. . . .” It is therefore possible that our author was “capellán de capellanía,” “de capilla,” or “de coro.”
15 There is nobody of this name listed among the caciques’ sons who attended the “Colegio de los Caciques” founded by Francisco de Borja in Lima (Colegio de Caciques 1923:800–829, años 1618–1802).
16 He continues: “Other Indians are thus trained in other colleges and universities, where they are instructed in all the disciplines in the same manner as the Spaniards, and they win academic awards. These awards are given, regardless of personal conditions, to those who are outstanding

quechua vocabulary (1788)

199

Morales 1982:241). Considering Ávalos’s broad knowledge and his remarks about the Lima Councils (Appendix C, fol. 1r), the man described by Llano Zapata and named as Quechua professor was probably the author of the vocabulary.17 Also, the author’s mother’s surname seems to be an indigenous American rather than a Spanish name. However, the author does not consider himself an Indian at all because he speaks of the “Indians” in a distanced and detached manner (e.g., Appendix D, fol. 3r).
The data of the vocabulary itself also provide information on the author as well as on his knowledge of Quechua. Most of the Quechua words Ávalos has in his list are also found in the works of González Holguín ([1607] 1975; [1608] 1989),18 whose books the author must have known. However, González Holguín’s dictionary is very comprehensive and so it is to be expected that most words will be found in his book. That Ávalos did not copy all the Quechua words from González Holguín is clear from a number of entries in his list, especially complex words or compounds, which are not present in González Holguín’s dictionary in exactly the same form (for example, 123, 129, 202, 271, 366, 410). Thus, “vischuicúpui,” the translation of “echar” (129), consists of wischu- ‘throw (away)’, the modal sufﬁxes19 -yku, intensifying or attentive, and -pu, beneﬁciary (can also denote a negative effect

in merits and dedication in their own faculties. If up to the present time we have not seen some Indians as professors and chair-holders in the schools and colleges, it is due to the fact that after ﬁnishing their studies they withdraw to serve the Church in the ministry of pastors and confessors. . . .” (Llano Zapata [ca. 1761] 1904:4–5, quoted and translated by Martín and Pettus 1973:88; cf. Martín 1973:47). For a sketch of attitudes toward indigenous education throughout the colonial period, see Wood (1986:16–22).
17 According to the “Preliminar” to the Spanish 1904 edition of Llano Zapata’s book, this edition is based on the copy from 1761 which the author had given to King Carlos III and which—in 1904—was presented to the “Biblioteca de Lima.” With respect to the author of the vocabulary, José Ávalos, this means that a period of 27 years would have passed between Llano Zapata’s mention of Ávalos and the composition of the vocabulary. It is therefore not unreasonable to suppose that the Ávalos mentioned by Llano Zapata and our Ávalos Chauca are the same person.
18 Diego González Holguín (1552–1618) was a Spanish Jesuit who lived for almost 20 years in Cuzco and dedicated much of his life to the study of the Quechua language. His grammar and dictionary are still today among the most comprehensive that exist on the Quechua language (see Dedenbach-Salazar Sáenz [forthcoming]).
19 These verb derivational sufﬁxes modify or change the meaning of the verb and can also inﬂuence the subject or object of the action. The term “modal” was ﬁrst used by Solá (1967:sec. 5.21, pp. 5–18) and Parker (1969:63). When a verb stem receives such a modal sufﬁx, the meaning of the verb can become different from the meaning of the original verb stem plus the meaning of the modal sufﬁx. This is especially frequent when more than one modal sufﬁx occurs. See González Holguín ([1607] 1976, 1. III, cap. II, del aumento de verbos). Cusihuamán (1976:sec. 7.1, derivación verbal, suﬁjos formativos), and Hoggarth (2004: sec. 3.2, verb derivation: modiﬁers) for Cuzco Quechua verb derivation (modals). It should be noted that -mpu is characteristic of Cuzco but not of Ayacucho Quechua.

200

international journal of american linguistics

on the person acted upon) or deﬁnitive, and the basic unspeciﬁc nominalizer -y used for the inﬁnitive; so this complex verb forms implies ‘throw (someone or something) out or away in an abrupt manner’. “Huairanpucúmui,” given as the translation of “ventilar” (202), derives from wayra- ‘to be windy’ and -npu (-mu-pu), -ku pseudo-reﬂexive or reﬂexive, and -mu directional (obligatory with weather conditions if they affect the speaker), literally ‘to be windy’, implying ‘a strong wind blowing here’. These examples show that Ávalos was familiar enough with the Quechua language to use such idiomatic expressions, either through his own (near-)native-speaker knowledge or because of intensive studies.
Particularly in Ávalos’s grammatical observations, it becomes clear that he consulted González Holguín, as is shown in the case of his explanation of the inclusive and exclusive plural forms (105–6). His explanation is very similar and his example (105–6) identical to that given by González Holguín ([1607] 1975:1. I, cap. VII, fol. 11r):
y este plural se dize inclusiuo porque los que hablan incluyen a si y a aquellos a quien hablan, como, ñocanchic runa, nosotros los hombres, ñocanchic caricuna, nosotros los varones, si no ay ninguna muger, mas si la ay, ya este plural ñocacnhic [sic] caricuna, no conuiene a todos, ni incluye a todos; antes excluye a las mugeres que alli ay, y assi no se puede dezir ñocanchic, que es inclusiuo, sino el otro plural ñocaycu, que es exclusiuo, como hablando hombres con mugeres dizen excluyendolas a ellas ñocaycu caricuna, nosotros los varones, . . . (cf. 1. II, cap. II, fol. 27r–v).
On the lexical level, there are also strong similarities, for example, when both Ávalos (12) and González Holguín ([1608] 1989:493) explain ‘virgin’ as ‘a woman not known by a man’.
The author of the vocabulary is very much aware of the differences in Spanish and Quechua, for example, when he observes that there is not one verb for ‘carry’ but many, according to the “modes of this action” (126– 128). Of course, the fact that all these and many more verbs for llevar ‘take’ are found in González Holguín may show that here again Ávalos consulted that work, but he still makes his own conclusive observation about this semantic domain. He also states that there is no verb ‘have’ in Quechua and suggests the possessive construction with -yuq, meaning ‘the one who has or owns’, as a way to express this verb (90). In González Holguín’s dictionary ([1608] 1989:678), the basic expression given for ‘have’ is a construction with the bipersonal conjugation, “capuhuanmi,” which can be translated as ‘it exists for me, to my advantage’; in this case, then, Ávalos seems to refer to his own knowledge rather than to González Holguín, although in the latter’s grammar ([1607] 1975: 1. III, cap. I, s23, fol. 105v) -yuq is also explained as ‘have’.

quechua vocabulary (1788)

201

4. The linguistic situation in the Andes according to Ávalos. Ávalos distinguishes four general languages as such: Quechua, Aymara, Chimu, and the language of Chile, as opposed to varieties which cannot be said to be languages in their own right and which are different from each other mainly in their vocabulary and pronunciation. He counts among the latter group what he calls Chinchaysuyu, which he sees as differing from Quechua “in a slight variation of the modes and phrases of explaining oneself and in the corruption of some words and in the form of construction” (Appendix C, fol. 1r), i.e., it shows grammatical and lexical peculiarities. It is interesting that for him, as for the Third Lima Council20 (on which he may base his judgment), the variety called Chinchaysuyu was a “corrupt” form of Quechua.
Furthermore, he mentions Cauqui as a language spoken in only a few villages which he locates in Yauyu (Yauyos, province in the Dept. of Lima), Yaulli (probably the Yauli province in the Dept. of Junín21), and other, unspeciﬁed places. So far, there is not much documentation with respect to the historical distribution of the Cauqui language,22 and Ávalos provides us with additional information about where it was spoken during the colonial era. In the twentieth century, Hardman (1978:147– 48) found only a few Cauqui speakers in the district of Tupe, province of Yauyos. If Cauqui was also spoken in Yauli in the eighteenth century, it suggests historically a larger area covering parts of the Departamentos Lima and Junín. Ávalos points out that the speakers frequently used a mixed form of language, which seems to have consisted of Cauqui and Quechua.
According to Ávalos, Quechua in his time was spoken in the province of Cuzco and the surrounding areas, Aymara in “the region which carries its [the Aymara language’s] name” (which would be Aimaraes in the Dept. of Apurímac), although further on he speciﬁes the Aymara area as “close to the line that divides this viceroyalty [i.e., Peru] from the one of Buenos Aires.” The Chimu language is spoken on the coast from Lambayeque to Piura and is seldom used in religious instruction because the indigenous population has learned Spanish well. Finally, he mentions the language of Chile spoken “by the Indians of that kingdom” (Appendix C).
This sketch of the Andean languages shows that Ávalos was aware of the linguistic situation, although the farther away the languages he talks about
20 Doctrina Christina ([1584/85] 1985:fol. 74r). 21 Stiglich (1922:1173); see also n. 2, p. 262 of “Entrada y misión a los Andes de Jauja en 1602.” For a historical study, a vocabulary, and a grammatical sketch (the latter two from a manuscript by Pablo Patrón), see Matos (1956). 22 Cauqui belongs to the Aru language family, of which Aymara is the most widespread member. See Torero (1970:238– 43) for the distribution of the Aru languages in the early colonial period and Adelaar and Muysken (2004:chap. 3.3) for an overview of the present situation of what they call the Aymaran languages (also called the Jaqi language family).

202

international journal of american linguistics

are spoken, the less he knows about them and their distribution. Ávalos also shows good knowledge of the Church’s linguistic policy and refers to the decrees of the Second and the Third Lima Councils (1567 and 1582–83, respectively) which introduced the instruction of the Christian doctrine in Quechua and Aymara (Appendix C, fol. 1r). On the whole, Ávalos’s knowledge of the linguistic situation in Peru, his remarks about the Church Councils’ policy regarding Indian languages, as well as how he explains and presents the Quechua language, show that he must have been a competent scholar and probably also a speaker of the language.
5. The composition of the vocabulary. The vocabulary, which with respect to the Spanish terms to be translated is identical in all the languages included in the AGI section (except in Sáliva), is organized according to what one might call semantic ﬁelds, such as religion, family, body, senses, basic verbs and adjectives, colors and numbers, metals and minerals, plants and animals, astronomical and meteorological phenomena, government and war-related terms. It also comprises function words such as personal and interrogative pronouns, temporal and spatial adverbs, and the conjugation in the present and past tense.
In Ávalos’s vocabulary, abstract nouns and states are formed with the help of the basic unspeciﬁc nominalizer -y, for example, in “cusícui,” “gozo” (96), “nanácui,” “dolor” (98) (most of them found as such also in González Holguín’s dictionary). This sufﬁx is also used to mark the inﬁnitive, e.g., “coi,” “dar” (132).23
Loanwords are marked with an asterisk and some of them are adapted to Quechua word structure, as Ávalos explains in his introduction: “It is actually true that they use them, clothing them—to put it this way—with Indian dress, that is, adapting their pronunciation to the dialect and sound of their language” (Appendix D, fol. 3v). Examples of this way of ‘clothing them with Indian dress’ are “cap-ra” (319) for cabra as well as Spanish–Quechua composites, such as “vuas-mallqui,” “viña” (291), literally ‘grapes(Spanish)tree(Quechua)’, or “acllasca-trigo,” “trigo escogido” (296), literally ‘selected(Quechua)-wheat(Spanish)’, both adapted to Quechua syntax in that

23 It is interesting that Ávalos is the ﬁrst author to use the so-called inﬁnitive sufﬁx to mark the basic verb form as a dictionary entry. All colonial lexicographers use the ﬁrst-person singular for this purpose (the latest being Torres Rubio, Figueredo, and Anonymous Jesuit 1754 and Velasco ca. 1788); it is only in Middendorf ’s Quechua–German dictionary of 1890 and in the 1905 Vocabulario políglota incaico that the same usage Ávalos has can be found. Of course, with no other dictionaries available, we cannot be certain when this inﬁnitive marker became established or if Ávalos introduced this innovation.

quechua vocabulary (1788)

203

the qualiﬁer precedes the noun. Another example shows how the word accent shifts in order to conform to Quechua rules: “batéria” (399).24
6. Orthography and conclusions about Quechua phonology. In the Southern Peruvian Quechua dialects, some particular allophonic and phonemic features developed during the eighteenth century. This is the case with syllable-ﬁnal weakening of /p/ > [x]25 and /ch/ > /s/ in the Cuzco variety. Cuzco Quechua also substituted syllable-ﬁnal /w/ with /y/. A complex sibilant system was replaced by a single sibilant in the whole area of Southern Peruvian Quechua. A phenomenon typical of the Cuzco variety, a series of aspirated and glottalized stops apart from the plain plosives, can, however, be observed as early as 1584 (Doctrina Christiana [1584] 1985: “Annotaciones,” fol. 75r) and came almost certainly from Aymara (Torero 1998:620).26
With respect to Ávalos, it is evident—from what he says about where Quechua is spoken (see above) as well as from his description of the sound/orthographic system he uses—that he tries to describe Cuzco Quechua. Thus he makes it clear that certain sounds pronounced “with force” or “softness and simplicity” change the meaning of a word. The example he gives is “ttanta” ‘bread’ (modern Cuzco Quechua t’anta) vs. the “simple” form meaning ‘assembly’ (modern Cuzco Quechua tanta27) (Appendix D, fol. 3r); there are further examples in the vocabulary itself, such as “pacha” (234) ‘time’ (modern Cuzco Quechua pacha) vs. “ppacha” (376) ‘clothes’ ( p’acha).
A comparison of Ávalos’s Quechua orthography to those of González Holguín (1608), Torres Rubio (1619), Torres Rubio and Figueredo (1700), and Torres Rubio, Figueredo, and Anonymous Jesuit (1754), all of which describe Cuzco Quechua, shows that Ávalos does not follow any of these authors consistently; instead, he seems to make up his own rules. If he was not a native Quechua speaker, he may have tried to apply a certain linguistic logic (as did the other Spanish authors), perhaps based on extant studies and
24 The only entries which are not loanwords but which are marked as such by the author are “vpiai” and “vinayacui” (“beber” and “nutrir” respectively; 122, 123).
25 /q/ is realized as [x] only in syllable-ﬁnal position in Cuzco Quechua, in all other positions as a stop: [q]. Also, the fricativization of /q/ > [x] in syllable-ﬁnal position in Cuzco and of /q/ > /x/ in general in Ayacucho Quechua must have occurred during the past three centuries.
26 See Mannheim (1991:chaps. 7, 8, 9) for a detailed analysis of the phenomena mentioned in this paragraph.
27 And there is yet a third member of this minimal pair: thanta ‘rag’. The modern Cuzco equivalents are taken from Lira (ca. 1967), but I have adapted their orthography to the modern ofﬁcial alphabet.

204

international journal of american linguistics

TABLE 1

González Holguín 1608 (p.)
atoc/atok (37) kari/ccari (136/688) carppa/carpa (50/681) curu (56) ritti (riti ) (318) ttanta (337) vssuta (359) mizqui (mizqqui ) (244) ciça (82) çua (86)

Torres

Torres Rubio and

Rubio Figueredo

1619 (s.v.) 1700 (fol.)

atoc

atoc (83r)

cari

cari (84r)

Torres Rubio et al. 1754 (fol.) atoc (75v) ccari (77r)

Ávalos 1788 (no.) attocc (330) ccari (16)

Cuzco 20th century
atuq qhari

carpa carpa (84r) carpa (77r) ccarpa (357) karpa

curu curu (85r) curu (78v) ccuru (307)

kuru

riti

riti (95r) ritti (99r) ritti (211)

rit’i

tanta vssuta misqui
çiça çua

tanta (96r) vssuta (97v) misqui (91r) çiça (87r) çua (87r)

ttanta (101v) vssuta (105r) miscqui (91v) çiça (82v) çua (83r)

ttanta (393) vsutta (379) mizqui (313)
siza (283) zua (395)

t’anta usut’a misk’i
sisa suwa

on what he heard from Quechua speakers. This would also have been the case if he was a native speaker of a Quechua dialect other than Cuzqueño. If we assume that he was a native speaker of Cuzco Quechua, in addition to the mentioned linguistic considerations, he may have written the sounds to reproduce as closely as possible what he thought he pronounced.
Table 1 shows some examples of the usage of the stops and sibilants. Although in his introduction Ávalos discusses and gives examples of typical Cuzco Quechua features such as glottalization and aspiration, in the vocabulary itself both glottalization and aspiration, as well as /k/ and /q/, are (inconsistently) presented as double consonants and not with any additional devices (such as González Holguín uses, for example, in the case of the letter {k}). It seems plausible that Ávalos knew and wanted to present Cuzco Quechua, but that he was not quite able to manage the complexity of the stops. Thus he uses {pp} for both glottals and aspirates (“ppacha” [376], p’acha in modern Cuzco Quechua ‘clothes’; “ppuru” [344], phuru ‘feather’). Neither González Holguín28 —nor any of the other colonial authors— is completely consistent, but Ávalos seems to choose his own way of
28 However, I was not able to consult a copy of the original 1608 edition, so I used the 1989 edition instead. Neither this nor the 1952 edition on which it is based are facsimiles. This must be taken into account, especially when discussing the spelling of particular words.

quechua vocabulary (1788)

205

writing, independent from them. González Holguín, for example, has “ppacha” (1989:691), “ppachha,” “pacha” (1989:270), Ávalos “ppacha” (376) (for modern Cuzco Quechua p’acha). We ﬁnd “ppuc-ru” ‘pit’ (Ávalos 257, 258) but “pukru” (González Holguín 1989:293), “vsutta” ‘sandal’ (Ávalos 379) vs. “vssuta” (González Holguín 1989:359), usut’a (modern Cuzco Quechua); “attocc” ‘fox’ (Ávalos 330) vs. “atoc/atok” (González Holguín 1989:37), atuq (modern Cuzco Quechua). I would, however, like to suggest that this apparent inconsistency about glottalization and aspiration in Ávalos’s list and also in the sources throughout the centuries (see table 1) may not be due entirely to the authors’ confusion; it is possible that it shows the instability of these sounds as phonemes until as late as the end of the eighteenth century.
Throughout his Spanish text, Ávalos uses primarily modern orthography also with respect to the sibilants.29 He uses the same letters for the Quechua sibilants as he does in his Spanish words which contain sibilants, and his use of the sibilants in Quechua is to a certain extent consistent in itself. There is no {ç}.30 All of the words that sixteenth- and seventeenth-century Quechua sources wrote with this letter are, in his Quechua words, written either with {z} or {s}, apparently both used interchangeably, with a tendency to use {z} more often than {s}. Sixteenth- and seventeenth-century syllable-ﬁnal {z} is always represented as {s} by Ávalos.31 In Ávalos, there is no {ss}, as González Holguín writes it, but the fact that the Third Lima Council texts from 1584/85 do not use {ss}32 leaves it an open question whether Ávalos copied an old orthography (as in the Council texts) or used a new one (postGonzález Holguín). Today, Southern Peruvian Quechua has only one sibilant left. So, on the whole, Ávalos’s usage of a simpler system of sibilants than

29 With a few exceptions, such as “trage,” “extrangeras,” “muger,” “trabaxo,” and in some cases {y} instead of {i}, as in “bayle,” as well as alternating {qua} and {cua} in “quando/ cuando.” At the beginning of the eighteenth century, the Real Academia Española simpliﬁed most of these orthographies which no longer represented sound distinctions, but people still continue to write some of the older forms (Lapesa 1985:421–24).
30 In the ﬁrst half of the eighteenth century, the Real Academia Española abolished the letter {ç} and introduced the distribution of {c} with front vowels and {z} with back vowels, still valid (Lapesa 1985:422).
31 González Holguín (1989:51) “cauça-” becomes Ávalos (146) “cáuza-,” “vicça” (1989:351) becomes “vicza” (45), “çua” (1989:86) becomes “zua” (395), “çapa” (1989:673, s.v. sombria cosa) becomes “sapa” (218), “yzccon” (1989:370) becomes “yscon” (456), “cazco” (1989:620 s.v. pecho) becomes “casco” (44). See Mannheim (1991:166–67, table 7.3) for a list of the sibilant-containing words in different colonial sources and a detailed discussion of the sibilant problem (1991:153–76).
32 Mannheim (1991:170–71, table 7.4).

206

international journal of american linguistics

that found in sixteenth- and seventeenth-century sources shows that his material ﬁts chronologically between seventeenth-century and modern usage.33
However, some other phonological features of Ávalos’s work seem to reﬂect a slightly earlier stage (i.e., before the eighteenth-century changes), as can be seen in the accusative form “-cta” (417, not -ta, as in modern Quechua), the semi-consonant diphthong “punchau” (430– 432), “vauque” (8) (not punchay, wayqi ), the syllable-end affricate “pichca” (451, not pisqa), and the ﬁnal stop in “ñocanchic” (105, not ñuqanchis), assertative “-m” (435, 439) and “-n” (436, 437), not just -n, as in modern Cuzco Quechua, as well as genitive “-p” in “apup” (411, not -pa as in modern Ayacucho Quechua or -q [-x] as in modern Cuzco Quechua). According to Mannheim (1991:150–52), these changes occurred gradually throughout the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries. However, it is not possible to date exactly the Ollanta manuscripts which Mannheim uses as his main data base, so Ávalos, in his seemingly more conservative usage,34 may well be in line with his contemporaries, i.e., the changes may have occurred only toward the end of the eighteenth century.35
7. Final remarks. With respect to the author of the vocabulary, the preceding observations show that he was aware of the Quechua sound system of his time and probably did not simply copy older sources—not surprising when we take into consideration that he taught Quechua at the university.

33 Only one word is not given in its modern form with initial {s} but instead with initial {h}: “hacha” (247, 273, 276, 279). González Holguín (1989:74: “çachha, o hacha”) still offers both; today hacha is used in Central Peruvian dialects (e.g., in Parker and Chávez 1976:60) but not in the Southern Peruvian ones, which have sacha.
34 It is improbable, in my opinion, that Ávalos would have written “apup” if it was actually being pronounced /apuq/ [apux] and “vauque” if it was pronounced /wayqi/. (The opening of the vowels which accompany postvelar consonants is an allophonic phenomenon; there are only three phonemic vowels—/a/, /i/, /u/—in Quechua.) This would have meant that he either did not know Quechua and only consulted old grammars or that he chose a highly conservative, etymological orthography.
35 It is interesting that the Tercero Catecimo, republished in 1773, shows virtually the same changes in the sibilants and the same conservatism in the syllable-end stops and in “-cta,” a further indication that the AGI vocabulary reﬂects the changes of its time. I would suggest, however, that we be cautious with this kind of conclusion because in order to be deﬁnitive we would need to be sure that eighteenth-century published works did not use old orthographies. Furthermore, we would also need an exact comparison with the development of the (Latin American) Spanish sound system in relation to its orthography in the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries. Only then could we be sure that Quechua writing in the eighteenth century does not use an archaic orthography and/or simply reﬂect the Spanish conventions but is the Quechua language’s own development.

quechua vocabulary (1788)

207

Certain inconsistencies may be due to the difﬁculty even a native speaker might have in recognizing and describing systematically the sound system of his mother tongue. However, it is also possible that Ávalos was from Southern Peru, but not from Cuzco, and therefore did not have in his own dialect the typical Cuzco aspirated and glottalized stops and other features peculiar to that variety; it would therefore have been very difﬁcult for him to describe them adequately. Another scenario would be that Ávalos was not a native Quechua speaker at all; however, his inclusion of a number of idiomatic expressions as well as the usage of an orthographic system of his own makes this rather improbable, unless—as a nonnative speaker—he had studied the language very thoroughly.
With respect to the development of Southern Peruvian Quechua, the materials examined here are a useful piece in the chronological mosaic because this is a dated source, as opposed to the frequently used theatrical manuscripts. However, some caution is necessary because, especially with respect to his glosses, Ávalos obviously makes extensive use of González Holguín’s work. Ávalos’s reference to González Holguín thus shows that even more than 150 years after the latter’s works were published, they were still used in the study of the Quechua language.
With the publication of Ávalos’s vocabulary, old questions are raised again, and although the data he provides help us understand more of eighteenth-century Quechua, these questions also create new ones, for example, about the glottalization and aspiration process of Cuzco Quechua and about what a changing orthographic usage really implies: changes in Quechua, the reﬂection of changes in Spanish, or just an idiosyncratic way of writing.
I hope that with the publication of Ávalos’s vocabulary I have shed some further light on eighteenth-century Quechua, having tried to cope with his data and their analysis—to quote Ávalos (Appendix C, fol. 2r)—“in the best way my small talent permits, in the Quechua language, which is my profession and understanding.”
Appendixes A–F contain transcriptions of the documents in Mapas y Planos: Escritura y Cifra 40.36

36 This document is followed by a presentation and vocabulary of the Aymara language (Mapas y Planos, Escritura y Cifra 41). Both documents are preceded by a cover sheet which assigns them to the section Indiferente General, Legajo no. 1342, Documento 14, where they were kept before they were transferred to Mapas y Planos, Escritura y Cifra. The documents presented below are written in three different hands: Appendix A by one hand, Appendix B by another one, and Appendixes C–E by a third one which seems to belong to Ávalos Chauca himself, who signs it.

208

international journal of american linguistics

APPENDIX A Letter from the Peruvian Viceroy to Antonio Porlier
1[fol. 1r]
[left column:]
N. 66
El Virrey del Perù37
Remite traducidas en la lengua yndica las palabras castellanas que con Real Orden de 13 de Noviembre de 1787 se le dirixieron para este efecto, y acompaña una lista de los libros que por separado en un caxoncito de madera dirixe en esta propia ocasion.
P38
[main text:]
Excelentísimo Señor
Luego que recivi la Real Orden de 13 de noviembre del año pasado de 787 libré quantas providencias me parecieron conducentes à ﬁn de recoger uno, ò dos exemplares de cada vno de los libros, contenidos en la lista que con el numero primero se me acompañaba, y que se tradujesen en quantas lenguas yndicas fuese posible las palabras de la lista n.o 2.o De resultas de esta extrechas providencias, hè conseguido los libros que comprehende la adjunta lista, y remito en esta propia oca-[fol. 1v]sion en un caxoncito de madera forrado en lienzo, y rotulado a Vuestra Excelencia. De ellos algunos no son de los pedidos, pero como conciernen à un mismo obgeto, y pueden dar luz en la materia, me hà parecido combeniente dirigirlos.
Ygualmente remito à Vuestra Excelencia traducidas en las lenguas quechua, y aymara las palabras castellanas de la lista n.o 2.o, habiendose veriﬁcado esto en el mejor orden, y metodo que hà sido posible para su mayor claridad; como reconocerá Vuestra Excelencia por las mismas traducciones que originales le acompaño, para evitar el que en las copias de ellas, se omitiese alguna puntuacion, ò letra que hiciese va-[fol. 2r]riar el signiﬁcado de la diccion. En la propia forma, y segun vaya reciviendo, remitire à Vuestra Excelencia las demas traducciones que tengo pedidas en otros varios ydiomas; lo que participo à Vuestra Excelencia por ahora en contestacion à la Real Orden citada.
Dios guarde à Vuestra Excelencia m.s a.s Lima y febrero 28 de 1789
Excelentísimo Señor El Cavallero De Croix
[bottom line:] Excelentísimo Señor don Antonio Porlier.
37 As to the transcription conventions, spelling, accents, and punctuation have been maintained as in the original, but the word limits and the use of initial word capitals have been adapted to modern usage. Abbreviations have been completed according to modern orthography where possible.
38 Each of the following documents also has “N. 66” and “P” written at its left margin.

quechua vocabulary (1788)

209

APPENDIX B List of Books
[fol. 1r]
Razon de los libros que se dirigen al Excelentísimo Señor don Antonio Porlier secretario de Estado, y del Despacho de gracia, justicia, y materias eclesiasticas de Yndias, por el Virrey del Perù don Teodoro de Croix, en cumplimiento de la Real Orden de 13 de noviembre del año pasado de 1787. A saver.

La gramatica quichuana del Padre Diego González Holguín, impresa en Lima en 1607 en 4.o con
el lexicon quichuanum del mismo autor, impreso en Lima en 1608 en 4.o reunidos ambos en vn tomo.
La gramatica aymarà del Padre Ludovico Bertonio reimpresa en la Provincia de Chucuyto el año de 1612 en 8.o por duplicado.
El vocabulario de dicha lengua aymarà por el mismo autor en 4.o Gramatica y diccionario de la lengua moxa, por duplicado
Ydem de la lengua chilena por duplicado. Nueva ediccion [sic] de la gramatica quichuana del Padre Torres Bubio [sic: for
Rubio], hecha en Lima el año de 1754 en 8.o La doctrina christiana, formada, ò traducida en lengua quichua por el lizenciado
Bocanegra en 4.o Los evangelios con los sermones del Dr. [fol. 1v] Davila en folio.39 3 9

Lima y febrero 28 de 1789.

Varea

39 These works are the following: González Holguín, Diego: Gramatica y arte nveva de la lengva general de todo el Peru, llamada lengua qquichua, o lengua del Inca. Francisco del Canto: Los Reyes [Lima], 1607. Vocabvlario de la lengva general de todo el Perv llamada lengua qquichua o del Inca. Francisco del Canto: Los Reyes [Lima], 1608. Bertonio, Ludovico: Arte de la lengva aymara, con vna silva de phrases de la misma lengua, y su declaracion en romance. Francisco del Canto: Juli, Prouincia de Chucuyto, 1612. Vocabvlario de la lengva aymara. Francisco del Canto: Juli, Prouincia de Chucuyto, 1612. Probably Marbán, Pedro: Arte de la lengua moxa con su vocabulario y cathecismo . . . , Lima, 1701 (from Tovar and Larrucea de Tovar 1984:131). Either Valdivia, Luis de: Arte y gramática general de la lengva qve corre en todo el Reyno de Chile, con vn vocabulario, y confessonario [sic]. Lima: Francisco del Canto, 1606; or Febrés, Andrés: Arte de la lengua general del reyno de Chile, con un diálogo chileno-hispano muy curioso: a que se añade la Doctrina Christiana, . . . y por ﬁn un vocabulario hispano-chileno, y un calepino chileno-hispano mas copioso. Lima: Calle de la Encarnación, 1765. It

210

international journal of american linguistics

APPENDIX C Explanatory Letter by José Joaquín Ávalos Chauca
[fol. 1r]
Excelentísimo Señor
Me manda Vuestra Excelencia en conseqüencia de un Real Orden que se le ha comunicado por el Ministerio sobre que se viertan en los ydiomas que usan los yndios naturales de las provincias sujetas à este Virreynato las dicciones contenidas en la Lista N.o 2.o que se me ha remitido por la Secretaria de Cámara, tome à mi cargo este cuidado; dàndole à Vuestra Excelencia de antemano razon de quales son estos idiomas, para desempeñar con la exactitud debida un encargo tan respetable y circunstanciado.
Y deseando satisfacer este mandato, con que Vuestra Excelencia se sirve honrarme, he procurado examinar con la prolixidad correspondiente, en què idiomas se explican en el dia los yndios de estas provincias. En fuerza de mi diligencia he llegado à entender, que las que pueden llamarse con propriedad lenguas diferentes, para el efecto que se solicita solamente son la general del Perù, que llaman quechua, la aymarà, la chimu, y la de Chile; porque estas en la realidad se distinguen, no menos en la expresion de las voces, que en el dialecto, y fabrica de la oracion. Pues aunque es cierto, que algunos pueblos usan la que llaman chinchaysuyu, otros la que nombran cauqui, y muchos varias lenguas inominadas: estas no merecen el nombre de lenguas diferentes de la quechua; pues la chinchaysuyu, casi no se distingue de ella, sino en una corta variacion de los modos y frases de explicarse, y en la corrupcion de algunas dicciones, y forma de la construccion. La cauqui pura, apenas se habla en tal qual pueblo de las provincias Yauyu, Yaulli, y otras; explicandose sus naturales comunmente en la general corrompida, como la antecedente: de manera que los que hablan la quechua, con gran facilidad entienden este genero de [fol. 1v] idioma mixto. Esta variedad, y otra que proviene de la diversa pronunciacion de las dicciones, y de las letras, tanto vocales, como consonantes, hace parecer diferente un mismo idiomas [sic] en diversos lugares; y es por lo que dixe, no deberia caliﬁcar de varias, en el rigor de esta palabra, las lenguas que oy usan los yndios en el distrito de este Virreynato.
Solo restan pues las lenguas quechua, aymarà, chimu, y [de] Chile en razon de idiomas verdaderamente diversos. Las dos primeras, aun desde que fueron sujetos estos reynos à la dominacion española, se consideraron idiomas diferentes, y su inteligencia de la mayor importancia; asi por ser la quechua, general en todo el Perù, y la ay-
is rather improbable that it could have been Havestadt, Bernard: Chilidúgu sive Res chilenses. Typis Aschendorﬁansis: Monasterii Westphaliae, 1777.
Torres Rubio, Diego de/Juan de Figueredo/Jesuita anónimo: Arte, y vocabulario de la lengua quichua general de los indios de el Perú. Lima: Imprenta de la Plazuela de San Christoval, 1754.
Pérez Bocanegra, Ivan: Ritval formvlario, e institvcion de cvras,. . . . Lima: Geronymo de Contreras, 1631.
Ávila, Francisco de: Tratado de los Evangelios, qve nvestra madre la iglesia propone en todo el año. . . . 2 vols. [Lima, 1646–48].

quechua vocabulary (1788)

211

marà usual y propria de la region que lleva su nombre, habitada de muchas gentes: como porque su dialecto, siendo mas culto y expresivo, fue mas facil instruir à los yndios que las hablaban, explicándoles en ellas los mysterios de la fé cathólica con mayor propriedad y decoro. Por lo què el 3. Concilio Provincial Limano del año de 1582. en el Cap. 3. de la Accion 5. en conseqüencia de lo decretado en la Sesion 2. Cap. 26. del 2.o Provincial celebrado en 1567. manda, que aprobado el Cathecismo, y Confesionario dispuesto de orden de este Concilio en ambas lenguas quechua, y aymarà, se encomiende à los párrocos de yndios ùsen de ellos en la administracion del sacramento de la penitencia, è instruccion de la doctrina christiana;40 como en efecto empezò à practicarse, y aun oy se observa en estas provincias. La lengua chimu se habla en la provincia de Lambayeque, hasta los términos de la de Piura; ella es enteramente diversa de las dos mensionadas, y de las demas que se hablan en las serranias, asi en las voces, como en el dialecto; y su pronunciacion es sumamente diﬁcil, asemejandose mucho à la lengua mexicana. Ygnoro si de ella se haya compuesto arte, ò algunas traducciones, como se han hechos [sic] de las dos referidas. Lo cierto es, que para el efecto de cathequizar à los yndios, y aun para el trato civil, es casi de ningun uso; porque en esta costa, por la freqüente versacion con los españoles, han aprendido los yndios el idioma castellano con tal perfeccion, que lo hablan, y entienden, como si les fuera nativo.
[fol. 2r] La lengua de Chile hablan los yndios de aquel reyno. Nada tiene ella comun con los idiomas de este; porque no habiendo los yncas sujetado enteramente aquellas naciones à su imperio, no pudieron introducir en ellas el uso de la lengua general del Perù, como practicaban en sus conquistas, por una maxima política, utilisima al gobierno.
De todo resulta, que en el distrito de este Virreynato solo se usan entre los yndios las quatro referidas. La primera en la provincia del Cuzco, y sus comarcanas; la segunda en algunos pueblos que oy estan cerca de la raya que divide este Virreynato del de Buenos Ayres; la tercera en Lambayeque, y pueblos de la costa, desde esa provincia, hasta la de Piura; y la quarta en el reyno de Chile.
Es lo que puedo decir à Vuestra Excelencia cerca del primer artículo que contiene su superior mandato. En lo que toca à la traduccion de las dicciones contenidas en la lista, solo puedo encargarme de hacerla, del mejor modo que me permita mi corto ingenio, en la lengua quechua, que es la de mi profesion è inteligencia.
40 With respect to the Second Lima Council, Ávalos seems to get the chapter wrong. It is in the second part, paragraph 2, that an authorized catechism for the indigenous population is asked for (Vargas Ugarte 1951:24) and this section is referred to in the Third Council documents (Lisi 1990:124). But as there are different manuscripts of the proceedings of the Councils, it cannot be conclusively said that Ávalos is wrong. The Third Lima Council’s Accíon 5, cap. 3, “Acerca del confesionario,” is on the confessionary that has to be translated into Quechua and Aymara and will be given to the parish priests together with the catechism (Lisi 1990:224/225). Ávalos probably (also) means Acción 2, cap. 3, “De la redacción y edición de un catecismo,” which is a detailed instruction to produce an authorized catechism in indigenous languages to be used to teach the Indians the Christian doctrine (Lisi 1990:124/125).

212

international journal of american linguistics

Dios guarde la importante vida de Vuestra Excelencia m.s a. Lima, septiembre 3. de 1788.
Excelentísimo Señor Beso la mano [?] de Vuestra Excelencia Su mas obediente siervo y capellan Josè Joaquin Avalos Chauca.
[lower left margin:] Excelentísimo Señor don Teodoro de Croix.
APPENDIX D Ávalos Chauca’s Explanation of
Quechua Orthography and Pronunciation
[fol. 3r]
Ha prevenido prudentisimamente el Real Orden, se indique en la traduccion de las dicciones contenidas en la lista N. 2. la ortograﬁa que se haya seguido para expresarlas. Advertencia tan importante en el asunto; que sin ella, ademas de no mostrarse la propriedad con que deben pronunciarse las voces, se expondria à equivocaciones muy considerables su inteligencia: pues: aunque los yndios ignoraron el arte de explicarse por letras, ó caracteres que expresan la pronunciacion de las palabras, variaron de ordinario la signiﬁcacion de ellas con solo el modo mas ò menos fuerte de la pronunciacion. Asi esta diccion Ttanta, pronunciada la primera T. con fuerza, signiﬁca Pan, y articulada con suavidad y sencillez, signiﬁca congregacion ò junta de personas. Baste este exemplo para justiﬁcar la necesidad dè expresar con los caracteres la diferencia de las voces. En esta inteligencia se debe advertir, que aunque los yndios no conocen en su idioma general, ò lengua quechua la pronunciacion de las letras B.D.F.G.J.L. sencilla, y X; pero usan de otras articulaciones que justamente equivalen à estas letras: Cc, Qq. Tt. Vu. Ch. Th; reconociendose, que la fuerza con que se pronuncian las unas, y el diverso sonido de las otras conduce à distinguir las signiﬁcaciones.
Asimismo se debe notar, que no haciendo uso de la L. sencilla, siempre la usan doble, con el mismo sonido que en español pronunciamos esta letra doblada: como al contrario jamas pronuncian la R. doble, ò aspera, sino siempre suave y simple, ya sea en el principio, ya en el medio de la diccion: Que ninguna consonante hiere à otra; y asi se pronuncian como separadas en las dicciones donde concurren. Asi no se pronuncia Ricra, sino Ric-ra: Que ninguna diccion tiene acento agudo [fol. 3v] en la ùltima silaba, sino todas le tienen en la penùltima: à excepcion de las dicciones que acaban en dos vocales, las quales tienen el acento en la antepenúltima; asi se pronuncian estas voces Mícui, Múnai.
Como las palabras son expresiones de las ideas, y estas no se pueden tener, sino de las cosas conocidas; no pudieron las gentes de este payz formar concepto de muchas cosas de que no tubieron noticia; ò porque ellas no se presentaron à sus sentidos como fueron las que no existieron en este continente, y vinieron à èl por el comercio con la Europa; ò porque careciendo de arte de pensar, y los principios de la religion ver-

quechua vocabulary (1788)

213

dadera, no pudieron elevar la mente à las abstracciones, y otras operaciones de espíritu que piden consideraciones sublimes, y reﬂexiones hechas con método y arte: por cuya razon no les pudieron dar nombre, ni expresarlas en su idioma. Sin embargo ya la comunicacion con los españoles, y la necesidad de oir, y entender el cathecismo les ha hecho adoptar muchas voces extrañas, signiﬁcativas de cosas que ignoraron, enriqueciendo con ellas su idioma, como ha acontecido à todas las naciones del mundo, aun las mas cultas. Bien es verdad que usan de ellas, vistiendolas, por decirlo asi, al trage indiano, ésto es, reduciendo su pronunicacion al dialecto y sonido de su idioma. Asi dicen Caüallo por Caballo, Ceüolla, por Cebolla, Üaca [written with a capital V with dieresis], por Baca. Y aun en algunas ya han admitido el uso de las letras que no pronunciaban; asi dicen Dios, Trigo, sin embargo de serles desconocidas la D y la G. Estas voces extrangeras, que ya estan adoptadas en el idioma indiano, iran notadas en la traducion con esta señal (*) para distinguirlas de las genuinas y proprias de esta lengua. Con esta breve nota entro y en la traduccion.

APPENDIX E The Vocabulary according to the Manuscript41

[fol. 4r / col. 1]

1 Dios

Este nombre sacrosanto pudiera

quizà traducirse por el de

Pachacamac, que propriamente

signiﬁca Hacedor, Conservador, y

Alimentador del Vniverso. Pero

siendo este asunto tan delicado en

la religion, los autores que han

compuesto cathecismos, y otras

obras sagradas, se han abstenido

justamente del uso de esta voz

para signiﬁcar la divinidad,

tomando la castellana.

Dios [no tiene *]

2 Padre

Yaya

3 Madre

Mama

4 Hijo

con respecto al padre

Churi

5

con respecto à la madre Vuauua

6 Hija

con respecto al padre

Vsusi

7

con respecto à la madre Vuauua

8 Hermano

Vauque

9 Hermana

Pana

10 Marido

Coza

11 Muger por el sexo

Huarmi

41 In the transcription, the Quechua entries have been numbered for easier reference. For an alphabetic ordering of the Quechua entries, see Appendix F.

214

international journal of american linguistics

Consorte del marido:

se le debe añadir la

particula posesiva que

corresponde à la persona

de este.

Mia

Huarmii

Tuya

Huarmiiqui

Suya

Huarmin

12 Doncella

No hay una diccion que

corresponda à esta voz. Asi

signiﬁca esta ca-

[fol. 4r/2]

lidad mugeril por una

circumlocucion que la da à

entender: Muger, à quien no ha

llegado varon

Manam ccarip recsiscan huarmi

13 Mozo

Huayna

14 Niño

Huarma

15 Hombre por la especie

Runa

16

por el sexo

Ccari

17 Gentes

Runa-runa

18 Cabeza

Huma

19 Cara

Vya

20 Nariz

Cenca

21 Narices

Cenca-cuna

22 Ojo

Ñaui

23 Cejas

Qquesip-ra

24 Pestañas

Zap-ra

25 Oreja

Rinri

26 Frente

Matti

27 Cabellos

Chuccha

28 Mexillas

Ccacclla

29 Boca

Simi

30 Garganta

Ccuncca

31 Labio el superior

Cip-ri

32

el inferior

Virpa

33 Diente

Quiru

34 Lengua

Ccallu

35 Barba parte inferior del rostro Ccaqui

36

el pelo de ella

Zuncca

37 Cuello

Ccuncca

38 Hombro

Ric-ra

39 Codo

Chuchuch

quechua vocabulary (1788)

215

40 Mano 41 Brazo 42 Dedos 43 Uñas 44 Pecho 45 Vientre 46 Espalda 47 Pie

[fol. 4v/1]

48 Rodilla

49 Corazon

50 Estomago

51 Sangre

52 Leche

53 Piel

54 Carne

55 Hueso

56 Oido

la oreja

57

el sentido

58 Vista

59 Ver

60 Gusto

61 Olfato

62 Oler

acto del sentido

63

despedir olor

64 Tacto

65 Voz

66 Hablar

67 Razonamiento

68 Palabra

69 Nombre

70 Gritar

71 Grito

72 Ruido

73 Ahullido

74 Llorar

75 Reir

76 Cantar

77 Estornudar

78 Temblar

79 Suspirar

80 Bostezar

81 Silvar

82 Echarse

Maqui Maqui Ruccana Sillu Casco Vicza Huasa Chaqui
Concor Sonco [sic] Yahuar Ñuñu Ccara Aicha Tullu Rinri Vyarina Ricuna Ricui Mallina Mutquina Mutquii Asnai Llamcana Ccuncca Rimai Chayaqquen-simi Simi Sutti Hapllaicáchai Hatun-ccuncca Huáccai Huaccainin Huáccai Acii Táquii Hachícui Cúyui Anchii Haniaíllii Huichichíchii Cirícui

216

international journal of american linguistics

83 Pára (tu) 84 Yr 85 Vé (tu) 86 Véte 87 Dormir 88 Sueño (gana de dormir) 89 Saltar
[fol. 4v/2] 90 Tener
91 Correr 92 Baylar 93 Amar 94 Amor 95 Gozoso 96 Gozo 97 Tristeza 98 Dolor 99 Pena 100 Trabaxo 101 Perezoso 102 Yo 103 Tu 104 Aquel 105 Nosotros
Este pronombre se dice de dos modos; que es necesario distinguir bien. Quando en el contexto de la oracion se incluye à la [fol. 5r/1] persona, ò personas, con quienes se habla; se ha de decir

Sayácui Rii Rii Purii Púñui Puñanáyai Pahuarícui
no hay un verbo que lo signiﬁque. Pero se expresa mui bien con esta partícula yoc añadida al nombre que signiﬁca la cosa tenida, y el verbo cai, que signiﬁca ser. Por exemplo: Tengo plata; se dice con elegancia: Collquiyoc cani: que es lo mismo que: soy poseedor de plata. Huairacáchai Túsui Múnai Múnai Cusicuillam Cusícui Llaquícui Nanácui Putiimánai Ñacarícui Qquellacuc Ñoca Cam Chàcai
Ñocanchic

quechua vocabulary (1788)

217

106 Asi cuando, hablando un varon con otro le dixera: Nosotros los hombres: deberia decir: Ñocanchic ccari. Pero si la persona con quien se habla, no puede incluirse en la misma razon, ò calidad; entonces se ha de decir Como si hablando ellos con una muger dixeran: Nosotros los hombres, habian de decir: Ñocaicu ccari
107 Vosotros 108 Aquellos 109 Ser 110 Yo soy 111 Tu eres 112 El es 113 Nosotros somos
Se varia baxo la misma advertencia hecha en la diccion Nosotros; y asi se dice 114 115 Vosotros sois 116 Aquellos son 117 Fuè 118 Comer
[fol. 5r/2]
119 Yo como 120 Tu comes 121 Aquel come 122 Beber 123 Nutrir 124 Tomar 125 Sacudir (Golpear) 126 Llevar
No hay un verbo que signiﬁque esta accion indeterminada: sino otros tantos verbos, quantos son los modos de esta accion. Por eso. Llevar à cuestas 127 Llevar en brazos

Ñocaicu Camquichic Chaicuna Cai Cani Canqui Can
Canchic, ò Caicu Canquichic Can, ò Cancu Carcan Mícui
Micuni Micunqui Micun *Vpiai *Vinayacui Hatallii Maccai
Apai Márcai

218

international journal of american linguistics

128 Levar [sic] en andas

Y asi se varía el verbo de muchos

modos: sobre que se deben

consultar los diccionarios.

129 Echar

130 Desgarrar

131 Verter

132 Dar

133 Dà (dà tu)

134 Cortar

135 Ocultar

136 Fuerza

137 Facultad

138 Poder

139 Parir

140 Familia Los parientes

141

Los criados

142 Matrimonio

respecto del varon à la muger:

143 de la muger al varon

144 Nupcias

145 Viuda

146 Vivir

[fol. 5v/1]

147 Vida 148 Cuerpo 149 Estatura 150 Espíritu 151 Alma 152 Morir 153 Muerte 154 Viejo 155 Joven 156 Grande 157 Pequeño 158 Alto 159 Baxo 160 Frio 161 Caliente 162 Ardiente 163 Sano 164 Bien (adverbio) 165 Bueno 166 Dichoso

Huántui Vischuicúpui Nacarcárii Híchay Coi Coi Cúchui Pácai Callpa Atípai Atípai Huáchai Ayllomacicuna Yanacuna
Huarmiyácui Cozayácui *Nupcia-cuna Ycma Cáuzai
Cáuzai Vcu Sáyai *Espíritu *Alma Huáñui Huáñui Machu Huaina Hatun Húchui Zuni Vra Chiri Ccoñic Rupac Allilla-cainiyoc Allillam Alli Cusiyoc

quechua vocabulary (1788)

219

167 Malvado 168 Mal 169 Estulto 170 Capaz 171 Hermoso 172 Agudo 173 Redondo 174 Círculo 175 Bola 176 Ligero 177 Pesado 178 Duro 179 Fuerte 180 Endeble 181 Delgado 182 Grueso 183 Ancho 184 Presto 185 Lento 186 Blanco 187 Negro 188 Encarnado
[fol. 5v/2]
189 Verde 190 Amarillo 191 Azul 192 Sol 193 Luna 194 Estrella 195 Cielo 196 Niebla 197 Nube 198 Arco Yris 199 Rayo 200 Ayre 201 Viento 202 Ventilar 203 Turbonada 204 Vracan 205 Vapor 206 Lluvia 207 Rocío 208 Granizo 209 Trueno

Acuilla Mana-alli Vpa Yachaipac Zumac Ñaupiyoc Rumpu Muyu Ccororumpa Manallasac Llasac Anac Cinchi Hiuicac Llañu Racu Químray Vtcalla Allillamanta-puric Yurac Yana Llamca panti
Ccomer Carhua Ancas Ynti Quilla Coillur Hanac-pacha Huapci Ppuyu Ccuichi Yllapa Huaira Huaira Huairan-pucúmui Antai-cónchui Paria-cónchui [sic] Huapci Para Sulla-sulla Chicchi Ccaccaccáccai

220

international journal of american linguistics

210 Relámpago 211 Nieve 212 Frio 213 Elada 214 Yelo 215 Fuego 216 Lumbre 217 Sombra 218 Sombrio 219 Dia 220 Noche 221 Mañana 222 Tarde 223 Oriente 224 Occidente 225 Septentrion 226 Mediodia 227 Verano 228 Ynvierno 229 Otoño 230 Primavera 231 Hora 232 Semana 233 Año

[fol. 6r/1]

234 Tiempo

235 Mundo

236 Tierra

237 Agua

238 Mar

239 Rio

240 Lago

241 Olas

242 Ysla

243 Arena

244 Arcilla

245 Polvo

246 Cieno

247 Montaña

248 Rivera de rio

249

de lago

250 Colina

251 Valle

252 Profundidad

Lliulliú-ñii Ritti Chiri Caza Caza Nina Raurac-nina Llamtu Llamtusapa Púnchau Tuta Pacarin Chisi Yntip-llocsimunan Yntip-yaucunan *Septentrion *Mediodia Rúpai-mita Párai-mita Aimúrai-mita Chirau-pacha *Hora *Semana Huata
Pacha Ticsi-muyu-pacha Allpa Yacu Mama-Ccocha Mayu Ccocha Pocchin Huatta Tiu Llamca-allpa Allpa-ccosni Charan Hacha-hacha Mayu-pata Ccocha-pata Vrco Huailla-pampa Vcu-cay

quechua vocabulary (1788)

221

253 Altura

254 Anchura

255 Longitud

256 Agugero

257 Foza

258 Fozo

259 Cueva

260 Piedra

261 Oro

262 Plata

263 Cobre

264 Hierro

265 Estaño

266 Plomo

267 Sal

268 Cal

269 Veneno

270 Marabilla

271 Verdura

272 Yerba

273 Arbol silvestre

274

fructífero

275 Leña

276 Bosque

[fol. 6r/2]

277 Palo 278 Raiz 279 Tronco 280 Corteza 281 Rama 282 Oja 283 Flor 284 Fruto 285 Semilla 286 Baya (fruta) 287 Cebolla 288 Nuez 289 Manzana 290 Encina 291 Viña 292 Llanura 293 Campo 294 Sembrar 295 Trigo (en general)

Hahuannin Quinrainin Zùni-cainin Vttcu Ppuc-ru Ppuc-ru Máchcai [sic] Rumi Cori Collqui Puca-anta Quíllai Chayanta Titi Cachi Yzcu Miu Vttichic Muya-yuyu Yuyu Hacha Mallqui Yamtta Hacha-hacha
Cullu Zapi Hachap-chaquin Cara Caclla Rapi Siza Mallquip-rurun Muhu *Vaya *Ceuolla *Nuez *Manzana *Encina *Vuas-mallqui Pampa Pampa Tárpui *Trigo

222

international journal of american linguistics

296 Trigo escogido 297 Avena 298 Abena 299 Cebada 300 Guisantes 301 Animal 302 Pescado 303 Ballena 304 Cangrejo 305 Serpiente 306 Rana 307 Gusano 308 Mosca 309 Mosquito 310 Hormiga 311 Araña 312 Abeja 313 Miel 314 Buey 315 Baca 316 Ternera 317 Oveja 318 Carnero 319 Cabra 320 Cuerno 321 Caballo
[fol. 6v/1]
322 Camello 323 Asno 324 Cerdo
A este animal deduciendole el nombre du su gruñido, llaman 325 Perro 326 Gato del mismo modo deducen el nombre de esta bestia, y le llaman 327 Leon 328 Oso 329 Lobo 330 Zorra 331 Liebre 332 Raton 333 Gallina A esta ave, que no conocieron, sino despues de

*Acllasca-trigo *Auena *Abena *Ceuada *Guisantes Llama Challhua Vallena [no tiene *] Apaucórai [sic] Amaru Ccaira Ccuru Chuspi Huanhua Sisi Vru Huanccoiru Mizqui *Buey *Vaca *Ternera *Ouija *Carniro *Cap-ra Huacc-ra *Cauallo
*Camillo *Asno
Ccuchi Allco
Mizitu Puma Vcumari *Lobo Attocc *Liebre Hucucha

quechua vocabulary (1788)

223

la venida de los españoles, no pudieron darle nombre en su idioma. Pero hallando cierta proporcion entre el tono que hace el canto del gallo, y el nombre del Ynca Atahuallpa, la acomodaron este nombre, y asi le llaman 334 Gallo 335 Ganzo 336 Pato

[fol. 6v/2]

337 Pichon

338 Aguila

339 Cuervo

340 Codorniz

341 Páxaro

342 Gorrion

343 Golondrina

344 Pluma corta

345

larga

346 Huevo

347 Nido

348 Pastor

349 Arar

350 Arado

351 Carreta

352 Rastrillo

353 Cosecha

354 Límite

355 Casa

356 Chosa

357 Tienda

358 Puerta

359 Hogar

360 Piso

361 Ciudad

362 Villa

363 Seguir

364 Medida

365 Cuchillo

366 Caldero

367 Meza

368 Banco

369 Cuba

Atahuallpa Vrco-atahuallpa *Ganzo Ñuñuma
Chuchi Ahuancana Suyùntui *Codorniz Pizccu Paucarccori Yanacallhua Ppuru Patpa Runtu Qqueza Michi Yápui Yapuna *Carreta Pacpana Cállcai-pacha Caillan Huaci Chuclla Ccarpa Puncu Concha Allpa Ccapac-llacta Llacta Cátii Tupu Cuchuna Quellai-manca *Mesa Tiyana *Cuba

224

international journal of american linguistics

370 Navio 371 Esquife 372 Coche 373 Acarrear 374 Yr en coche
Se puede decir en esta lengua, por esta oracion: ser llevado en coche 375 Construir
[fol. 7r/1]
376 Vestido 377 Pelliza 378 Media 379 Zapato 380 Gorro 381 Faxa 382 Seda 383 Lana 384 Algodon 385 Lino 386 Comida 387 Crudo 388 Cocer 389 Cerveza 390 Vino 391 Azeyte 392 Manteca 393 Pan 394 Dinero 395 Ladron 396 Guerra 397 Soldado 398 Contienda 399 Bateria 400 Arnez 401 Casco 402 Escudo 403 Lanza 404 Miseria 405 Victoria 406 Amigo 407 Enemigo 408 Señor 409 Siervo cautivo en guerra

Marca-huampu Huampu *Coche Astai
Cochepi rampasca cai Pírcai
Ppacha Cara-ppacha *Media Vsutta Chucu Chumpi *Seda Millhua Vttcu *Lino Mícui Hanccu Huaícui Acca *Vino *Azeyte Vira Ttanta *Dinero Zua Auccanácui Cinchi-runa Auccanácui *Batéria *Árnez *Casco Pullcanca Chuqui Vsuc-cai Atírcui Ccochomazi Aucca Apu Piñas

quechua vocabulary (1788)

225

410

comprado

411 Príncipe

412 Rey

413 Guardia

414 Ley

415 Yugo

416 Leer

417 Escribir

[fol. 7r/2]

418 Principio

419 Fin

420 Sí

421 No

negando

422

prohibiendo

423 Ahora

424 Antes

425 Despues

426 Cerca

427 Lexos

428 Aquí

429 Allà

430 Ayer

431 Oy

432 Mañana

433 Hè aquí

434 O (particula disyuntiva)

435 Como

436 Donde

437 Quando

438 Què

439 Quien

440 Con quien

441 Con què

442 Baxo

443 Sobre

444 Sin

445 En

446 Numero

447 Vno

448 Dos

449 Tres

450 Quatro

451 Cinco

452 Seis

Rantisca-runa Ccapac Apup Churin Zápai-Apu Chapatiyac Camachicusca simi *Yugo Quellcacta rícui Quéllcai
Callarícui Ppuchúcai Y . . . Ari Manam Ama Cunam Ñaupa Caimanta Cailla Caru Caipi Chaiman Caina punchau Cunan punchau Ccaya punchau Caimi Cairi Hinam Maipin Maipachan Yma Pim Pihuan Ymahuan Vcupi Hahuapi Nac Pi Haicaccai Huc Yscai Quimza Tahua Pichca Socta

226

international journal of american linguistics

453 Siete 454 Ocho 455 Nueve 456 Dies 457 Onze 458 Veinte 459 Treinta 460 Ciento 461 Mil

Canchis Pusac Yscon Chunca Chunca-hucniyoc Yscai-chunca Quimza-chunca Pachacc Huaranca

APPENDIX F The Vocabulary Ordered Alphabetically

Quechua Acca Acii Acuilla Ahuancana Aicha Aimúrai-mita Allco Alli Allilla-cainiyoc Allillam Allillamanta-puric Allpa Allpa Allpa-ccosni Ama Ancas Anchii Antai-cónchui Apai Apaucórai [sic] Apu Asnai
Astai Atahuallpa Atípai Atípai Atírcui Attocc Aucca

Spanish Cerveza Reir Malvado Aguila Carne Otoño Perro Bueno Sano Bien (adverbio) Lento Piso Tierra Polvo No (prohibiendo) Azul Suspirar Turbonada Llevar à cuestas Cangrejo Señor Oler (despedir
olor) Acarrear Gallina Facultad Poder Victoria Zorra Enemigo

Quechua Auccanácui Auccanácui Ayllomacicuna
Cachi Caclla Cailla Caimi Caina punchau Caipi Cairi Callarícui Cállcai-pacha Callpa Cam Camachicusca
simi Camquichic Can Can, ò Cancu Canchic, ò Caicu Canchis Cani Canqui Canquichic Cara Cara-ppacha Carcan Carhua Caru

Spanish Contienda Guerra Familia
(parientes) Sal Rama Cerca Hè aquí Ayer Aquí O Principio Cosecha Fuerza Tu Ley
Vosotros El es Aquellos son Nosotros somos Siete Yo soy Tu eres Vosotros sois Corteza Pelliza Fuè Amarillo Lexos

quechua vocabulary (1788)

227

Quechua Casco Cátii Cáuzai Cáuzai Caza Caza Ccaccaccáccai Ccacclla Ccaira Ccallu Ccapac Apup
Churin Ccapac-llacta Ccaqui Ccari Ccarpa Ccaya punchau Ccocha Ccocha-pata Ccochomazi Ccomer Ccoñic Ccororumpa Ccuchi Ccuichi Ccuncca Ccuncca Ccuncca Ccuru Cenca Cenca-cuna Chàcai Chaicuna Chaiman Challhua Chapatiyac Chaqui Charan Chayanta Chayaqquen-simi Chicchi Chirau-pacha Chiri Chisi Chuccha

Spanish Pecho Seguir Vida Vivir Elada Yelo Trueno Mexillas Rana Lengua Príncipe
Ciudad Barba (rostro) Hombre Tienda Mañana Lago Rivera (de lago) Amigo Verde Caliente Bola Cerdo Arco Yris Cuello Garganta Voz Gusano Nariz Narices Aquel Aquellos Allà Pescado Guardia Pie Cieno Estaño Razonamiento Granizo Primavera Frio Tarde Cabellos

Quechua

Spanish

Chuchi

Pichon

Chuchuch

Codo

Chuclla

Chosa

Chucu

Gorro

Chunca

Dies

Chunca-hucniyoc Onze

Chuqui

Lanza

Churi

Hijo

Chuspi

Mosca

Cinchi

Fuerte

Cinchi-runa

Soldado

Cip-ri

Labio superior

Cirícui

Echarse

Cochepi rampasca ser llevado en

cai

coche

Coi

Dà (dà tu)

Coi

Dar

Coillur

Estrella

Collqui

Plata

Collquiyoc cani Tener

Concha

Hogar

Concor

Rodilla

Cori

Oro

Coza

Marido

Cozayácui

Matrimonio

(varon)

Cúchui

Cortar

Cuchuna

Cuchillo

Cullu

Palo

Cunam

Ahora

Cunan punchau Oy

Cusícui

Gozo

Cusicuillam

Gozoso

Cusiyoc

Dichoso

Cúyui

Temblar

Hacha

Arbol (silvestre)

Hacha-hacha

Bosque

Hacha-hacha

Montaña

Hachap-chaquin Tronco

Huhuannin

Altura

Hahuapi

Sobre

Haicaccai

Numero

Hanac-pacha

Cielo

Hanccu

Crudo

Haniaíllii

Bostezar

228

international journal of american linguistics

Quechua Hapllaicáchai Hatallii Hatun Hatun-ccuncca Hichay Hinam Hiuicac Huáccai Huáccai Huaccainin Huacc-ra Huáchai Huaci Huaícui Huailla-pampa Huaina Huaira Huaira Huairacáchai Huairanpucúmui Huampu Huanccoiru Huanhua Huántui Huáñui Huáñui Huapci Huapci Huaranca Huarma Huarmiyácui
Huasa Huata Huatta Huayna Huc Húchui Hucucha Huichichíchii Huma Llacta Llama Llamca panti

Spanish Gritar Tomar Grande Grito Verter Como Endeble Llorar Ruido Ahullido Cuerno Parir Casa Cocer Valle Joven Ayre Viento Correr Ventilar Esquife Abeja Mosquito Llevar en andas Morir Muerte Niebla Vapor Mil Niño Matrimonio
(mujer) Espalda Año Ysla Mozo Vno Pequeño Raton Silvar Cabeza Villa Animal Encarnado

Quechua

Spanish

Llamca-allpa

Arcilla

Llamcana

Tacto

Llamtu

Sombra

Llamtusapa

Sombrio

Llañu

Delgado

Llaquícui

Tristeza

Llasac

Pesado

Lliulliú-ñii

Relámpago

Maccai (Golpear) Sacudir

Máchcai [sic]

Cueva

Machu

Viejo

Maipachan

Quando

Maipin

Donde

Mallina

Gusto

Mallqui

Arbol (fructífero)

Mallquip-rurun Fruto

Mama

Madre

Mama-Ccocha Mar

Mana-alli

Mal

Manallasac

Ligero

Manam

No (negando)

Manam ccarip Doncella

recsiscan huarmi

Maqui

Brazo

Maqui

Mano

Marca-huampu Navio

Márcai

llevar en brazos

Matti

Frente

Mayu

Rio

Mayu-pata

Rivera (de rio)

Michi

Pastor

Mícui

Comer

Mícui

Comida

Micun

Aquel come

Micuni

Yo como

Micunqui

Tu comes

Millhua

Lana

Miu

Veneno

Mizitu

Gato

Mizqui

Miel

Muhu

Semilla

Múnai

Amar

Múnai

Amor

Mutquii

Oler (sentido)

SHORT

quechua vocabulary (1788)

229

Quechua Mutquina Muya-yuyu Muyu Nac Nacarcárii Nanácui Nina Ñacarícui Ñaui Ñaupa Ñaupiyoc Ñoca Ñocaicu Ñocanchic Ñuñu Ñuñuma Pácai Pacarin Pacha Pachacc Pacpana Pahuarícui Pampa Pampa Pana Para Párai-mita Paria-cónchui [sic] Patpa Paucarccori Pi Pichca Pihuan Pim Piñas
Pírcai Pizccu Pocchin Ppacha Ppuc-ru Ppuc-ru Ppuchúcai Ppuru

Spanish Olfato Verdura Círculo Sin Desgarrar Dolor Fuego Trabaxo Ojo Antes Agudo Yo Nosotros Nosotros Leche Pato Ocultar Mañana Tiempo Ciento Rastrillo Saltar Campo Llanura Hermana Lluvia Ynvierno Vracan Pluma (larga) Gorrion En Cinco Con quien Quien Siervo (cautivo
en guerra) Construir Páxaro Olas Vestido Foza Fozo Fin Pluma (corta)

Quechua Ppuyu Puca-anta Pullcanca Puma Púnchau Puncu Púñui Puñunáyai
Purii Pusac Putiimánai Qquellacuc Qquesip-ra Qqueza Quellai-manca Quellcacta rícui Quéllcai Quilla Quíllai Químray Quimza Quimza-chunca Quinrainin Quiru Racu Rantisca-runa
Rapi Raurac-nina Ric-ra Ricui Ricuna Rii Rii Rimai Rinri Rinri Ritti Ruccana Rumi Rumpu Runa Runa-runa

Spanish Nube Cobre Escudo Leon Dia Puerta Dormir Sueño (gana de
dormir) Véte Ocho Pena Perezoso Cejas Nido Caldero Leer Escribir Luna Hierro Ancho Tres Treinta Anchura Diente Grueso Siervo
(comprado) Oja Lumbre Hombro Ver Vista Vé (tu) Yr Hablar Oido (oreja) Oreja Nieve Dedos Piedra Redondo Hombre Gentes

230

international journal of american linguistics

Quechua Runtu Rupac Rúpai-mita Sayácui Sáyai Sillu Simi Simi Sisi Siza Socta Sonco Sulla-sulla Sutti Suyùntui Tahua Táquii Tárpui Ticsi-muyu-pacha Titi Tiu Tiyana Ttanta Tullu Tupu Túsui Tuta Vauque Vcu Vcu-cay Vcumari Vcupi Vicza Vinayacui Vira Virpa Vischuicúpui Vpa Vpiai Vra Vrco Vrco-atahuallpa Vru

Spanish Huevo Ardiente Verano Pára (tu) Estatura Uñas Boca Palabra Hormiga Flor Seis Corazon Rocío Nombre Cuervo Quatro Cantar Sembrar Mundo Plomo Arena Banco Pan Hueso Medida Baylar Noche Hermano Cuerpo Profundidad Oso Baxo Vientre Nutrir Manteca Labio inferior Echar Estulto Beber Baxo Colina Gallo Araña

Quechua

Spanish

Vsuc-cai

Miseria

Vsusi

Hija

Vsutta

Zapato

Vtcalla

Presto

Vttcu

Agugero

Vttcu

Algodon

Vttichic

Marabilla

Vuauua

Hija

Vuauua

Hijo

Vya

Cara

Vyarina

Oido (sentido)

Y . . . Ari

Sí

Yachaipac

Capaz

Yacu

Agua

Yahuar

Sangre

Ymahuan

Con què

Yamtta

Leña

Yana

Negro

Yanacallhua

Golondrina

Yanacuna

Familia (criados)

Yápui

Arar

Yapuna

Arado

Yaya

Padre

Ycma

Viuda

Yllapa

Rayo

Yma

Què

Ynti

Sol

Yntip-llocsimunan Oriente

Yntip-yaucunan Occidente

Yscai

Dos

Yscai-chunca

Veinte

Yscon

Nueve

Yurac

Blanco

Yuyu

Yerba

Yzcu

Cal

Zap-ra

Pestañas

Zápai-Apu

Rey

Zapi

Raiz

Zua

Ladron

Zumac

Hermoso

Zuncca

Barba (pelo)

Zuni

Alto

Zùni-cainin

Longitud

quechua vocabulary (1788)

231

Spanish loanwords:

*Árnez *Abena *Acllasca-trigo *Alma *Asno *Auena *Azeyte *Batéria *Buey *Camillo *Cap-ra *Carniro *Carreta *Casco *Cauallo *Ceuada *Ceuolla *Coche *Codorniz *Cuba *Dinero Dios *Encina *Espíritu

Arnez Abena Trigo escogido Alma Asno Avena Azeyte Bateria Buey Camello Cabra Carnero Carreta Casco Caballo Cebada Cebolla Coche Codorniz Cuba Dinero Dios Encina Espíritu

*Ganzo *Guisantes *Hora *Liebre *Lino *Lobo *Manzana *Media *Mediodia *Mesa *Nuez *Nupcia-cuna *Ouija *Seda *Semana *Septentrion *Ternera *Trigo *Vaca Vallena *Vaya *Vino *Vuas-mallqui *Yugo

Ganzo Guisantes Hora Liebre Lino Lobo Manzana Media Mediodia Meza Nuez Nupcias Oveja Seda Semana Septentrion Ternera Trigo (en general) Baca Ballena Baya (fruta) Vino Viña Yugo

REFERENCES
Adelaar, Willem F. H., and Pieter Muysken. 2004. The Languages of the Andes. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Adelung, Friedrich von. 1976. Catherinens der Großen Verdienste um die vergleichende Sprachenkunde [1815]. Nachdruck der Ausgabe von 1815 mit einer Einleitung und einem bio-bibliographischen Register von Harald Haarmann. Hamburg: Helmut Buske Verlag.
Archivo General de Indias, Seville (AGI). 1769. Nos Don Francisco Antonio Lorenzana, Arzobispo de Mexico . . . 6/10/1769. Indiferente 1312. Ms. . 1787–92. Mapas y Planos, Escritura y Cifra, no. 35–45. [Language materials and correspondence about it.] Ms. . 1788–89. Carta del Virrey del Perú; Lista de libros; Excelentísimo Señor . . . [letter and vocabulary by José Joaquín Ávalos Chauca]. From: Indiferente General 1342, Doc. 14; ﬁled with Mapas y Planos, Escritura y Cifra, no. 40. Ms. . 1694–1835. Indiferentes 513, 533, 535, 545, 546, 1625, 1626. Ms.
Ávalos Chauca, José Joaquín. 1788. See Archivo General de Indias, Sevilla. 1788–1789. Campbell, Lyle. 1997. American Indian Languages: The Historical Linguistics of Native
America. Oxford Studies in Anthropological Linguistics 4. New York: Oxford University Press.

232

international journal of american linguistics

Clément, Jean-Pierre. 1993. Les créoles et le débat sur le quechua au XVIIIème siècle. Langues et Cultures en Amérique Espagnole Coloniale, Colloque International, Université de la Sorbonne Nouvelle, Paris III, 22–23 novembre 1991, Hommage à André Saint-Lu, ed. Marie Cécile Bénassy-Berling, Jean-Pierre Clément, and Alain Milhou, pp. 119–32. Publications du Centre de Recherche Interuniversitaire sur l’Amérique Espagnole Coloniale. [Paris]: Presses de la Sorbonne Nouvelle.
Colegio de Caciques. 1923. Constituciones del Colegio de los Caciques que por orden de su magestad ha fundado en el Cercado de Santiago de esta Ciudad de los Reyes, el Excmo. Señor Dn. Francisco de Borja, Príncipe de Esquilache, Virrey de estos reynos del Perú. Inca, vol. 1, no. 4:793–883. Lima.
Cusihuamán G., Antonio. 1976. Gramática Quechua Cuzco–Collao. Lima: Ministerio de Educación and Instituto de Estudios Peruanos.
Dedenbach-Salazar Sáenz, Sabine, ed. 1993. Una Gramática Colonial del Quichua del Ecuador: Transcripción e interpretación de un manuscrito del Archivo Histórico Nacional de Colombia. [18th century]. Bonner Amerikanistische Studien/Estudios Americanistas de Bonn 20; Institute of Amerindian Studies Occasional Papers 25. Bonn and St. Andrews. . Forthcoming. Dictionaries, vocabularies, and grammars of Andean indigenous languages. Historiographic Guide to Andean Sources, ed. Joanne Pillsbury. Washington, D.C.: Center for Advanced Study in the Visual Arts, National Gallery of Art.
Dedenbach-Salazar Sáenz, Sabine, and Lindsey Crickmay, eds. 1999. La Lengua de la Cristianización en Latinoamérica: Catequización e Instrucción en Lenguas Amerindias/The Language of Christianisation in Latin America: Catechisation and Instruction in Amerindian Languages. Bonner Amerikanistische Studien/Estudios Americanistas de Bonn/Bonn Americanist Studies 32; Centre for Indigenous American Studies and Exchange, St. Andrews, Occasional Papers 29. Markt Schwaben: Saurwein.
Dedenbach-Salazar Sáenz, Sabine; Utta von Gleich; Roswith Hartmann; Peter
Masson; and Clodoaldo Soto Ruiz. 2002. “Rimaykullayki”—Unterrichtsmaterialien zum Quechua Ayacuchano. Berlin: Reimer [1985]. Diccionario de Autoridades. 1976. Diccionario de la Lengua Castellana . . . por la Real Academia Española [1726–37]. Biblioteca Rómanica Hispánica, 5. Diccionarios, 3. (Facsimile, 3 vols.) Madrid: Gredos. Doctrina Christiana. 1985. Doctrina Christiana y Catecismo para Instrvccion de Indios . . . [y] Tercero Cathecismo . . . [Ciudad de los Reyes (Lima): Antonio Ricardo 1584/85]. Corpus Hispanorum de Pace, vol. 26–2. (Facsimile.) Madrid: Consejo Superior de Investigaciones Cientíﬁcas. Entrada y misión a los Andes de Jauja en 1602. 1965. Ed. Marcos Jiménez de la Espada, Relaciones Geográﬁcas de Indias, vol. 3, pp. 257–75. Biblioteca de Autores Españoles 185. Madrid: Atlas. Epp, George K. 1984. The Educational Policies of Catherine II. European University Studies. Frankfurt/Main: Peter Lang. Fajnstein, M. S. 1990. Istorija odnoj kollekcii. Latinskaja Amerika, 1990, no. 12:127–31. Moscow. González Holguín, Diego. 1975. Gramática y Arte Nveva de la Lengva General de todo el Perú, llamada Lengua Qquichua, o Lengua del Inca. [Ciudad de los Reyes (Lima) 1607]. (Facsimile.) Vaduz-Georgetown: Cabildo.
. 1989. Vocabvlario de la Lengva General de todo el Perú llamada Lengua Qquichua o del Inca. [Ciudad de los Reyes (Lima) 1608]. Prólogo Raúl Porras Barrenechea, Presentación Ramiro Matos Mendieta. Universidad Nacional Mayor de San Marcos. (Facsimile of 1952 edition, includes addenda.) Lima: Editorial de la Universidad.

quechua vocabulary (1788)

233

Gulya, Janos. 1974. Some eighteenth century antecedents of nineteenth century linguistics: The discovery of Finno-Ugrian. Studies in the History of Linguistics, Traditions and Paradigms, ed. Dell Hymes, pp. 259–76. Bloomington: Indiana University Press.
Haarmann, Harald. 1976. Einleitende Vorbemerkungen; Bio-bibliographisches Register. [In Adelung 1976:[ii–xiii].]
Hardman, Martha. 1978. Jaqi: The linguistic family. IJAL 44:146–53. Herrero Mediavilla, Victor, and L. Rosa Aguayo Nayle. 1986. Archivo Biográﬁco de
España, Portugal e Iberoamérica. [Catalog and microﬁches.] Munich: K. G. Saur. Hervás, Lorenzo. 1778–87. Idea dell’Universo che Contiene la Storia della Vita dell’Uomo,
Viaggio Estatico al Mondo Planetario, e Storia della Terra e delle Lingue. 22 vols. Cesena: Gregorio Biasini. Hoggarth, Leslie. 2004. Contributions to Cuzco Quechua Grammar. Bonner Amerikanistische Studien/Bonn Americanist Studies/Estudios Americanistas de Bonn BAS 41. CD-ROM. Aachen: Shaker. Husson, Jean-Philippe. 1985. La Poésie Quechua dans la Chronique de Felipe Waman Puma de Ayala. De l’art lyrique de cour aux chants et danses populaires. Série Ethnolinguistique Amérindienne. Paris: L’Harmattan. Itier, César, ed. 1995. Del Siglo de Oro al Siglo de las Luces. Lenguaje y sociedad en los Andes del siglo XVIII. Estudios y Debates Regionales Andinos 89. Cuzco: Centro de Estudios Regionales Andinos “Bartolomé de la Casas.” Kaltz, Barbara. 2005. »Deutsche gründliche Kritik«—Christian Jacob Kraus zu Pallas’ Vergleichendem Glossarium aller Sprachen. Sprache und Sprachen in Berlin um 1800, ed. Ute Tintemann and Jürgen Trabant. http://www.berliner-klassik.de/online_pub/texte. php?ﬁle=texte/10kaltztxt.html#fn4. [Published under the same title as the volume that contains the proceedings of the conference “Berliner Klassik: Eine Großstadtkultur um 1800.” Berliner Klassik, vol. 3, Berlin, 2005.] Klein, Harriet E. Manelis, and Herbert S. Klein. 1978. The “Russian Collection” of Amerindian languages in Spanish archives. IJAL 44:137– 44. Konetzke, Richard. 1964. Die Bedeutung der Sprachenfrage in der spanischen Kolonisation Amerikas. Jahrbuch für Geschichte von Staat, Wirtschaft und Gesellschaft Lateinamerikas 1:72–116. Cologne. Lapesa, Rafael. 1985. Historia de la Lengua Española. Biblioteca Románica Hispánica III. Manuales, 45. Novena edición corregida y aumentada. Madrid: Gredos. Lauch, Annelies. 1969. Wissenschaft und kulturelle Beziehungen in der russischen Aufklärung. Zum Wirken H. L. Ch. Bacmeisters. Deutsche Akademie der Wissenschaften zu Berlin, Veröffentlichungen des Instituts für Slawistik, no. 51. Berlin: Akademie-Verlag. Lira, Jorge A. ca. 1967. Breve Diccionario Kkechuwa–Español. Edición popular. Cuzco: Librería León. Lisi, Francesco Leonardo. 1990. El Tercer Concilio Limense y la Aculturación de los Indígenas Sudamericanos. Acta Salmanticensia, Estudios Filológicos 233. Salamanca: Universidad de Salamanca. Llano Zapata, José Eusebio de. 1904. Memorias Histórico–físicas–apologéticas de la América Meridional que a la Majestad del Señor Carlos III dedica don José Eusebio de Llano Zapata [Reino mineral] [ca. 1761]. Lima: Imprenta y Librería de San Pedro. Mannheim, Bruce. 1991. The Language of the Inka since the European Invasion. Austin: Texas University Press. Martín, Luis. 1973. Indian education in colonial Peru. The Indian Historian, n.s., 6/3:44– 47. San Francisco.

234

international journal of american linguistics

Martín, Luis, and Jo Ann Guerin Pettus. 1973. Scholars and Schools in Colonial Peru. Dallas: Southern Methodist University.
Matos, José. 1956. Yauyos, Tupe y el idioma kauke. Revista del Museo Nacional 25:148–83. Lima.
Meneses Morales, Teodoro. 1982. Cuatricentenario de la cátedra de quechua en San Marcos. Aula quechua, ed. Rodolfo Cerrón-Palomino, pp. 237–46. Signa Universitario 2. Lima: Ediciones Signo.
Middendorf, Ernst W. 1890. Wörterbuch des Runa Simi oder der Keshua-Sprache. Die einheimischen Sprachen Perus, 2. Band. Leipzig: Brockhaus.
Morales Moya, Antonio. 1998. El estado de la ilustración, la guerra de la independencia y las cortes de Cádiz: la constitución de 1812. Historia de España Menéndez Pidal, vol. 30: Las Bases Políticas, Económicas y Sociales de un Régimen en Transformación (1759– 1834), ed. Antonio Morales Moya, pp. 69–232. Madrid: Espasa Calpe.
Muro Orejón, Antonio. 1957–58. Los libros registros-cedularios del Consejo de Indias. Anales de la Universidad Hispalense 18:9–21. Seville.
Nieto Polo del Águila, Tomás. 1927. Breve Instrucción, o Arte para Entender la Lengua Común de los Indios, según se Habla en la Provincia de Quito [Lima: Imprenta de la Plazuela de San Christoval 1753]. (Facsimile.) Paris: Adrien-Maissoneuve.
Pallas, Peter Simon. 1786–89. Linguarum Totius Orbis Vocabularia Comparativa. 2 vols. Petropoli.
Parker, Gary J. 1969. Ayacucho Quechua Grammar and Dictionary. Janua Linguarum, Series Practica, vol. 82. The Hague: Mouton.
Parker, Gary J., and Amancio Chávez. 1976. Diccionario Quechua Ancash–Huailas. Lima: Instituto de Estudios Peruanos and Ministerio de Educación.
Rivet, Paul, and Georges de Créqui-Montfort. 1951–56. Bibliographie des Langues Aymará et Kicua (1540–1956). 4 vols. Travaux et Mémoires de l’Institut d’Ethnologie 51. Paris: Université de Paris.
Romero, Luis Francisco. 1999. Catechismo para los yndios en lengua [1725], in: Roswith Hartmann: El obispo de Quito Luis Francisco Romero y el catecismo quichua de 1725, pp. 76–82. [In Dedenbach-Salazar Sáenz and Crickmay 1999:61–87.]
Solá, Donald F. 1967. The Structure of Cuzco Quechua. Quechua Language Materials Project. Ithaca, N.Y.: Cornell University.
Solano, Francisco de, ed. 1991. Documentos sobre Política Lingüística en Hispanoamérica 1492–1800. Colección Tierra Nueva e Cielo Nuevo 32. Madrid: Consejo Superior de Investigaciones Cientíﬁcas.
Stiglich, Germán. 1922. Diccionario Geográﬁco del Perú. Lima: Imp. Torres Aguirre. Tercero Catecismo. 1773. Tercero Catecismo, y Exposicion de la Doctrina Christiana por
Sermones . . . conforme a lo que se proveyò en el Santo Concilio Provincial de Lima el año pasado de 1583. Mandado reimprimir por el Concilio Provincial del año de 1773. Lima: En la oﬁcina de la calle de San Jacinto. Torero, Alfredo. 1970. Lingüística e historia de la sociedad andina. Anales Cientíﬁcos de la Universidad Nacional Agraria, La Molina, vol. 8, nos. 3– 4:231–64. Lima. [Also in Lingüística e Indigenismo Moderno de América. Trabajos presentados al XXXIX Congreso Internacional de Americanistas, Lima 1970, vol. 5, ed. Rosalía Ávalos de Matos and Rogger Ravines, pp. 221–59. Lima: Instituto de Estudios Paruanos, 1975.]
. 1998. El marco histórico–geográﬁco en la interacción quechua-aru. 50 Años de Estudios Americanistas en la Universidad de Bonn/50 Years Americanist Studies at the University of Bonn, ed. Sabine Dedenbach-Salazar Sáenz et al., pp. 601–30. Bonner Amerikanistische Studien/Estudios Americanistas de Bonn/Bonn Americanist Studies 30. Markt Schwaben: Saurwein.

quechua vocabulary (1788)

235

Torres Rubio, Diego de. 1619. Arte de la Lengva Qvichva. Lima: Francisco Lasso. Torres Rubio, Diego de, and Juan de Figueredo. 1700. Arte de la Lengua Quichua. Nve-
vamente van añadidos los romances, el cathecismo pequeño, todas las oraciones, los días de ﬁesta, y ayunos de los Indios, el vocabulario añadido, y otro vocabulario de la lengua Chinchaisuyo. Lima: Joseph de Contreras. Torres Rubio, Diego de; Juan de Figueredo; and Anonymous Jesuit. 1754. Arte, y Vocabulario de la Lengua Quichua General de los Indios de el Perú. Que compuso el Padre Diego de Torres Rubio de la Compañia de Jesvs, y añadido el P. Juan de Figueredo de la misma Compañia. Ahora nuevamente corregido, y aumentado en muchos vocablos, y varias advertencias, notas, y observaciones, para le mejor inteligencia del ydioma, y perfecta instrucion da [sic] los parochos, y cathequistas de Indios. Por vn religioso de la misma Compañia. Lima: Imprenta de la Plazuela de San Christoval. Tovar, Antonio, and Consuelo Larrucea de Tovar. 1984. Catálogo de las Lenguas de América del Sur con Clasiﬁcaciones, Indicaciones Tipológicas, Bibliografía y Mapas. Nueva edición refundida. Madrid: Gredos. Vargas Ugarte, Rubén. 1951. Concilios Limenses (1551–1772). Vol. 1. Lima: Peruana. Velasco, Juan de. 1964. Vocabulario de la Lengua Índica [ca. 1788]. Introducción: Oswaldo Romero Arteta; versión paleográﬁca, notas y comentarios de Piedad Peñaherrera de Costales y Alfredo Costales Samaniego. Llacta, año VI, vol. 20. Quito: Instituto Ecuatoriano de Antropología y Geografía y Biblioteca Ecuatoriana “Aurelio Espinosa Pólit.” Vocabulario Políglota Incaico. 1905. . . . Cuzco, Ayacucho, Junín, Ancash y Aymara. Compuesto por algunos religiosos franciscanos misioneros. . . . Lima: Tipografía del Colegio de la Propaganda Fide del Perú. Wood, Robert D. 1986. “Teach Them Good Customs”: Colonial Indian Education and Acculturation in the Andes. Culver City, Calif.: Labyrinthos. Yankievich de Mirievo, Theodor. 1790–91. Sravnitel;nyj slovar; vs®x= qzyko= i nar®hπj, po azbånomå porqdkå raspolo’ennyj. 4 parts in 2 volumes. St. Petersburg. [Cf. http://copac.ac.uk/: “Sravnitelnyï slovar vsiekh iazykov i nariechï ï, po azbuchnomu poriadya raspolozhennyï. An alphabetical arrangement, by T. Yankievich de Mirievo, of the “Linguarum totius orbis vocabularia comparativa” of P. S. Pallas.”]

