Nominal Classification in Uitoto Author(s): Gabriele Petersen de Piñeros Source: International Journal of American Linguistics, Vol. 73, No. 4, This issue edited by Frank Seifart and Doris L. Payne. (October 2007), pp. 389-409 Published by: The University of Chicago Press Stable URL: http://www.jstor.org/stable/10.1086/523771 . Accessed: 27/04/2013 17:25 Your use of the JSTOR archive indicates your acceptance of the Terms & Conditions of Use, available at . http://www.jstor.org/page/info/about/policies/terms.jsp . JSTOR is a not-for-profit service that helps scholars, researchers, and students discover, use, and build upon a wide range of content in a trusted digital archive. We use information technology and tools to increase productivity and facilitate new forms of scholarship. For more information about JSTOR, please contact support@jstor.org. .
The University of Chicago Press is collaborating with JSTOR to digitize, preserve and extend access to International Journal of American Linguistics.
http://www.jstor.org
This content downloaded from 86.95.52.226 on Sat, 27 Apr 2013 17:25:24 PM All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

NOMINAL CLASSIFICATION IN UITOTO1
Gabriele Petersen de Piñeros
Universidad Nacional de Colombia
This paper contributes to the discussion of Amazonian systems of nominal classiﬁcation by providing the ﬁrst description of the system of Uitoto, spoken in the Colombian Amazon. Two gender markers and a set of more than 100 classiﬁers, most of them denoting physical properties, are described with respect to their distribution and eventual patterns of agreement, their degree of grammaticalization, and their discursive function. Special attention is given to the relation between classiﬁers and nouns and to the formation of pro-forms with classiﬁers, stressing the importance of classiﬁers in the lexical genesis of the language.
[Keywords: nominal classiﬁcation, gender, compounding, grammaticalization, nominalization, incorporation]
1. Introduction. This paper responds to the growing interest in nominal classiﬁcation systems in general and especially the interest that Amazonian languages have attracted in recent times. Nominal classiﬁcation in the Amazon is “an omnipresent and complex areal phenomenon” (Grinevald 2000:82) which still presents many questions with regard to the characteristics that deﬁne it. Thus, data from each and every one of these languages is important for a better understanding of the systems of nominal classiﬁcation of this region, which is important for a universal typology of nominal classiﬁcation. Here, I present the most important aspects of the nominal classiﬁcation system of the Uitoto language. My presentation focuses primarily on the morphosyntactic or formal aspects.
After an introduction to general characteristics of the language (in 2), I provide a brief description of the gender markers (3) and the classiﬁers (4). Section 5 deals with the structure of nominal words. Noun phrases and noun compounding (6 and 7), which are closely related, have structural properties that allow us to form a hypothesis about the origin of Uitoto classiﬁers. The discussion of classiﬁers in nominals derived from verbs and their incorporation into verbs (8 and 9) completes the discussion of contexts in which Uitoto classiﬁers can be used. The function of the classifying elements is touched upon here only in a tangential way.
The data used correspond to the mIka doode variety of the Uitoto language of the family of the same name (both are also sometimes spelled Witoto or
1 I would like to thank Doris Payne and Frank Seifart for their helpful comments on and discussions of this paper.
[IJAL, vol. 73, no. 4, October 2007, pp. 389–409] ç 2007 by The University of Chicago. All rights reserved. 0020–7071/2007/7304–0002$10.00
389
This content downloaded from 86.95.52.226 on Sat, 27 Apr 2013 17:25:24 PM All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

390

international journal of american linguistics

Huitoto) and are taken exclusively from the work Religión y Mitología de los Uitotos, an extensive compilation of mythic texts and songs made by the German ethnologist Konrad Theodor Preuss in 1914, from a Uitoto community in South Colombia. These data are characterized by their great uniformity in terms of the historical moment when they were produced, the sociolect, the idiolect, and the genre. The texts compiled by Preuss have been revised and translated into Spanish by me in cooperation with Eudocio Becerra (BigIdIma), a native speaker of mIka doode. During this work, Eudocio Becerra served as consultant for the grammatical analysis and provided the negative evidence discussed below.
2. General characteristics of the language. Uitoto is a polysynthetic language in which the verb stands out as the most complex type of word. The order of constituents in the clause is predominantly SOV; in the noun phrase, the modiﬁer always precedes the modiﬁed element. The two major word classes—nouns and verbs—share the property of beginning with the root (nominal or verbal) to which grammatical morphemes are sufﬁxed in a ﬁxed order. Minor word classes are the closed classes of demonstratives, quantiﬁers, and interrogatives, on one hand, and the open class of attributives, on the other hand, all of which never occur without a sufﬁxed classiﬁer or a sufﬁxed bound nominal lexeme. There are two basic forms of verbal predicates: ﬁnite and nonﬁnite. The ﬁrst is typically used when new information is conveyed and consists minimally of a verbal root followed by the predicate morpheme (for active and passive voice) and by the person marker (see example 1a below).2 The second is used to express known information and is characterized by the absence of the predicate morpheme (see 1b); in this case, the nonﬁnite morpheme is sufﬁxed to the verb stem and the subject is expressed by a noun phrase that precedes the nonﬁnite verb form. At the level of discourse, the whole construction, i.e., subject plus verbal predicate with nonﬁnite marker, expresses the setting, that is to say the background or situation in which the other events take place.

2 All examples are represented in orthographic transcription with the following correspondences to IPA symbols: f = /F/; j = /h/; ñ = /ˆ/; v = /b/; y = /ƒ/; z = /q/; I = /I/. Two identical vowels represent a long vowel: aa = /a:/. Abbreviations are as follows: appr approach; ana anaphoric; caus cause; cl classiﬁer; cl:gen general classiﬁer; cm continuous movement; coll collective; dem demonstrative; descr descriptive; dim diminutive; emph emphatic; exp experiential; fa fast action; fem feminine; fut future; inst instrumental; int interrogative; loc locative; man manner; masc masculine; mod mode; neg negation; nf nonﬁnite; num numeral; part partitive; pl plural; plc place; pos possession; pot potential; pp personal pronoun; pred predicative; preda predicative active voice; predp predicative passive voice; predpf predicative passive voice future; proc process; ra recent action; reas reason; rel relational; rem remove; rep repeater; s subject; sit site; sou source; str space–time–remoteness.

This content downloaded from 86.95.52.226 on Sat, 27 Apr 2013 17:25:24 PM All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

nominal classification in uitoto

391

(1a) jaai-dI-ke go-preda-1s
‘I go’
(1b) kue jaai-ya pp1s go-nf
‘my (action of ) going’
In the ﬁnite form of the verb (1a), the slot of the verbal root may be ﬁlled by a noun stem (2a), an interrogative element (2b), or an attributive stem (2c).
(2a) iyaI-ma-dI-ke chief-masc-preda-1s
‘I am (the) chief ’.
(2b) nI-fo-d-e int-mod-preda-3
‘How is it?’
(2c) jitI-rei-dI-kaI black-pos-preda-1pl
‘We are black’.
3. Gender markers. There are two gender markers in the singular: -ma masculine and -ño feminine. Gender is also expressed in the pronominal forms nai-mIe ‘he’ and nai-ñeño ‘she’. There is no gender agreement with the verb, i.e., there is not necessarily gender agreement within the sentence. Gender markers are sufﬁxed to free and bound nominal stems; their presence in the noun is not obligatory, as we shall see below. Number markers and case markers are sufﬁxed after the gender markers (sometimes with the elision of the gender marker).
In the majority of cases, the presence of a gender marker is semantically motivated: in general it designates animate referents. In the case of human referents, gender markers distinguish male from female sex (3a–3f ). In the case of animals, species that are characterized by large size, dangerousness, or voracity are assigned masculine gender (3g), while feminine gender is used in expressions referring to animals of a reduced size or a particular shape (often round) (3h). At any rate, gender markers are not used to differentiate the sex of animal species.
(3a) fekI-ma inheritance-masc
‘widower’

This content downloaded from 86.95.52.226 on Sat, 27 Apr 2013 17:25:24 PM All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

392

international journal of american linguistics

(3b) fekI-ño inheritance-fem ‘widow’
(3c) rI-a-ma eat (meat)-nf-masc ‘white man’
(3d) rI-a-ño eat (meat)-nf-fem ‘white woman’
(3e) raaI-reI-ma sit-exp-masc ‘lazy man’
(3f ) raaI-reI-ño sit-exp-fem ‘lazy woman’
(3g) jIgadI-ma tapir-masc ‘tapir’
(3h) fIkaI-ño woodpigeon-fem ‘woodpigeon’
In addition, a number of inanimate nouns also combine with gender markers (4). In many cases, the objects denoted by these nouns are associated with male and female activities or physical characteristics. It is worth noting that in the analyzed texts the cases of inanimate nouns with feminine gender markers exceed those with masculine gender markers by a proportion of approximately four to one. To date, I have found no explanation for this.
(4a) yoe-ma metal-masc ‘metal ax’
(4b) dobe-ño crush manioc-fem ‘manioc crusher’

This content downloaded from 86.95.52.226 on Sat, 27 Apr 2013 17:25:24 PM All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

nominal classification in uitoto

393

(4c) okI-ma give a name-masc
‘ritual of naming’
(4d) jore-ño image-fem
‘image, likeness’
(4e) yIko-ma clitoris-masc
‘clitoris’
(4f ) nIgora-ño fontanel-fem
‘fontanel’
4. Classiﬁers. From this point on, I call Uitoto classifying morphemes “classiﬁers,” without entering into discussion about the speciﬁc type of nominal classiﬁcation system they comprise according to proposed typologies. The classiﬁers constitute a large set of bound forms with somewhat fuzzy limits, as we shall see below. In my corpus, around 100 classiﬁers were found. They are mono- and disyllabic forms (like most free roots and other elements of the language) and can be used in different morphosyntactic contexts: sufﬁxed to free or bound nominal roots (see 5a and 5b below); sufﬁxed to the modiﬁers of nouns (i.e., demonstratives, quantiﬁers, interrogatives, attributives) (5c–5f ); sufﬁxed as nominalizers after the predicate or nonﬁnite markers in ﬁnite and inﬁnite verbal forms (5g and 5h). About 50% of the classiﬁers that occur in Preuss’s texts are also used incorporated into the verb stem (5i ). There is no evidence whether there are some classiﬁers that cannot attach to verbal roots. Number and/or case markers can follow the classiﬁers, e.g., on attributives and nouns (5j and 5k).
The distribution of gender markers and classiﬁers is not exactly the same. Both may be sufﬁxed to free or bound nominal roots and to inﬁnite verbal forms. However, gender markers have not been found sufﬁxed to the predicate marker in a process of nominalization of ﬁnite verbal forms, nor incorporated into the verb stem.
(5a) ame-na wood-cl:tree
‘tree’
(5b) jime-na chontaduro-cl:tree
‘chontaduro tree’

This content downloaded from 86.95.52.226 on Sat, 27 Apr 2013 17:25:24 PM All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

394

international journal of american linguistics

(5c) bi-na dem-cl:tree ‘this tree’
(5d) nI-na int-cl:tree ‘Which tree?’

(5e) da-na num:one-cl:tree
‘one tree’

(5f ) are-na tall-cl:tree
‘tall tree’

(5g) i-tI-na be-preda-cl:tree
‘the tree that is’

(5h) tIe-ka-na fell-predp-cl:tree
‘the fallen tree’

(5i) tIe-na-t-e fell-cl:tree-preda-3
‘he felled (a) tree’

(5j) ebe . . . are-na-IeI-mo

rii-d-e

oh . . . tall-cl:tree-pl-loc arrive-preda-3

‘Oh . . . GaimI arrived at the tall trees’.

GaimI-dI GaimI-s

(5k) i-e-mo-na

amoI-mo i-t-e

rel-cl:gen-loc-sou pp2pl-loc be-preda-3

‘Since then corn belongs to you’.

beya-jI-dI corn-cl:seed-s

The semantics of classiﬁers mainly concerns physical properties. Within this domain, the following subdomains can be distinguished, given in the order of their importance to the system: shape > size > consistency > material. The semantics of an individual classiﬁer often involves more than one of these subdomains, especially in case of disyllabic classiﬁers, e.g., -bairo ‘wide, ﬂat, and big’, e.g., omabairo ‘a wide, ﬂat, and big tail’ (size and

This content downloaded from 86.95.52.226 on Sat, 27 Apr 2013 17:25:24 PM All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

nominal classification in uitoto

395

shape); -keikI ‘bland and woolly’, e.g., komeikeikI ‘the down (part of the ﬂower) of the milpes palm’ (material and consistency). There are some indications that in the case of the disyllabic classiﬁers what we are dealing with are compound classiﬁers, at least historically, but this issue requires further research. These classiﬁers seem to be semantically more precise and speciﬁc than the monosyllabic classiﬁers, as their translation equivalences indicate. However, it is difﬁcult to judge the degree of complexity that these notions correspond to in the mind of native speakers.
In addition to the numerous classiﬁers with a determined semantic meaning, there is also a general classiﬁer or zero classiﬁer (cl:gen) -e with its allomorph -je. This classiﬁer refers to an entity that is not speciﬁed for consistency, size, or shape. It is found as a sufﬁx in mass nouns (6a) and collective nouns (6b). It also may be used to indicate an undetermined quantity in contexts where it structurally replaces another classiﬁer that would express the size and/or the shape of the referent (6c and 6d ).
(6a) nanI-e land-cl:gen
‘land’
(6b) jofu-e house-cl:gen
‘a number of houses’
(6c) rozi-yI pineapple-cl:bulbous base
‘(a) pineapple (fruit)’
(6d) rozi-e pineapple-cl:gen
‘a lot of pineapple’
The zero classiﬁer is also used as a “dummy semantic element” with the structural function of building free forms by being sufﬁxed to noun determiners and modiﬁers, such as demonstratives, quantiﬁers, interrogatives, and attributives, which are bound roots, as mentioned above (see 2). The morpheme -e sufﬁxed to these bound roots can be used for any referent, animate and inanimate, and for all nouns regardless of their morphological structure (with or without gender marker or classiﬁer). Thus, it does not mark agreement. These free forms consisting of determiner/attributive + cl:gen can perform the function of a noun modiﬁer in the noun phrase (7a– 7c). However, more frequently they are used alone as pronominal forms, to which syntactic function markers may be sufﬁxed (7d–7f ).

This content downloaded from 86.95.52.226 on Sat, 27 Apr 2013 17:25:24 PM All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

396

international journal of american linguistics

(7a) da-je

rIño da-je

IIi-ma

num:one-cl:gen woman num:one-cl:gen male-masc

‘one woman and one man’

(7b) bi-e

kInai-mo

fII-i-t-o-za

dem-cl:gen hammock-loc lie down-fut-preda-2s-emph

‘Lie down on this hammock!’

(7c) jIaI-e

fIvui-dI kIuai-d-e

other-cl:gen moon-s appear-preda-3

‘The New Moon appeared’.

(7d) ebe nI-no ii-kaI

bi-e-dI

Juziñamui

oh int-plc be+fut-1pl dem-cl:gen-s Juziñamui

dIbei-zie-za site-people-reas

‘What is going to become of us? Well, these are the people of Juziñamui’.

(7e) ebe nI-no ii-kaI oh int-plc be+fut-1pl
i-ya-no-za live-nf-plc-reas

bi-e-dI dem-cl:gen-s

Juziñamui Juziñamui

‘What is going to become of us? Well, this is the place of Juziñamui’.

(7f ) bi-e-na

eka-ye

bi-e-na

dem-cl:gen-sou feed-predpf dem-cl:gen-sou

fIrui-d-e-za delight-preda-3-reas

‘(He) will be fed with this, because he likes this’.

5. Noun structure. Morphologically, nouns can have the following possible types of structures:
(A) Monomorphemic nouns: izo ‘paternal uncle’, yoba ‘shad’, jata ‘stone ax’.
(B) Monomorphemic nouns with fused (i.e., synchronically no longer segmentable) gender markers or classiﬁers: aama ‘brother (ego masc.), rIño ‘woman’, jaio ‘snake’, jIgI ‘egg’. The second syllable of these nouns corresponds to the morphemes: masculine (-ma), feminine (-ño), cl:threadlike (-o), cl:spherical with content (-gI).
(C) Bimorphemic nouns with segmentable gender markers or classiﬁer: uzu-ma ‘grandfather’, uzu-ño ‘grandmother’, nome-do ‘avocado’

This content downloaded from 86.95.52.226 on Sat, 27 Apr 2013 17:25:24 PM All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

nominal classification in uitoto

397

(fruit), kIrI-gaI ‘basket’. The classiﬁer -do designates long and pointed objects; the classiﬁer -gaI means ‘ﬁber’ or ‘texture’.

There is grammatical evidence for the opposition between monomorphemic nouns and bimorphemic nouns: Monomorphemic nouns form the plural with -nIeI/-tIeI. Bimorphemic nouns form the plural with -IeI/-eI/-yeI.3 In addition to these three morphological types, there are a number of bound lexemes that could be considered nouns based on their ability to combine with number and case markers. Because of their distribution, they could be analyzed as classiﬁers as well, but the best analysis is probably that of a special set of nouns that are phonologically eroded from a previous state of the language in which they were free lexemes.
These borderline cases can be divided into three groups. In the ﬁrst group (see examples in 8), there are morphemes whose semantics are noun-like in that they have a unique referent, which does not correspond to the categorization of the physical interaction of the speaker with the surrounding world.

(8a) -kIno ‘news’

(8b) -ui ‘day’

(8c) -zie ‘group of people’

(8d) ebe nI-zie-mo

deno-dI-ke

dIka naaIzo-mo jIko

oh int-group-loc arrive-preda-1s since path-loc jaguar

eeI-yI-dI

raaIe-d-e

foot-cl-bulbous base-s sit-preda-3

‘Oh! To which group have I arrived as there are jaguar tracks on the path?’

The second group contains a number of bound morphemes with locational semantics (see examples in 9). Their morphosyntactic distribution is similar to that of classiﬁers. For instance, they can be sufﬁxed to the morpheme daa‘same’ and i- relational (9d and 9e). All of them share the ability to combine with sufﬁxes expressing inherent and relational categories of the noun (i.e., number and case).
(9a) -no

‘place’

3 See Petersen de Piñeros (1994:41) for the phonological conditions that determine the presence of these allomorphs.

This content downloaded from 86.95.52.226 on Sat, 27 Apr 2013 17:25:24 PM All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

398

international journal of american linguistics

(9b) -bIrI ‘clean place in jungle’

(9c) -bei ‘side’

(9d) daa-no-mo kue jofo-dI i-t-e same-plc-loc pp1s house-s be-preda-3
‘My house is in the same place’.

(9e) i-no-mo-na

jaai-d-e

iye ana-do

rel-plc-loc-sou go-preda-3 river lower region-inst

‘From that moment on they walked on the ground of the river’.

The third group of bound lexemes (see examples in 10) can be called “partial repeaters,” i.e., they are reduced forms of nouns that appear in the same morphosyntactic contexts as classiﬁers but with the difference that they denote unique objects. In contrast to the full nouns from which they are derived (which also appear in the texts), partial repeaters are typically used anaphorically (10d).
(10a) -zo (derived from naaIzo)
‘path’

(10b) -za (derived from jiza) ‘child’

(10c) -zikI (derived from jazikI) ‘jungle’

(10d) JIkonIma dIne duui-dI-zo

zako-d-e

JIkonIma at lead-preda-rep:path leave a track-preda-3

‘It left its tracks on the path that leads to JIkonIma’.

In summary, in addition to a great number of free nouns, the language has a certain number of bound nominal lexemes that share semantic features with nouns but at the same time present a morphosyntactic distribution similar to classiﬁers. Unlike many classiﬁers, these borderline cases have not been found incorporated into verb stems.
It is important to point out that the border between the different noun types described above is somewhat fuzzy. First, there is no clear dichotomy between animate and inanimate nouns since the gender markers are also used on a few inanimate nouns. Second, not all nouns are free lexemes. The

This content downloaded from 86.95.52.226 on Sat, 27 Apr 2013 17:25:24 PM All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

nominal classification in uitoto

399

bound nouns and the “partial repeaters,” which are semantically like nouns, possibly represent a transitional stage between nouns as free lexemes and classiﬁers.

6. Noun phrase. This section discusses the role of classiﬁers in the context of noun phrase formation beyond the noun word. Without exception, modifying terms precede the head in the noun phrase. If the modifying term is nominal (i.e., a noun or a personal pronoun), the relation between head and modiﬁer is a genitive relation or one of possession, without a speciﬁc marker for this relation (see 11a and 11b). The language does not distinguish between alienable and inalienable possession.
(11a) iyaI-ma jito chief-masc son
‘the chief ’s son’
(11b) kue jofo pp1s house
‘my house’

There is also a genitive-like relation when the (semantic) head of the noun phrase is a classiﬁer that is preceded by the morpheme i- (see 12a and 12b). I interpret i- as a relational morpheme, i.e., an element that establishes a relation with the antecedent term which in the present case is a possession relationship. The construction relational + classiﬁer is also the form used by native speakers when they are talking about the semantics of classiﬁers alone.4

(12a) najeri iyaI-ma i-ko-mo

bi-t-e

all chief-masc rel-cl:semisphere-loc come-preda-3

‘All came to the chief ’s house’.

(12b) naga-mIe i-gaI-eI

ni-t-e

InI-ñe-na

all-pp3sm rel-cl:basket-pl weave-preda-3 sleep-neg-nf

‘Without sleeping, he wove the baskets of all of the men’.

If the ﬁrst element of the noun phrase, i.e., the determiner or modiﬁer, is a demonstrative, quantiﬁer, interrogative, or attributive, it appears as a

4 If, for instance, the investigator asks, “What does -gaba mean?,” the native speaker would answer: “Ah, igaba means. . . .”

This content downloaded from 86.95.52.226 on Sat, 27 Apr 2013 17:25:24 PM All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

400

international journal of american linguistics

bimorphemic free form whose second element is always the general classiﬁer. The head noun may have an animate/inanimate referent; it may or may not include a gender marker or classiﬁer. There is thus no agreement between the modifying element and the head of the noun phrase. (13a)–(13d ) show the relation of determination.

(13a) bi-e

rIño

dem-cl:gen woman

‘this woman’

(13b) da-je

jIgadI-ma

num:one-cl:gen tapir-masc

‘one tapir’

(13c) nI-e

fakai

int-cl:gen direction

‘which direction?’

(13d) jIaI-e

nome-do

other-cl:gen avocado-cl:elongated pointed

‘another avocado’

7. Formation of pro-forms with classiﬁers. The formation of proforms is one of the most striking characteristics of Uitoto. The formation of pro-forms follows the same basic scheme as compositions of nominal elements. This scheme can be conceived of in the following way (see ﬁgure 1): If we suppose that the noun phrase is a construction made up minimally of two constituents and that each constituent at the same time is made up of a modifying element and a modiﬁed element, in the nominal composition the ﬁrst element of the modiﬁer is combined with the second element of the modiﬁed constituent in a process called “fusion” here. The other constituents are elided.
Figure 2 exempliﬁes the scheme illustrated in ﬁgure 1 applied to the process of formation of a pro-form from a noun phrase made up of a modiﬁer followed by a noun with a classiﬁer. The typical function of the pronominal form that is the result of this process is anaphoric (see 14). In discourse, a referent is usually introduced by means of a full noun phrase; subsequent mentions are made using a pronominal form which, in this context, no longer allows for an interpretation referring to a large class of entities (i.e., a given classiﬁer could potentially refer to many entities); rather, the pronominal form is used anaphorically to refer to a speciﬁc individual from the class of entities which the classiﬁer denotes.

This content downloaded from 86.95.52.226 on Sat, 27 Apr 2013 17:25:24 PM All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

nominal classification in uitoto

401

Noun Phrase

Modiﬁer

Modiﬁed

Modiﬁer

Modiﬁed

Modiﬁer

Modiﬁed

Elision

Fusion
Fig. 1.—The process of nominal composition.

(14) bi-e-dI

moni-ya ame-na

doo-d-e

JitIruni . . .

dem-cl:gen-s satisfy-nf wood-cl:tree say-preda-3 JitIruni

i-e-mo-na

daa-na

gui-t-e

naIreI-dI

rel-cl:gen-loc-sou same-cl:tree eat-preda-3 people-s

‘This is the tree of abundance, said JitIruni . . . from then on, the people ate (from this) same tree’.

Pronominal forms with classiﬁers can also have monomorphemic nouns as antecedents, i.e., the antecedent nouns may lack a classiﬁer. In this case, the form that appears in the position of the modiﬁed constituent within the pronominal form is either a classiﬁer that corresponds to the class of the antecedent noun (see 15) or it is a partial repeater (see 16), i.e., a reduced form of the antecedent noun. In some cases, the last syllable of a monomorphemic noun that functions as an antecedent can also be used in an anaphoric pronominal expression in place of the classiﬁer (see 17 below).
In (15), the focus is on the referent of nogokIni ‘small pot’, which is the diminutive form of nogo, a monomorphemic noun. In the absence of an antecedent, the pro-form eiyokomo could be interpreted as ‘in the big house’,

This content downloaded from 86.95.52.226 on Sat, 27 Apr 2013 17:25:24 PM All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

402

international journal of american linguistics

daaje amena ‘(the) same tree’

(same-cl:gen) daa-je

ame-na (wood-cl:tree)

Elision

Fusion

daa-na ‘(the) same tree’
Fig. 2.—The formation of pro-forms with a classiﬁer as modiﬁed constituent.

‘in the big calabash fruit’, or generally ‘in a large object with a semispherical form’. In the context of (15), its meaning is restricted to ‘in a large pot’, through the presence of the antecedent nogokIni ‘small pot’. The full form of eiyokomo would be the noun phrase eiyu-e nogo-mo (big-cl:gen pot-loc) ‘in a large pot’.

(15) i-e-ri

mootaI-dI nogo-kIni jaizI-d-e . . . nia

rel-cl:gen-caus father-s pot-dim give-preda-3 then

eeiyu-e-na

jaai-de . . . nia eiyo-ko-mo

large-cl:gen-man go-preda-3 then large-cl:semisphere-loc

dane

Iei-d-e

at this time be put-preda-3

‘For this reason the father gave (them) a small pot (to put the pet into it) . . . but (the pet) increased in size . . . now it was put into a large pot’.

(16) illustrates the use of a partial repeater in a pronominal expression. The complete noun phrase of which jIaI-za ‘another child’ is a pro-form is jIaI-e jiza (other-cl:gen child). Though the repeater -za does not correspond

This content downloaded from 86.95.52.226 on Sat, 27 Apr 2013 17:25:24 PM All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

nominal classification in uitoto

403

to any part of the phonological form of urutIko, its meaning (‘child, little one’) indicates that urutIko is its antecedent.

(16) i-no uru-tIko ikI-d-e rel-plc child-coll scold-preda-3

jIaI-za-dI

yo-t-e

other-rep:child-s tell-preda-3

i-e-mo rel-cl:gen-loc

‘He yelled at the children; then another child spoke . . .’.

The examples in (17) illustrate the presence of the last syllable of a noun in an anaphorically used pronominal expression. In this case, -ko on jIaIko is neither a classiﬁer meaning ‘semispherical object’ (see 15 above), nor a repeater (because of its lack of meaning), but rather only the last meaningless syllable of the word jIko. The crucial difference between repeaters and the use of the last meaningless syllable of a noun is that repeaters are easily interpreted out of context (e.g., jIaI-za ‘another child’), while constructions like (17b) make no sense without an explicit antecedent.

(17a) jIaI-e

jIko

other-cl:gen jaguar

‘another jaguar’

(17b) jIaI-ko other-jaguar
‘another jaguar’ (this meaning depends on context)

(17c) iye-koni yiñajai-d-e jIko-nIeI . . . zota-kei-da

river-loc fall-preda-3 jaguar-pl

trap-fa-ra

ui-t-e

ZIkInaI-ma-dI jIaI-ko

take away-preda-3 alligator-masc-s other-jaguar

godei-ño-dI ui-t-e big ray-fem-s take away-preda-3
‘The jaguars fell into the river . . . the alligator trapped one and took it away; another jaguar was taken by a big ray’.5

The previous examples have illustrated the formal characteristics and functions of pronominal forms: they are constructions that are built according to the scheme in ﬁgure 1. These constructions conserve the basic information that the classiﬁer, repeater, or reduced form of the antecedent noun

5 Note that in (17c) the Uitoto term for a big ray (godeiño) includes the feminine gender marker -ño, even though the ray is considered a dangerous animal. The categorization as feminine is probably due to the suckers on the lower surface of the wings of this animal.

This content downloaded from 86.95.52.226 on Sat, 27 Apr 2013 17:25:24 PM All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

404

international journal of american linguistics

supplies; and the modifying morpheme that precedes the classiﬁer further speciﬁes the referent. These constructions have all of the characteristics of a noun. In particular, they can combine with number and case markers. However, their discursive function is clearly anaphoric. They allow for a highly productive lexical genesis process in which any noun preﬁxes can enter into the nominal construction with any classiﬁer, partial repeater, or in some cases simply with the last syllable(s) of a noun.6

8. Nominalization with classiﬁers. Having discussed the role of classiﬁers in the formation of anaphoric nominal expressions, I turn now to the use of classiﬁers on verbal stems. The use of classiﬁers to derive nouns from verbs is frequent and important. Nominalization with classiﬁers occurs with all types of verb stems, namely, verbs with the predicative morpheme of active and passive voice in the future and nonfuture tense and verbs with the nonﬁnite morpheme (see 2 above). The classiﬁer (cl) or repeater (rep) occurs in the position which is taken by the person marker in ﬁnite verb forms (18a and 18b) or it is sufﬁxed to the nonﬁnite form of the verb (18c). In the same positions, bound nominal lexemes (like -no ‘place’ in 18d; see also 5 above) can occur.

(18a) nai-ñeño-dI i-e

i-zai-ya uni-fe

ana-pp3sf-s rel-cl:gen be-str-nf side-sit

bota-ka-fo-mo

uie-ko

mefo-d-e

split-predp-cl:hollow-loc face-cl:semisphere see-preda-3

‘She saw a face in the opening (in the wall of the hut) that was next to where she was’.

(18b) fuirI

i-ne

jooi-dI-zo

raka-d-e

downstream rel-plc lead-preda-rep:path follow-preda-3

‘He took the road that led downstream of the river’.

(18c) mootaI jaai-ya-zo-dI

zako-ñe-ga

father go-nf-rep:path-s leave a track-neg-predp

‘The road that the father had taken (lit., the road of the father’s leaving) had no tracks’.

6 The following example was overheard by Jörg Gasché in a conversation among Uitotos: When an indigenous person, speaking Spanish, asked another if he could pass a spoon (Spanish cuchara), the other responded: nIchara? (int + chara) ‘which spoon?’

This content downloaded from 86.95.52.226 on Sat, 27 Apr 2013 17:25:24 PM All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

nominal classification in uitoto

405

(18d) nI-fo mei i-e

guui gui-yI-no-dI

int-mod well rel-cl:gen eat+fut eat-predpf-plc-s

i-ñe-d-e be-neg-preda-3

‘So, how was she going to eat? There was nowhere to eat’.

It is worth noting here the parallelism between nominalization with classiﬁers and nominalization with the gender markers used in third-person personal pronouns. As mentioned in 3 above, the masculine and feminine third-person pronouns are nai-mIe ‘he’ and nai-ñeño ‘she’, made up of the anaphoric bound determiner nai- and the pronominal gender markers -mIe and -ñeño (derived from komIe ‘man’ and rIño ‘woman’).7 Just like classiﬁers, these gender markers are used in the slot taken by the person marker in ﬁnite verb forms or sufﬁxed to nonﬁnite verbal forms (19). These nominalizations are functionally similar to relative clauses, like those in the following examples, and they are often used anaphorically, like pronouns.

(19a) tIe-dI-mIe fell-preda-pp3sm
‘the one (masc.) that cuts down (trees)’

(19b) bIta-ka-ñeño push-predp-pp3sf

‘the one (fem.) that was pushed’

(19c) abIdo

jaai-zai-d-e

nai-ñeño

way back go-str-preda-3 ana-pp3sf

u-aIbi-zai-dI-mIe-dI take away-appr-str-preda-pp3sm-s

‘The man who had come to take her with him (i.e., the wooer) went back’.

9. Classiﬁer incorporation in verb stems. As mentioned above, approximately half of the classiﬁers in my corpus also occur incorporated in verb stems. Incorporated classiﬁers occur in a different slot from the classiﬁers that are used for nominalization. The association of the verbal root and the classiﬁer is very tight, as evidenced by the fact that the phonological characteristics of the entire verb stem, i.e., verbal root followed immediately by the incorporated classiﬁer, condition the presence of one or another of the

7 There is no evidence that would allow for an analysis of komIe as a bimorphemic word, rather -mIe behaves like a partial repeater; neither do we have any explanation for the presence of the syllable /ñe/ in the feminine gender marker -ñeño.

This content downloaded from 86.95.52.226 on Sat, 27 Apr 2013 17:25:24 PM All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

406

international journal of american linguistics

predicative allomorphs -dI/-tI (predicative active voice) or -ka/-ga (predicative passive voice), which obligatorily are present in the ﬁnite verbal form: verbal stem + predicative + person marker.8
Verb roots can usually incorporate different classiﬁers—but only one simultaneously, and classiﬁers can be incorporated into different verbal stems.9 The majority of the classiﬁers that combine with transitive verb roots are monosyllabic and they generally refer to the explicit or implicit direct object of the clause.10 However, with intransitive verb roots, almost exclusively disyllabic classiﬁers occur. As mentioned above, these tend to be semantically more speciﬁc. Classiﬁers that are incorporated into intransitive verbs refer to the explicit or implicit subject of the clause.
Intransitive verbs with an incorporated classiﬁer often express position (to hang, to lie, to be lying down, to be suspended), attribution of some inherent property (to be feared, to be red), movement (to fall, to walk, to limp), or the transitory state of a referent (to be dry, to be painted, to be bent). How this set of verbs relates to the class of unergative and unaccusative verbs and how these classes would be deﬁned in Uitoto are questions for future research.
As Mithun (1986:379) points out, the main function of incorporated classiﬁers is not to establish reference but rather to narrow the scope of the reference of their host verbs when compared to the form that does not include the incorporated classiﬁer. In this way, the verb’s reference is made more precise by the presence of the classiﬁer.
Incorporated classiﬁers sometimes occur with explicit arguments (20a– 20c) and sometimes without them (20d ). From the corpus used here, it is not possible to determine the precise function of the absence vs. presence of an explicit argument in addition to an incorporated classiﬁer.
(20a) and (20b) present transitive verbs (distribute, cover) with two objects each: the direct objects (people, body) would be the subjects of the corresponding passives; the indirect objects (ambil, down) would keep the same marker (-na) in the passive voice. (20c) and (20d ) present intransitive verbs.

(20a) dane

naIreI eka-bI-t-e

once again people distribute-cl:thick liquid-preda-3

yera-na ambil-part

‘Once again, he distributed ambil (tobacco paste) among the people’. (Lit.: He supplied the people with ambil.)

8 For details, see Petersen de Piñeros (1994:33–34). 9 Several examples of verb root + classiﬁer not found in the analyzed texts but which I put
together ad hoc were approved by the native speaker working with me. 10 Transitive verb roots do not present any special phonological or morphological character-
istics; I identify these roots because of their ability to form the passive voice.

This content downloaded from 86.95.52.226 on Sat, 27 Apr 2013 17:25:24 PM All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

nominal classification in uitoto

407

(20b) nia komei-re-mo

rii-d-e

i-no-mo

then milpes-cl:patch-loc arrive-preda-3 rel-plc-loc

komei-keikI-eI-na

abI

milpes-cl:smooth and ﬂeecy-pl-part body

tI-keikI-t-e cover-cl:smooth and ﬂeecy-preda-3

‘So, they arrived at a patch of milpes palm trees and they covered themselves with the down (that produce the ﬂowers) of these trees’.

(20c) i-no

joo-rofe-d-e

keei-ya

dofo-dI

rel-plc lie-cl:cord-preda-3 come to an end-nf point-s

‘The end of the cord lay there’.

(20d) kInai-mo

akI-kIzi-zai-d-e

hammock-loc lie-cl:skeleton-str-preda-3

yIkInei-t-e-za get thin-preda-3-reas

‘He lay down in the hammock, because he had gotten very thin’.

Another interesting aspect of classiﬁers in verbs is their ability to function (as simple or reduplicated forms; see 21a and 21b) as verb roots. In general terms, they share this characteristic with noun roots that also can be used as verb roots (see 2 above). This again conﬁrms the lexical character of classiﬁers.

(21a) i-e-mo

naaIzo-do bi-t-e

Enokazaini-ño

rel-cl:gen-loc path-inst come-preda-3 Enokazaini-fem

Ifo-kI-dI head-cl:round and hard-s

diri-diri-kabi-d-e cl:big sphere-cl:big sphere-appr-preda-3

naaIzo-do path-inst

‘In this moment, the head of Enokazainiño came nearer along the road, it was rolling’.

(21b) nia imakI iyaI-ma-dI nia ieiko rakoe-do then pp3pl chief-masc-s then wing beam-inst

dutao-kei-d-e

jIfai-d-e-dI

nanI-e-mo

maintain-cm-preda-3 intoxicate-preda-3-s earth-cl:gen-loc

goda-jai-d-e

iyaI-ma-dI

cl:big plane sinuous-rem-pred-3 chief-masc-s

‘Their chief (i.e., the chief of vultures), being intoxicated, tried to maintain his wing on the beam, but then fell down’.

This content downloaded from 86.95.52.226 on Sat, 27 Apr 2013 17:25:24 PM All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

408

international journal of american linguistics

10. Conclusion. The purpose of this paper has been to present a general description of the Uitoto system of nominal classiﬁcation, including a description of classiﬁer forms and the different morphosyntactic contexts in which the gender markers and classiﬁers appear. In this section, I summarize those aspects of this system that could be important for investigation of nominal classiﬁcation as an areal phenomenon in the North West Amazon as well as from the perspective of a universal typology of systems of nominal classiﬁcation (e.g., Grinevald 2000).
First, Uitoto has two gender markers and a large set of classiﬁers, all of which are bound forms (sufﬁxes). None of these is always explicitly present in noun words, nor do they strictly obey the opposition between animate referents and inanimate referents. Nevertheless, the semantic motivation for the use of a classiﬁer or gender marker is, with few exceptions, almost always easily recognizable.
Second, there is no strict agreement, by means of classiﬁers or gender markers, at the level of the noun phrase between the head and its modiﬁers or at the clause level between the predicate and its arguments. The only phenomenon that is akin to agreement in noun class can be observed in anaphorically used expressions. These are formed by a nominal “preﬁx” plus a classiﬁer in a condensed composition (forming a pronominal expression) or they are nouns or nominalized verbs that are used anaphorically. This is a phenomenon that occurs at a trans-sentential level and with a clearly discursive function.
Third, all Uitoto classiﬁers appear in the same set of morphosyntactic contexts. Thus, it would not be justiﬁed to distinguish numeral, genitive, verbal classiﬁers, etc. On the contrary, the classiﬁers in Uitoto constitute a single system. What remains to be explored are the criteria that could be used to identify the gender system as a distinct system from the classiﬁer system.
Fourth, in terms of the continuum of grammaticalization on which different types of systems of nominal classiﬁcation are positioned by Grinevald (2000:61), the Uitoto system appears to display a very low degree of grammaticalization, akin to the type of systems called “class terms” by Grinevald. Like class terms, Uitoto classiﬁers have been shown to play an important role in compounding processes with all word classes except adverbs, displaying a strong semantic motivation and allowing for the creation of new terms. Thus, Uitoto classiﬁers participate in the lexical genesis of the language.
Fifth, the description of the structural characteristics of nouns and noun phrases, in particular the productive pattern of formation of nominal words, allows us to hypothesize that Uitoto classiﬁers developed from nouns. Furthermore, it allows us to postulate that the classiﬁers have the status of nouns synchronically. An additional agreement for this analysis is the ability

This content downloaded from 86.95.52.226 on Sat, 27 Apr 2013 17:25:24 PM All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

nominal classification in uitoto

409

of these forms to combine with sufﬁxes such as number and case markers (see Weber 2002 for an analogous analysis of Bora [Witotoan]).
Finally, I would like to add two observations about the function of classiﬁers in Uitoto. The ﬁrst and most important one concerns the function of “individuation” of “concept nouns” that is claimed to be a common feature of languages that have classiﬁers (Grinevald 2000:74). This function is fulﬁlled by a variety of morphosyntactic constructions. However, expressions of the type numeral + noun, which are often considered to be prototypical for individuation of classiﬁers, are extremely rare. The most salient and frequent function of classiﬁers in Uitoto is that of specifying the physical outline of a particular referent in a particular situation. A second observation about the function of classiﬁers in Uitoto concerns their anaphoric function in discourse: It is a basic characteristic of the Uitoto language that whenever the linguistic context and situation allow for it, a participant will be referred to with a “pro-form” whose head is a classiﬁer. Therefore, these pro-forms are extremely frequent and important components of Uitoto discourse structure.
REFERENCES
Grinevald, Colette. 2000. A morphosyntactic typology of classiﬁers. Systems of Nominal Classiﬁcation, ed. Gunter Senft, pp. 50–92. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Mithun, Marianne. 1986. The convergence of noun classiﬁcation systems. Noun Classes and Categorization, ed. Colette Craig, pp. 379–97. Amsterdam and Philadelphia: John Benjamins.
Petersen de Piñeros, Gabriele. 1994. La lengua uitota en la obra de K. Th. Preuss. Bogotá: EUN–Editorial Universidad Nacional.
Preuss, Konrad Theodor. 1994 [1921/23]. Religión y Mitología de los Uitotos. 2 vols. Vol. 1 translated by Ricardo Castañeda N. Vol. 2 transcribed and translated by Eudocio Becerra (BigIdIma) and Gabriele Petersen de Piñeros. Bogotá: EUN–Editorial Universidad Nacional.
Weber, David J. 2002. The structural status of Bora classiﬁers. Work Papers of the Summer Institute of Linguistics, University of North Dakota Session, vol. 46. http://www.und.edu/ dept / linguistics /wp/2002Weber.PDF.

This content downloaded from 86.95.52.226 on Sat, 27 Apr 2013 17:25:24 PM All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

This content downloaded from 86.95.52.226 on Sat, 27 Apr 2013 17:25:24 PM All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

