INFORMATION TO USERS
This manuscript has been reproduced from the microfilm master. UMI films the text directly from the original or copy submitted. Thus, some thesis and dissertation copies are in typewriter face, while others may be from any type of computer printer.
The quality of this reproduction is dependent upon the quality of the copy submitted. Broken or indistinct print, colored or poor quality illustrations and photographs, print bleedthrough, substandard margins, and improper alignment can adversely affect reproduction.
In the unlikely event that the author did not send UMI a complete manuscript and there are missing pages, these will be noted. Also, if unauthorized copyright material had to be removed, a note will indicate the deletion.
Oversize materials (e.g., maps, drawings, charts) are reproduced by sectioning the original, beginning at the upper left-hand corner and continuing from left to right in equal sections with small overlaps.
ProQuest Information and Learning 300 North Zeeb Road, Ann Arbor, Ml 48106-1346 USA
800-521-0600

COMPLEX PREDICATES IN TSAFIKI
by CONNIE DICKINSON
A DISSERTATION Presented to the Department of Linguistics and the Graduate School of the University of Oregon in partial fulfillment of the requirements
for the degree of Doctor of Philosophy
December 2002

UMI Number: 3072578
Copyright 2002 by Dickinson, Connie S.
All rights reserved.
UMI®
UMI Microform 3072578 Copyright 2003 by ProQuest Information and Learning Company.
All rights reserved. This microform edition is protected against unauthorized copying under Title 17, United States Code. ProQuest Information and Learning Company 300 North Zeeb Road P.O. Box 1346 Ann Arbor, Ml 48106-1346

ii
"Complex Predicates in Tsafiki," a dissertation prepared by Connie Dickinson in partial fulfillment of the requirements for the Doctor of Philosophy degree in the Department of Linguistics. This dissertation has been approved and accepted by:

Dr. Sc

:ommittee

Committee in charge:

Dr. Scott DeLancey, Chair Dr. Eric Pederson Dr. Spike Gildea Dr. Phillip Young

Accepted by:

Dean of the Graduate School

©2002 Connie Dickinson

iv
An Abstract of the Dissertation of Connie Dickinson for the degree of Doctor of Philosophy in the Department of Linguistics to be taken December 2002 Title: COMPLEX PREDICATES IN TSAFIKI
Approved:
This dissertation is a study of two predicate constructions in Tsafiki, a Barbacoan language spoken in the western lowlands of Ecuador. The first concerns complex predicates. The majority of predicates in Tsafiki are complex consisting of an inflecting element (generic verb) from a small closed class of around thirty-three verbs and a non-inflecting element (coverb) from a large open class. Each of the elements of the complex predicate contributes semantic participants and affects the syntactic structure of the clause, although syntactically, the complex predicate functions like a simple predicate in that it allows only one set of morphosyntactic arguments. Complex predicates of this type pose a challenge for mainstream approaches to valency or argument structure. The standard

X
approach is characterized by the view that valency and argument structure are determined by the lexical properties of a single element, the head, exemplified by a simple verb. In this study I show that the standard approach is untenable for Tsafiki and instead adopt an alternative approach. By carefully considering the relational properties of the two elements of the complex predicate, allowing argument sharing or merger and by considering the construction as a sign in its own right, the syntactic structure and interpretation of the complex predicates can be explained.
Once the complex predicate is formed it can be further classified by another overt system of verbal classification. In Tsafiki, every predicate, whether simple or complex can be classified into one and only one of five categories based on overt morphological coding.
Both of these systems can be considered overt classifying systems, but I contend that the classifying function is secondary. The primary function of both systems is to provide a schematic profile or template for the evidentuality coded by the predicate.

vi
CURRICULUM VITA NAME OF AUTHOR: Connie Dickinson PLACE OF BIRTH: Coeur d'Alene, Idaho GRADUATE AND UNDERGRADUATE SCHOOLS ATTENDED:
University of Oregon DEGREES AWARDED:
Doctor of Philosophy in Linguistics, 2002, University of Oregon
Master of Arts in Linguistics, 1994, University of Oregon
Bachelor of Arts, 1991, University of Oregon AREAS OF SPECIAL INTEREST:
Mirativity and Evidentiality South American Languages Barbacoan Languages PROFESSIONAL EXPERIENCE: Teaching Assistant, University of Oregon, 1991-1994,
1995, 1998-2002. AWARDS AND HONORS:
Fulbright Grant, 1996 National Science Foundation Dissertation Improvement
Grant, 1997

Graduate Student Research Award, Graduate School of the University of Oregon, 1999, 2000
Graduate Student Research Support Grant, Center for the Study of Women in Society
Endangered Language Fund, 2002
PUBLICATIONS: Dickinson C., and M. Ventura, (in press). La Narrative Tsachila. Literaturas indigenas del Ecuador, compiled by J. Juncosa. Quito: Corporacion Editora Nacional. Dickinson, Connie. 2000. Complex predicates in Tsafiki. BLS 24. Berkeley: Berkeley Linguistic Society. Dickinson, C. 2000. Mirativity in Tsafiki (Colorado). Studies in Language. 24.2:379-422. Dickinson, C., and Givon, T. 2000. The effect of the interlocutor on episodic recall: An experimental study. Usage-Based Models of Language, ed. by Michael Barlow and Suzanne Kemmer, 234-276. Stanford: CSLI Dickinson, C. 1999. Semantic and pragmatic dimensions of Tsafiki evidential and mirative markers. CLS 35, ed. by S. Billings, J.P. Boyle, and A. Griffith. 29-44. Chicago: Chicago Linguistic Society. Dickinson, C., and Givon, T. Memory and Conversation: Toward an Experimental Paradigm. Conversation: Cognitive, Communicative and Social Perspectives, ed. by T. Givon, 34-67. Amsterdam: John Benjamins.

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
I wish to express my most sincere thanks to the following people and institutions that have helped me to start and finish this project:
My friends in Congoma, Ecuador, particularly the family and friends of Jacinto Aguavil and the Director of PIKITSA, Alfonso Aguavil. In addition special thanks to Catalina Calazaon, Primitivo Aguavil, Juan Aguavil, Secundina Aguavil, Gloria Campuez, Ramon Aguavil, Rosa Zaracay, Berta Zaracay, Rene Aguavil, Meri Aguavil and Joel Aguavil and all my other friends in Ecuador including Dr. Marleen Haboud and Fernando Oretega.
I also wish to thank Tom Givon and Colette Grinevald for getting me started. A special thanks to Scott DeLancey and my offspring, Brodie, Dylan, Aeson, Sofia and Aaron and to Joan Dickinson. Special thanks to el diablo, thanks Roberto. This research was funded by the Fulbright Foundation, an NSF Grant (SBR-9614981), and grants from the U of Oregon Graduate School and CSWS.

ix
DEDICATION to Gerald Dickinson

TABLE OF CONTENTS
Chapter I. INTRODUCTION
1. Overview 1.1 Goals of the Study 1.2 Complex Predicates 1.3 Terminology Used in This Study
2. The Language and Speakers 2.1 Genetic Afffiliation 2.2 The Tsachila
3. Previous Research 4. Fieldwork
4.1 Methodology 5. Organization of the Dissertation II. BASIC GRAMMATICAL FEATURES OF TSAFIKI 1. Introduction 2. Phonology
2.1 Phoneme Inventory 2.2 Consonants 2.3 Vowels 2.4 Syllable Structure 2.5 Stress and Intonation 2.6 Notes on Orthography 3. Word Order 3.1 Verb Final Characteristics 4. Words and Phrases 4.1 Nominal Expressions 4.2 Verbs 4.3 Complement Clauses 4.4 Adverbial Subordinate Clauses 5.0 Summary III. SIMPLE AND COMPLEX PREDICATES

X
Page 1 1 3 4 12
17 17 20 24 25 27 30 32 33 33 34 37 38 39 40 41 47 52 52 79 124 130 141 142

xi

1. Introduction

142

2. Canonical Complex Predicates

146

2.1 Word Order and Prosody

147

2.2 Negation

150

2.3 Summary

150

3. Coverbs

151

3.1 Coverbs and Nouns

152

3.2 Nouns, Verbs and Coverbs

159

3.3 Coverbs and Subordinate Clauses

161

3.4 Coverbs in Finite Clauses

166

4. Adverbs

170

5. Ideophones

177

5.1 Tsafiki Ideophones

178

5.2 Semantic Constraints of Ideophones

186

5.3 Phonological Properties of Ideophones.... 189

5.4 Coverbs vs. Ideophones

191

5.6 Ideophones with ti 'say'

195

5.7 Integration of Ideophone and Verb

196

5.8 Summary

197

6. Borrowed Words

198

7. Generic Verbs

200

8. Coverb Classes

208

9. Summary

210

IV. ARGUMENT STRUCTURE OF SIMPLE AND COMPLEX PREDICATES 212

1. Introduction

212

2. Simple Finite Clauses in Tsafiki

220

2.1 Morphosyntactic Properties of 'Subject'

and 'Object'

224

2.2 Relative Clauses

233

2.3 Stative Verbs

237

2.4 Dative-Subject Constructions

241

2.5 Locative Alternations

252

2.7 Summary

256

3. Complex Predicates

257

3.1 Complex Predicate Formation of Active

Verbs

259

3.2 Stative Complex Predicates

279

4. Summary

282

V. VERB CLASS MARKERS AND AUXILIARIES

284

1. Introduction

284

2. Verb Class Markers 2.1 Morphosyntactic Properties of VCLs 2.2 Verb class markers within the clause 2.3 Verb Class Markers as Referential Devices 2.4 Discussion
3. Auxiliaries 3.1 Participle and infinitive forms 3.2 The auxiliary jo 'be' 3.3 Discussion 3.4 The Auxiliary i 'become'
4. Summary VI. GENERIC VERBS AND VERB CLASS MARKERS
AS CLASSIFYING CONSTRUCTIONS 1. Introduction 2. Structure of the Classifying Systems 3. Functional Similarities APPENDIX A. List of Abbreviations BIBLIOGRAPHY

xii
291 295 304 335 359 361 361 364 383 384 400 402 402 404 410
413 415

xiii

LIST OF FIGURES

Figure

Page

1. Location of Tsafiki lexemes on a scale from

affecto-imagistic to schematic

211

2. Initiating Point (IP) and coding of nominative in causative and inchoative constructions... 223

3. Argument sharing of monovalent motion verb and

monovalent coverb aligning with Undergoer =

inchoative

262

4. Argument sharing of monovalent motion verb and

monovalent coverb aligning with Actor = manner

of motion

263

5. Argument sharing of monovalent generic verb

aligning with Actor and monovalent coverb

aligning with Undergoer = causative

264

6. Argument sharing of monovalent generic verb

aligning with Actor and monovalent coverb

aligning with actor = non-translational

motion

264

7. Argument sharing of bivalent generic verb

aligned with an actor and event and monovalent

coverb aligning with actor

267

8. Argument sharing of monovalent generic verb

aligned with an actor and bivalent coverb

aligning with actor and undergoer

268

9. Argument sharing of trivalent generic verb

and a bivalent coverb

269

xiv

10. Argument sharing of monovalent generic

verb aligning with Undergoer and a monovalent

coverb aligning with Undergoer

270

11. Monovalent coverb aligned with undergoer, and

bivalent stative generic verb

280

12. Bivalent coverb and monovalent stative generic

verb

281

13. A monovalent coverb with undergoer alignment

and monovalent stative generic verb

282

14. Initiating Point and coding of nominative with

active verbs

360

15. Argument Sharing of bivalent nonfinite verb

aligned with actor and undergoer, and stative

auxiliary aligned with entity and

location

384

16. Nonfinite motion verb combined with monovalent

auxiliary aligned with undergoer

400

XV

Table

LIST OF TABLES

Page

1. Tsafiki Consonants

33

2. Tsafiki Oral Vowels

34

3. Tsafiki Nasal Vowels

34

4. Frequency of Occurrence of Coverb with a

Generic Verb

165

5. Frequency of Occurrence of a Coverb with a

Generic Verb in All Clause Types

168

6. Morphological and Syntactic Properties of

Nouns, Coverbs and Generic Verbs

169

7. Generic Verbs and Number of Coverbs with which

They Co-occur (out of 551)

203

8. Tsafiki Coverb and Verb Classes

209

9. Tsafiki Generic Verbs and Number of Coverbs

(out of 551) with which they can co-occur....292

10. Gender vs. Classifier systems

405

11. Verb Class Markers vs. Generic Verbs

406

1
CHAPTER I
INTRODUCTION
1. Overview
This work is a study of two predicate constructions in Tsafiki (Colorado) a Barbacoan language spoken in the western lowlands of Ecuador. The first system concerns predicate formation in Tsafiki. The majority of predicates in Tsafiki are complex, consisting of an inflecting element (generic verb) from a small closed class (33 members) and a non-inflecting lexeme (coverb) from a large open class of neutral elements. The generic verbs can also occur as the sole predicating element in the clause (simple verb). The coverbs can take nominalizing morphology to function as nominals, or can co-occur with the generic verb to form a finite complex predicate.
The second system applies to both the fully formed complex predicate and simple verbs. All predicates in Tsafiki can be classified according to one of five verb class markers (VCL) they takes in certain morphosyntactic environments. These verb class markers also occur with

2
simple verbs. By way of introduction, two examples of the type of complex predicates that are the focus of this are given below. In (1) the first underlined element is a generic verb j'i 'GO:GEN'. The second underlined element is the verb class marker i 'BECOME:VCL'. Both follow the coverb chi 'rip' (1).

(1)

Jali chijinin

jali chi-ji-nin

blanket rip-GO:GEN-CNTR

inatieti' i-na-ti-e-ti-e BECOME:VCL-PRG-RP-DCL-RP-DCL 'They say she said the blanket was just ripping.' {TSAB01.54}

Another complex predicate construction is given in (2). Here the coverb jeke 'dry' is followed by underlined generic verb suwa 'CAUSE.BECOME:GEN', which in turn is followed by the plural marker and then the underlined verb class marker ki 'DO:GEN'.

3

(4)

Junni sabe pelebinan

junni sabe pele=bi=nan

then rubber trunk=LOC=INCL

jeke suwalakiman', jeke suwa-la-ki-man-e dry CAUSE.BECOME:GEN-PL-DO:VCL-SIT-DCL

matu=te=ri matu=te=ri old.days=LOC=FOC 'They dried the rubber on the trunk of the tree itself, in the old days.' {CCNANNI.4}

1.1 Goals of the Study

The goals of this thesis are twofold: on the one hand, it aims at a thorough description of core areas of Tsafiki grammar, on the other hand, it is concerned with linguistic typology and the implications the type of complex predicate system found in Tsafiki has for linguistic theory. Tsafiki is a little described language from the under-documented Barbacoan language. A detailed description of a core area of its grammar will provide much needed information concerning this family of languages. In addition, the type of complex predicate found in Tsafiki has some striking linguistic similarities to the types of systems found in Northern Australian languages (see Schiiltze-Berndt 2000, and McGregor 2002) . The existence of the Tsafiki system demonstrates that these types of systems are not simply an idiosyncratic phenomenon found in a single language

4
family or area, but rather yet another means languages may employ to code events. Finally, complex predicates pose many challenges to mainstream approaches to argument structure and the relationship between syntax and semantics which are examines in this study.
1.2 Complex Predicates
Complex predicates, including the kind represented by the above Tsafiki examples, have received a good deal of attention in recent literature due to the challenges they pose for mainstream approaches to argument structure (Alsina, Bresnan and Sells 1997; Baker 1988, 1997; Hale and Keyser 1993; Mohanan 1994, 1997; Butt 1995, 1997; Schultze-Berndt 2000; inter alia). In the standard analysis, valency and argument structure are thought to be determined by the lexical properties of a single element, exemplified by a simple verb. Complex predicates create difficulties for the standard approach in that in this construction two or more relational lexemes combine at the syntactic level to form the equivalent of a single predicate with a single set of arguments. Either or both elements may contribute semantic participants and affect the argument structure of a single clause. There have been several different approaches presented in the literature to overcome these

5
difficulties ranging from Baker's (1988, 1997) 'head movement' which allows two separate predicate argument domains in Dstructure which can then undergo subsequent syntactic transformations (Geuder and Butt 1998) to approaches which allow argument composition at the syntactic level (Alsina 1996; Butt 1995; Mohanan 1994, 1997; Durie 1997; inter alia). In this study, the latter approach will be utilized. This approach is loosely based on construction grammar (Goldberg 1995; Croft 2001) and has three basic characteristics: 1) both elements of the complex predicate are considered relational jointly contributing semantic participants and affecting the argument structure of a single clause; 2) argument sharing is allowed, i.e. more than one semantic participant may converge on a single argument; and 3) the construction is considered a sign in its own right, capable of contributing its own information to the clause.
While allowing argument composition at the syntactic level solves many of the problems posed by complex predicates, questions concerning argument structure or linking still remain. The classic approach has depended heavily on the notion of "thematic roles" which have been posited not only to depict the relevant semantic properties of arguments that are 'projected' into the syntax, but also to encode pertinent

6
aspects of the verb's meaning (Geuder and Butt 1998). However it has become increasingly clear that these roles may lack explanative value and there is a growing consensus that they should be reconstructed in terms of other semantic or syntactic factors (Geuder and Butt 1998:2; Dowty 1991; Jackendoff 1990; Croft 1998 inter alia). Increasingly compositional semantics and event structure have been evoked to solve some of the classic problems concerning "thematic roles" and constructions such as locative (Levin 1993) and causative alternations (Alsina 1996, 1999). The semantic effects created in these types of alternations are not easily explained in a theory which posits an argument structure derived solely from the thematic roles projected by a single lexeme (see Butt and Geuder 1998).
Tsafiki offers a unique opportunity to address these larger theoretical issues for several reasons. Primarily the majority of predicates in Tsafiki are complex (except for the thirty-three generic verbs which can also function as simple verbs). In Tsafiki there is no need to 'decompose' the verb meaning, in that the predicate already contains two independently predicating elements. One of the primary aims of this study is to exam the type of information contributed by each element of the complex predicate. I will contend that the

7
coverb is rich in specific lexical meaning and carries semantic participants, but lacks information concerning event structure. The generic verbs in Tsafiki are highly schematic and general in their meaning and directly carry information concerning event structure in terms of different types of CAUSE, GO, ACT, BECOME, BE, and SAY and hence there is no need to postulate an additional layer of meaning.
The importance of distinguishing between two types of verb meaning, the lexically specific and the structural is recognized by most current semantic theories. However,, differences arise concerning whether the structural information is projected by the verb or lies elsewhere. The projectionist account must posit multiple lexical representations to account for the multiple meanings of the verb that then determine the various syntactic structures the verb can be found in. An alternative approach is the construction model, in which a single verb names a concept that is common to all its uses across various syntactic configurations. Verbs that name concepts that are compatible with the meaning conveyed by more than one syntactic structure can be found in more than one type of syntactic construction. In this approach a construction is defined as any element (from a morpheme to a syntactic configuration) that contains one or more properties that are

8
not strictly predictable from its component parts or from other previously established constructions (Goldberg 1995:4). The only restrictions in this approach are semantic. Two or more constructions may combine as long as the semantics of the constructions are compatible.
The construction grammar approach and the closely related cognitive grammar approach are both utilized in this study. Cognitive grammar does not posit a clear division between semantics and syntax but rather a gradient between specific lexical meaning and schematic meaning. In this sense it is highly compatible with construction grammar. Construction grammar is particularly attractive for Tsafiki, in that the thirty generic verbs obviously occur in a large number of different syntactic structures. In addition, the majority of the coverbs can occur with more than one of the generic verbs. I will show throughout the study that by considering the meaning of the coverb, the generic verb and the construction itself, Tsafiki complex predicates can be explained simply without positing a large number of lexical representations for the individual coverbs and generic verbs.
While the focus of this study will be on complex predicate formation, Tsafiki actually has four distinct categories of predicating elements. Besides coverbs and generic verbs,

9
Tsafiki has a large class of ideophones. Ideophones were defined early on by Doke (1935) as "a vivid representation of an idea in sound". They can describe manners, sounds, smells, actions or states. In Chapter III I will demonstrate that ideophones in Tsafiki can be used independently to code an event separate from that coded by the main verb in the clause in which it occurs. Kita (1997) calls ideophones "verbal gestures" in that like gesture they are high in affective meaning, often directly evoking certain modalities such as the visual, hearing, tactile or sensory motor. Many of the coverbs can also function as ideophones and like the ideophones are high in 'affecto-imagistic' information coded by the ideophones. Affecto-imagistic is a term from Kita (1997) who argues that the semantic representation of Japanese mimetics belongs to the affecto-imagistic dimension in which "language has direct contact with sensory, motor, and affective information" (Kita 1997:379). He contrasts this dimension of meaning with the 'analytic dimension' or the "dimension of decontextualized predication" (Kita 1997:379). Due to the specific, highly affective meaning coded by both the coverbs and ideophones, both have strong constraints on the type of semantic participants they carry (in standard terms they have strict subcategorization frames), which contrasts with both the

10
generic verbs and the verb class markers. The verb class markers lie at the other extreme from ideophones. As mentioned above, all predicates in Tsafiki can be classified by which one of five verb class markers they take in certain morphosyntactic environments. In Chapter V I will argue that these are not simply classifying lexemes, but rather function much like the generic verbs in that they carry information concerning event structure, minimally determining whether the clause is coding ACT, BECOME, SAY, BE or BE IN A POSITION.
The four predicating elements, ideophone, coverb, generic verb and verb class marker can be arranged on a cline, ranging from the highly affecto-imagistic ideophones, to the verb class markers which code highly schematic event structure. The existence of four different predicating elements all carrying different types of semantic naturally leads to a question which I cannot answer here, namely: Do the four different predicating elements arise from a single level of mental representation? We know that there must be some sort of conceptual structure that mediates between other systems such as the visual, auditory, haptic (sense of touch) and sensorimotor. Jackendoff originally proposed only a single level of mental representation at which information conveyed by language is compatible with information from other systems. In

11
his more recent work (Jackendoff 2002) in addition to positing a 'conceptual structure' adds a 'spatial structure' based on visual modality. He only addresses spatial structure but admits there may be other structures, based on other modalities. He maintains that the grammatical aspects of language make reference only to the conceptual structure, but postulates that it is only due to other structures such as 'spatial structure' that we can talk about what we see (or hear, or smell or feel for that matter). He further asks an interesting and as he admits unanswerable question at this point, as to how much, if any overlap, is there between "spatial structure" and what he calls "conceptual structure"?
I cannot answer these questions here, but Tsafiki does offer an interesting means to approach the question in that affecto-imagistic words and the more analytical words do belong to morphosyntactically distinct, although somewhat overlapping categories.
As pointed out the different elements combine at the syntactic level to form a single predicate. These combinations are not arbitrary. An individual coverb generally only regularly combines with a subset of the generic verbs, and while the system is productive to some degree, there are clear, semantically-based restrictions. The semantic basis of this

12
system leads to the secondary function of the generic verbs and verb class markers, i.e. both can be seen as classifying systems in that when the Tsafiki speaker forms a finite clause he must choose from a limited set of generic verbs essentially classifying all events in Tsafiki into a small number of categories. The verb class markers further classify all predicates into one of five semantically based classes. While not the focus of this study, there are some interesting parallels between the classifying system that arises from the use of the generic verbs and verb class markers and other overtly marked linguistic classifying systems such as nominal classifiers. This function of the complex predicate systems in Tsafiki will be addressed in Chapter VI.
In the remainder of this Chapter, I first discuss the terminology used in this study and then the historical and present situation of the Tsachila, and then fieldwork and the methodology used to collect the data used in this study.
1.3 Terminology Used in This Study
Following Shultze-Berndt (2000), I call the inflecting verb a 'generic verb' and the non-inflecting element a 'coverb'. She uses these terms in her study of Jaminjung complex predicates which bear a striking resemblance to the

13
Tsafiki system. In Jaminjung, as in Tsafiki, there are roughly thirty generic verbs that combine with an open class of coverbs to form complex predicates. The coverbs, as in Tsafiki, can also function as ideophones. While the similarities of the two systems are striking, the semantic meaning of the generic verbs exhibits some differences. In particular, generic verbs in Jaminjung tend to code more specific manner such as 'poke', 'kick/step' or 'bite' whereas in Tsafiki this type of information is found in the coverbs. Despite these differences the systems are similar enough that to highlight the similaritie I use SchiiltzeBerndt's terms.
As pointed out by Shiiltze-Berndt (2000) the term coverb accurately describes the dependent nature of these elements, which in finite clauses combine with an inflecting verb to form a predicate. Schultze-Berndt uses the term *generic verb' rather than other terms such as 'classifier' or 'verb class' for the inflecting verbs in that, while the term 'classifier' does capture the categorizing nature of the closed-class of inflecting verbs, she considers the generic verbs to be semantically general lexemes with a categorizing function rather than classifiers per se. The term 'generic' is borrowed from the

14
tern 'generic noun', familiar to Australian linguists, which describes nouns coding general rather than specific properties which co-occur with more specific nouns in combinations reminiscent of nominal classifier systems. While the closed-class verbs in Tsafiki are of a general nature, i.e. they code events such as 'do', 'put', 'become', 'go', 'be', there is an important difference between the coverb-generic verb combinations in Tsafiki and Jaminjung and the 'generic noun-specific noun' combinations found in languages such as Mparntwe Arrente (Wilkins 2000). In the generic noun constructions either element can occur as an independent, referring noun with discourse factors determining which of the three constructions—generic noun, specific noun or generic noun-specific noun—will be used (Wilkins 2000). In general, the coverbs, unlike specific nouns, cannot occur as independent elements. They require nominalizing morphology to occur as nominals and in most cases a generic verb to function as a predicate. Hence there is an important difference between specific nouns and coverbs that also affects the function of the generic verbs. However, the term is useful for Tsafiki in that it distinguishes the generic verbs from the verb class markers.

15
Also following Schultze-Berndt, who bases her terminology on Goldberg (1995), I distinguish between participants and arguments. In a construction based account semantic relationality can be described independently of syntactic argument structure. The term 'participant' or 'semantic participant' refers to the semantic participants that are inherent to the meaning of a relational predicate. I differ from Schiiltze-Berndt however in using the more abstract semantic roles 'undergoer', 'actor', 'entity' and 'location' as the basic semantic participant roles coded by coverbs and generic verbs rather than more specific terms such as 'giver' or 'givee'. The terms 'Actor' and 'Undergoer' are taken from Van Valin and LaPolla (1997). Both terms refer to 'macroroles', i.e. each covers a broad range of specific types of participants. The term 'undergoer' refers to the participant that undergoes a change of state or location or is the element at which the action is directed (i.e. with a verb like 'hit' the 'hittee' does not necessarily undergo a change of state, but it is the focus of the action). Actor covers the more traditional notion of 'agent', but includes perceivers and experiencers among other semantic roles. Actors are not necessarily volitional. The meaning of both these terms is

highly linked to an event, i.e. the Actor does something and the Undergoer 'undergoes' something. Neither term is appropriate for states in which there is no event or action for the Actor to do, nor an event for the Undergoer to undergo. I use the terms 'Entity' and 'Location' for stative eventualities. States describe relationships between different entities. I use 'Entity' for the more prominent participant that is being ascribed a 'location', either literally or metaphorically in a stative relationship.
Arguments are slots in a syntactic construction and can be described in terms of 'subject', 'object' or 'nominative', 'accusative', etc. or in terms of the constructional meaning associated with that slot.
Both semantic participants and arguments can be further distinguished by their status as core or peripheral. Core semantic participants are participants present in all usages of a particular lexeme. Core arguments are entities that are always present in a certain syntactic construction.
Finally, a note on the glosses. The glosses I use often combine both the meaning of the lexeme and its function in a certain construction. In particular some of

17
the generic verbs can function as simple verbs, generic verbs or verb class markers. When used as a simple verb the generic verb occurs in small letters with a single gloss. When used as a generic verb or verb class marker, the verb is glossed in capital letters followed by a colon and its function in the construction i.e. 'DO:GEN' or 'DO:VCL'.
2. The Language and Speakers
2.1 Genetic Affiliation
Tsafiki is a Barbacoan language spoken by approximately 2,000 speakers in the western lowlands of Ecuador. The genetic classification of the Barbacoan languages remains an open question. The three Barbacoan languages spoken in Ecuador, Tsafiki, Cha'paalachi (Cayapa) and Awa Pit (Coaiquer), have been classified in the Chibchan family since 1891 (Brinton, 1891; Rivet 1924; Jijon y Caamafio 1945; Loukotka 1968; Swadesh 1959; Moore, 1952; Tovar and Tovar 1984; Greenberg 1960, 1987). While the grouping with Chibchan has been questioned (Kaufman, 1990; Constenla, 1981), the sub-grouping with Paez (Nasa Yuwe) of Colombia has generally been accepted. However, recent work by Curnow (1998) argues against the grouping of

18
Barbacoan with Paez. He further identifies two languages in Colombia, Guambiano and Totoro, as members of Barbacoan. In any case, the grouping of the Barbacoan languages with Chibchan at the phylum level is not corroborated by current evidence and the sub-grouping with Paez needs further study.
The only truly comparative work that has been done within the Barbacoan family is Moore's (1962) article, which looked at the correspondences between Tsafiki and Cha'palaachi. He examined 207 cognates and clearly demonstrated the close relationship between the two languages.
Curnow and Liddicoat (1998) made a first attempt using the comparative method to demonstrate the relationships within the Barbacoan family, but unfortunately the study is based on only forty-eight cognates. It does however, demonstrate the already established relationship between Tsafiki and Cha'palaachi. Guambiano and Totoro also show a close relationship. In fact Totoro is sometimes considered a dialect of Guambiano and apparently the two languages exhibit a great deal of mutual intelligibility (Curnow 1998). According to Curnow's study, Awa Pit is more closely related to Guambiano/Totoro than to the two Southern

19
Barbacoan languages, Tsafiki and Cha'palaachi. He groups the languages into a Northern Branch—Awa Pit and Guambiano/Totoro and a Southern Branch—Tsafiki and Cha'palaachi. While the relationship of Tsafiki and Cha'palaachi is firmly established, and the relationship between Guambiano and Totoro appears self-evident, a more thorough study involving the comparative method and a larger number of cognates remains to be done.
Two interesting, fairly rare, typological aspects that the Barbacoan languages appear to have in common is all languages appear to have at least a reduced system of the verb classification systems discussed in this study and all along with Paez, have some form of the mirative, disjunct/conjunct system (Garzon 1994; Vasquez 1988, 1994; Rojas 1994, 1998; Vitadella 1988a, 1988b). Whether the presence of these similar grammatical systems is due to genetic affiliation or areal contact remains to be seen.
So at this time the genetic affiliation of Tsafiki and the Barbacoan languages remains an open question.

20
2.2 The Tsachila
Tsafiki is spoken by approximately 2,000 Tsachila living on seven communes situated at the western base of the Andes near the city of Santo Domingo de los Colorados. The Tsachila have no village, and traditionally lived in widely scattered houses. Extended family groups that were loosely aligned with other groups under a miya 'governor' or pone 'shaman'. However it should be noted that their narrative history includes the story of a Tsachila city in which the residents began to die of an epidemic. The shamans instructed the people to abandon and burn the city, and leave, taking nothing with them. No house was to be constructed within view of another, and if a member became ill and died, they were to immediately abandon and burn their dwelling. Hence, how far their present mode of living in widely scattered houses extends into the past is not known. It could be the result of colonialism and the epidemics it brought.
From the work of F. Salomon (1997) we know that the present-day Tsachila are an amalgamation of several distinct groups that populated western Ecuador before the colonial period. They may have occupied the region from the

21
Esmeraldas river basin in the extreme North of Ecuador to points in the Andean highlands such as the ancient Angamarca. There is evidence of extensive economic trade between the Tsachila, the highlands and even down into the Amazon until well into the 18th century until the pressure of colonialization and the disappearance of neighboring groups led to the increasing isolation of the Tsachila (Ventura i Oiler 2000) . At the end of the 19th Century the expoloitation of rubber in the area led to the arrival of both black and white colonialists (Ventura 2000). Still overall, the Tsachila remained relatively isolated from colonial contact throughout the 16th-19th centuries. However in 1958, with the construction of highways through the area, the Tsachila began to feel the full impact of the dominant culture of Ecuador (Ventura i Oiler, 1995). The city of Santo Domingo de los Colorados had approximately 1,500 inhabitants in 1957, but by 1989 it had 160,000 residents. Counting the floating population, Santo Domingo is now the third largest city in Ecuador with 250,000 inhabitants (Canelos 1989: B-4). In 1964 el Instituto Ecuatoriano de Reforma Agraria y Colonizacion promoted the colonization of the area, considering the land of the Tsachila barren because it was not permanently cultivated

22
(Ventura i Oiler, 1995). Between 1954 and 1963 the Tsachila were organized in communes. These communes are located eight to 25 km. from Santo Domingo and are geographically fragmented by the city and by the land of the colonists.
Traditionally the Tsachila relied on hunting, fishing and slash and burn agriculture as their subsistence base. With the loss of their old territory most of the Tsachila now grow commerical crops such as coffee, cacao, pineapple, yuca and platano both for national and international consumption. Each family individually can buy and own land within the community, but this land is considered communal and cannot be bought or sold to non-Tsachila. Each commune has a set of annually elected officers that in turn follow the guidelines of a constitution and an elected Governor that has precedence over all seven communes.
The Tsachila communal land is agriculturally rich, and the Tsachila are engaged in a constant battle to fight encroachment from the colonialists. The elected government and system of land ownership have erected some barriers against this intrusion, but both systems differ radically from the Tsachila's former system of loose alignment, which sometimes leads to a loss of effectiveness. Unfortunately, the situation does not look hopeful. There is not enough

23
land for the new generation of Tsachila and many are being forced to leave the communes to seek employment elsewhere. The city of Santo Domingo is growing rapidly. One of the communes, Chiwilpe, is already being absorbed by the growing city. The recent paving of the main road to one of the larger communes, Congoma, now makes the commune a short, twenty-minute commute from the city. While children are still learning Tsafiki as a first language and there are still a number of older monolingual speakers as well as a few younger monolinguals, the small number of speakers, the close proximity of the city and the geographical fragmentation as well as the change in economic base brought about by the loss of their old territory requires that the majority of the population speak Spanish on a regular basis. The survival of the language in the twentyfirst century is an open question. Most of the children now attend school, where they are in daily contact with nonTsachi. Intermarriage between the Tsachila and the local population is increasingly more common. While there is a bilingual program, the presence of large numbers of nonTsachi children in the classrooms and the lack of trained instructors and materials has resulted in an emphasis on Spanish and very little Tsafiki is used in the classroom

24
(Senor Marcus Aguavil, Director of the Bilingual Program, personal communication, 1998). Spanish is rapidly becoming the preferred language among school-age children, Tsafiki only being used to address elders within the community. With the arrival of electricity, television and radio, Spanish is now the dominant language in many Tsachila households. Tsafiki is clearly an endangered language and the culture has already undergone rapid change.
On the other hand, many members of the community are well aware of what is taking place and are struggling to find a way to adjust to a new way of life while still holding on to their language, their culture and their identity as Tsachila.
3. Previous Research
Linguistic information on Tsafiki is somewhat sparse. The first grammatical study of Tsafiki is Rivet and Beauchat (1907). Jijon and Caamano (1941) include a Tsafiki grammatical sketch and lexicon as a part of their study of the pre-Colombian inhabitants of western Ecuador. However, while interesting, neither of these works meets modern standards of grammatical description.
The first modern field investigator of Tsafiki was the SIL linguist Bruce Moore. He has published a small wordlist

25
of Tsafiki (1966), a short pedagogical grammar (1979), a brief phonological sketch (1975), a paper on correspondences in South Barbacoan Chibcha (1962) and Levinsohn has edited a short (88 pgs.) basic morphological description based on Moore's Grammatical Patterns of Colorado (1972). Moore's 1972 work is written in a style popular with SIL linguists of the time, tagmemics. Tagmemics concentrates on morphology and categorization and really does not address theoretical issues or complex morphosyntactic structures. However, Moore's work is a valuable description of the phonology and morphology of Tsafiki.
In addition, there have been a limited number of publications of Tsafiki texts with Spanish translations including, Ilushun (1985), Yo Imin Tsachi: 50 Leyendas de los Indios Colorados (1983), and Matu to Cuenta, (1982) all published by the Museo Antropologico del Banco Central del Ecuador, Guayaquil.
4. Fieldwork
My own fieldwork was first undertaken in 1994, when I spent almost one year in the field. Because the Tsachila do not have villages, I lived and worked in a Tsachila

26
household in the Congoma commune. I then spent an extended stay of almost two years, 1996-1998, with funding from the Fulbright Foundation and a National Science Foundation Dissertation Improvement Grant (SBR-9614981). Since then I have made yearly trips for short stays from one to three months in the field every year since 1998, spending a total of almost four years in the field. Because of the overwhelming hospitality of the Tsachila and the amenable conditions in the field, I quite literally spend all my time in Ecuador with the Tsachila, only going to Quito or other cities when business demands.
I work with an indigenous organization, PIKITSA, (Pila Kimin Tsachila 'Tsachi who write') under the approval of the Tsachila Government. PIKITSA is an indigenous organization dedicated to the documentation and preservation of the Tsachila language. The three core members, Alfonso Aguavil, Primitivo Aguavil and Juan Aguavil first began reading and writing Tsafiki with the SIL linguist Bruce Moore. They then worked for many years collecting texts for the Museo del Banco Central. All three are literate in both Tsafiki and Spanish and have a basic knowledge of linguistic analysis. I am formally considered a consultant to this organization.

27
4.1 Methodology
This study is primarily based on textual data. Working with the members of PIKITSA, we have collected approximately seventy hours (76 tapes) of texts from a mix of genres including traditional stories, personal narratives and conversations. The tapes are always collected by a member of PIKITSA, sometimes with my presence, but we always make sure there is native Tsafiki 'listener7 in the room. To do otherwise is to put the speaker in the somewhat awkward and totally unnatural situation of reciting a long narrative to someone who does not understand the language or the culture well. These tapes are primarily transcribed by one of the nine members of PIKITSA who are computer literate. I then listen to the tape and go over the transcription with the transcriber. The text is then parsed and glossed and entered into Shoebox (Davis and Wimbish 1993). The transcriber then translates the document and then the transcriber and I listen to the tape one more time and check the translation. In addition, when possible, I listen to the tape and go over the transcription and translation with the original speaker.

In addition to my own data, Montserrat Ventura i Oiler has generously allowed me to use and process some of the recordings she has collected during the course of her ethnographic research among the Tsachila. Also during my first year in Ecuador, El Museo del Banco Central de Ecuador allowed me access to the texts that had been collected by the Tsachila under the supervision of Robert Mix. The texts from this collection were retranslated and analyzed by myself and members of PIKITSA. Altogether, the texts used in this study represent the speech of more than thirty-seven speakers1 from the ages of six to their late nineties, although the narratives that are primarily used in this study are from the older generation. The majority of the speakers speak the more common dialect of Tsafiki. Only a few of the texts represent members of the Bua commune, who speak a slightly different dialect and I have only worked directly with one member of this community.
One of the major goals of the PIKITSA organization is the creation of a dictionary so in the course of this work we have created a rough, approximately 6,000 word
1 Some of the speakers only participate briefly in the recorded conversations hence they are not counted in with the speakers who produce longer narrations.

dictionary based on 2,051 roots using the MDF program of Shoebox. While still needing much work, the entries in this database contain grammatical information, including the set of generic verbs with which each individual coverb has been attested to co-occur, verb class, a phonetic transcription and example sentences. This work has proved invaluable in this study.
In addition to the texts, I have also done a fair amount of elicitation. I primarily work with two older, relatively monolingual speakers in their sixties, and three younger men (late thirties-forties) who are bilingual in both Spanish and Tsafiki, with Tsafiki the dominant language. I also work on a regular, but more limited basis with three women and two men, again bilingual speakers in their thirties and early forties. Elicitation is always contextualized, i.e. I do not simply ask for a translation or for a grammaticality judgment concerning a sentence, but rather the Tsachila consultant and I always establish a context for the sentence, either based on the immediate situation, a situation we both witnessed, or as one of the older consultants put it a nene pun 'lie' or imagined situation. This is done due to the fact that, the speaker is going to imagine a context for the example even if I am

30
looking for a 'pure' grammatical judgement, and it behooves me to have some idea of what that context is. In addition, the analysis here is based on meaning, both semantic and schematic. The context allows one to push the boundaries under which a given construction is acceptable and often leads to an understanding of the meaning of that construction. I then sometimes will give my next consultant the context without the example and ask them to give me a phrase describing the situation. All elicited examples are checked with all nine of my regular consultants, and the consultants and I also sometimes ask other members of the community to comment on the examples.
5.0 Organization of the Dissertation
The remainder of the dissertation is structured as follows:
Chapter II contains a brief grammatical sketch of Tsafiki. This is necessary in that almost all the examples used in this study come from texts. While the use of these examples is at times distracting, the analysis is strengthened by its reliance on natural speech and in addition, the examples convey the richness and elegance of the Tsafiki language. The grammatical sketch should make the reading of these examples easier.

31
Chapter III looks at the morphosyntactic behavior of the complex predicate as a whole, and then the morphosyntactic behavior of both the coverb and the generic verb separately, establishing that both belong to distinct, although somewhat overlapping categories. Ideophones are also discussed in this Chapter.
Chapter IV addresses the argument structure of the complex predicate by first examining with some depth the structure of a simple, finite clause in Tsafiki and then turning to the more complex predicate argument structure.
Chapter V looks at the verb class markers, their morphosyntactic behavior and their function and compares them with auxiliaries.
Chapter VI takes an overall view of the two systems as classifying systems and compared them to the more well-known system of overt classification—noun classifying systems.

CHAPTER II
BASIC GRAMMATICAL FEATURES OF TSAFIKI
1. Introduction
The majority of the examples cited in this study are taken from narrative texts, and often contain grammatical features irrelevant to the issue being discussed. Unfortunately, there is no widely available study of Tsafiki grammar to which I can refer the reader to guide him through these examples. In addition, an understanding of the basic structure of Tsafiki is necessary to follow the argumentation presented in the following chapters. Therefore, this chapter aims at an informal sketch of Tsafiki phonology, morphology and syntax. The sketch makes no claims as to completeness or rigor. The phonology section is structured primarily as an aid in understanding the orthography used throughout the text. I do cover in some depth the mirative/evidential system of Tsafiki, in that the majority of the finite verbal inflections have to do with mirative, evidential and mood distinctions which are little described in the literature. However, overall,

33
only major word classes and constructions are described here. Areas discussed in other chapters of the study are only mentioned briefly.

2.0 Phonology

2.1 Phoneme Inventory

Tsafiki has an inventory of fifteen basic consonants plus a glottal stop, whose phonemic status is marginal (Moore 1962, 1991). The consonants are listed in Table 1 below. The symbols of the practical orthography adopted in this study are given in angular brackets.

TABLE 1: Tsafiki Consonants

Bi-

Dental Alveo- Alveo- Pala- Velar Glot-

labial

lar

Palatal tal

tal

Stop
Nasal Fricative Affricative Approximant

p<p> b<b> m<m> ^<f> w<w>

Lateral Approximant

t<t> d<d>

n<n> s<s>
j<r> 1<1>

c<ch ts>

k<k> ?<>> h<j>
j<y>

Tsafiki has a five oral vowels and four nasal vowels (Moore 1962, 1991). The practical orthography used to represent these phonemes is once again given in angular brackets in Table 2 and Table 3 below.

TABLE 2: Tsafiki Oral Vowels

i<i>

u<u>

e<e>

o<o>

a<a>

TABLE 3: Tsafiki Nasal Vowels

i<in> e<en>

u<un>

a<an>

2.2 Consonants

The phonemes /b/ and /d/ aroe preglottalized when they occur intervocalically, i.e. [be bo] bebo 'woodpecker' and t[hdee?dpor]ecdeeddiong'mvaolweelfrsileingdhtolfy.a female'. The glottal affects
Tsafiki has no dipthongs and all vowel sequences are separated by a phonologically conditioned glottal: [ke?ere?i?e] keereie 's/he fell'. A glottal also occurs
before a word initial vowel [?ele] 'wild turkey'. The

glottal only occurs as a phoneme in environments in which a vowel or morpheme has been dropped. The declarative marker -e is often elided in rapid speech, signaled only by the glottal hence /ho?e/ joe 'It is' is often pronounced [ho?] jo'. Hence the glottal has at least allophonic status in some environments.
The velar stop is often vocalized when it occurs intervocally, hence [koggama] Konkama 'the commune Congoma' or [kogkama] Konkama.
The nasals /m/ and /n/ only occur in the onset position of the syllable, although they may be realized as stops when a nasalized vowel is followed by a stop. Hence /ma/ man 'one' becomes [magka] manka 'one thing,' [mande]
mande 'one long rigid thing', [mampe] manpe 'one large rigid planular thing'.
The fricative /s/ is pronounced [j*] before the high vowels /i/ and /u/: [JuJu] susu 'dog', [Jill] sili 'vine'. This also occurs when the /s/ is preceded by an unaccented high vowel [hija] jisa 'let's go'. Before all other vowels

it remains /s/: /se/ se 'good', /sawi/ sawi 'slither' and /soJi/ sori 'swirl'.
Much the same process occurs with the affricative /c/ that occurs before the high vowels /i/ and /u/ but the allophone [ts] occurs before the mid and low vowels: [tsa] tsa 'true', [tsompi] tsonpi 'type of frog', [tse] tse 'light.' Many speakers, particularly those in Bua, do not distinguish these two allophones and simply use /c/ in all environments. The closely related language Cha'palaachi, spoken by the Chachila also only has /c/. Hence to distinguish themselves from the Chachila, the Tsachila do not use a single form for these allophones. They could of course use the allophone [ts], rather than the phoneme /c/ in all environments which would still distinguish the Tsachila from the Chachila, but this system of writing both the phoneme and the allophone was established by the SIL Bruce Moore (1979) and the Tsachila have decided to retain the system.
The consonant /J/ is often pronounced as a flap [r], particularly when occurring word initially. When following a nasalized vowel /J/ the allophone [n] occurs: [ajani]

37

ayan-ri 'mother-FOC', but /sonaJi/ sona-ri 'woman-FOC'. In the writing system this is written as an <n>.

2.3 Vowels

Tsafiki has five oral vowels /i,u,e,o,a/ and four nasal vowels. The phoneme /o/ becomes [u] when nasalized. Contrastive pairs are given in (1) below. Following the standard orthography, nasalized vowels are indicated with a following 'n'.

(1)

ba 'unstick'

ban 'placenta'

ma 'day'

man 'one'

da 'cook'

dan 'slash'

so 'vagina'

son 'alive'

miya 'governor'

miyan 'sister of a female

kuru 'guatusa'

kurun 'cockroach'

pupu 'foam'

punpu 'butterfly'

Nasalization of a vowel is also morphemic. A nasalized vowel can indicate the interrogative (2a), an adjective (2b), or a secondary predicate (2c).

(2) a. jie jin
b. bare baren
c. katsoe katson tsoe

'S/he went.' 'Did s/he go?' 'stretch' 'long' 'S/he slept.' 'S/he lay there sleeping.

Unaccented vowels before voiceless obstruents are devoiced: [p^pci] pipa 'mud', [T^to] Teto 'Quito', [9ko] oko

'spirit', [tsaci] tsachi 'person',

fiki 'word'.

However a complete study remains to be done on devoiced vowels. They do not occur, and seem to be disallowed with certain morphemes, rarely occurring for example before the perfective suffix -ka.

2.4 Syllable Structure

The syllable structure of Tsafiki is CV or V, with the exception of the glottal that remains when a vowel is elided (see above) and the phonological realization of a nasal when a nasal vowel is followed by an obstruent. There are no consonant clusters in native Tsafiki words.
The majority of Tsafiki roots are mono- or bi-syllabic with trisyllabic being less common and roots with four or more syllables quite rare in Tsafiki roots, although they do occur more often in borrowed words: a-kra-de-se 'thank' from Spanish agradecer. All phonemes are allowed in word initial position, although /J/ has only been attested in
word initial position in one Tsafiki word, ra 'be in a position', and a few Spanish borrowings. This one word that

has an /j/ word initially, ra 'be in a position', is a generic verb and hence one of the more common words in Tsafiki. /j/ is pronounced as a flap in word initial position [r] . This allophone also occurs word medially in rapid speech.

2.5 Stress and Intonation

Much work remains to be done on the Tsafiki stress pattern. Generally, the last syllable of the root or stem receives the accent. However, some roots receive accent on the first syllable and there are a few minimal pairs that are only distinguished by the accent:

(3)

dewi

'broom'

dewi

'type of fish'

tsapo

'splash, fall into water'

tsapo

'hide something'

mera

'wait'

mera

'hear'

Furthermore, while the accent generally appears on the last root of the stem, some of the suffixes, in terms of the stress system, appear to be part of the stem, others not.

In coverb/generic verb combinations the last syllable of the coverb will receive primary stress with a secondary stress on the generic verb (second syllable if bisyllabic) (see Chapter III).
The pattern of intonation is rarely highly pronounced. In declarative sentences, the tone drops slightly after the final accented syllable. There is only rarely a rise of intonation towards the end of a question. In general, the intonation is far less pronounced when compared to English or Spanish. Much work remains to be carried out on both the stress system and the intonation patterns of Tsafiki.
2.6 Notes on the Orthography
The orthography used in this study is based on the orthography used by the members of PIKITSA. The core members of this team first learned to write Tsafiki in their teens, using the alphabet developed by Bruce Moore, the SIL linguist, based to a large degree on the Spanish alphabet. They modified the system somewhat, primarily, changing some of the symbols based on the Spanish alphabet to IPA symbols, while they worked for the Museo del Banco Central. The phoneme /h/ however continues to follow the Spanish system, written as 'j'. As mentioned above nasals

41
vowels are indicated with a following 'n'. This causes some problems when the nasal vowel is followed by a vowel, in that nasals do occur in syllable onset position, i.e. jimane could either be ji-man-e or ji-ma-ne. The SIL linguist Bruce Moore (1991) developed a system in which an 'h' is inserted after the 'n' coding a nasal vowel: jimanhe. While this system is not without its problems, the Tsachila are accustomed to it and it seems to serve their purposes well. We have made a few further modifications in the last few years, primarily concerning word divisions. Word divisions in Tsafiki are not predictable. Some of the coverb/generic verb combinations clearly form a single phonological word while others are clearly independent elements. In general, the intuitions of the Tsachila correlate well with the linguistic analysis of these combinations, so I generally rely on the speakers' intuitions as to what consists of a single word.
3. Word Order
The basic word order of Tsafiki is AOV and SV, the "A" standing for the agent or actor of a transitive clause, the "S" for the single core argument of an intransitive clause and the "0" for the object of a transitive clause in

Dixon's (1979, 1994) terminology. An example of a transitive clause with the order AOV is given in (4). The nominative phrase ya pone uniri 'The old shaman' carries the focus clitic =ri, but is unmarked for case. The accusative argument sonaka carries the non-obligatory, accusative enclitic =ka. An intransitive clause with the order SV is given in (5). The nominative argument na 'child' is unmarked.

(4)

AOV

Junni ya pone uniri

ya sonaka

junni ya pone uni=ri ya sona=ka

then 3P2 shaman old.M=FOC 3P2 woman=ACC

josolenutie. joso-le-nu-ti-e release-CAUSE.SUF:GEN-EV-RP-DCL 'They say the old shaman released the woman.' {TSEIT0NUNI.21}

(5)

SV

Junni kebi inasa

junni kebi i-na-sa

then dark become-PRG-DR

na jananuti'. na ja-na-nu-ti-e child come-PRG-EV-RP-DCL 'They say when it was getting dark a child was coming.' {MV.AASALUN.19}

Other orders are attested in the texts. In particular topical objects are often fronted resulting in the order OVA. In (6) the woman is the main protagonist in the story

43
and hence highly topical. Fronted objects usually occur in a separate intonation contour with a pause between the object and the rest of the sentence.

(6)

OAV

Tsachi sonaka mankaka, ponela

tsachi sona=ka man-ka=ka, pone=la

person woman=LOC one-NCL=LOC shaman=PL

yukapiyarika

junmantie.

yuka-piya-ri-ka

jo-man-ti-e

evil-lose-CAUSE.SUF:GEN-PF.P BE:AUX-SIT-RP-DCL

'A Tsachi woman, the shamans had cursed (her).'

{MV.TSAB02.3}

Alternatively the object can occur post-verbally as in (7). These objects again, often have a separate intonation contour, and might be best considered right dislocations, rather than bona fide word order variations.

(7)

VO

Wari pinchin kekanin

wari pinchin ke-ka-nin

EMPH strangle hit-GET:GEN-CNTR

kinatieti',

numika.

ki-na-ti-e-ti-e

numi=ka

DO:VCL-PRG-RP-DCL-RP-DCL penis=ACC

'(It) was just strangling (his) penis.

{CCTSONPIPI.280}

The WA" of a transitive clause can also occur postverbally as in (8).

(8)

OVA

Sonaka jele timantie

sona=ka jele ti-man-ti-e

woman=ACC fear SAY:GEN-SIT-RP-DCL

luban

okolari.

lu-ba-n

oko=la=ri

red-QUAL-ST spirit=PL=FOC

'They say they are afraid of women the red

demons.' {VLP.LUBANOKO.15}

Both the A and O may also occur postverbally as in (9) .

(9)

VAO

Tulale,

tulale,

tulale,

tula-le

tula-le

tula-le

unite-CAUSE.SUF unite-CAUSE.SUF unite-CAUSE.SUF

tulale

tulaimin

tula-le

tula-i-min

unite-CAUSE.SUF unite-BECOME:GEN-IMPF.P

joyotieti'

yari, jun biyaali

jo-yo-ti-e-ti-e

ya=ri jun biyalli

BE:AUX-CNJ-RP-DCL-RP-DCL 3P2=FOC 3D1 nutria

tsachika. tsachi=ka person=LOC ' (He) would always meet (him) meeting, meeting, meeting, meeting, he and the nutria.'{CCTSONPIPI.396}

The S of an intransitive clause may also occur postverbally (10).

(10)

45

VS

Tsaninasanan

jinin

tsan-i-na-sa-nan

ji-nin

SMBL-BECOME:VCL-PRG-DR-INCL go-CNTR

inayotieti'

ya tsachiri.

i-na-yo-ti-e-ti-e

ya tsachi=ri

BECOME:VCL-PRG-CNJ-RP-DCL-RP-DCL 3P2 person=FOC

'While this was happening (they) say (he) said

(he) just kept going, this person.'

{CCTSONPIPI.89}

In addition to some variance in word order, Tsafiki frequently elides core arguments. In a survey of 668 finite clauses, 294 or 44% had no expressed core arguments. Neither the intransitive sentence in (11) or the transitive sentence in (12) has overt expression of core arguments.

(11) (12)

Junni kakarinin tinatieti'. junni kakari-nin ti-na-ti-e-ti-e then laugh-CNTR SAY:VCL-PRG-RP-DCL-RP-DCL 'Then they say he said (she) was just laughing.' {CCTSONPIPI.15} Polariyanae pola-ri-ya-na-e come.across-CAUSE.SUF:GEN-DSJ-PRG-DCL titi' . ti-ti-e say-RP-DCL '(They say) (she) said (she) would take (him) across (the river) (if she could).' {MV.AASALUN.286}

The word order for the 374 finite verbs that had at least one core argument overtly expressed are given in

46
(13). A, 0, and S are first counted separately in (13a-c). In (13d) the order for the thirty clauses A and 0 overtly expressed is given.

(13) a. Word Order for A AV 80 85% VA 12 15%

b. Word Order for 0

OV 191 95%

VO

9 5%

c. Word Order for S SV 95 82% VS 17 18%

d. Word Order for clauses with both AOV 23 77% OAV 7 23%

Altogether subjects (A and S) are more likely to occur postverbally than objects- As noted above., arguments occurring in non-canonical word order often have a separate intonation contour and are often separated from the rest of the clause by a pause. An in-depth study of the intonation contour of these word orders need to be done to determine if they are right dislocations containing parenthetical information.

3.1 Verb Final Characteristics

Tsafiki exhibits several structural features that are often found in verb final languages (Greenberg 1963; Dryer 1991, 1997 inter alia).
First, all Tsafiki adpositions are postpositions:

(14) (15)

Aman jodochi

yabi

aman j odo=chi

ya=bi

now armadillo=POSS house=LOC

feyotie. fe-yo-ti-e arrive.there-CNJ-RP-DCL 'Now she said she arrived at the armadillo's house.' {VLP.SUPAN.16}

Wari ya minuka yari wari ya minu=ka ya=ri EMPH 3P2 road=LOC 3P2=FOC

jinin iyotie

titun.

ji-nin i-yo-ti-e

ti-tu-n

go-CNTR BECOME:VCL-CNJ-RP-DCL say-NEG-INT

'He said he went on this road didn't he?'

{VLP.SUPAN.9}

Secondly, the possessor precedes the possessee (16).

(16)

Boliyochi sona ja'nae

tika.

Boliyo=chi sona ja-ya-na-e

ti-ka

Liborio=POSS woman come-DSJ-PRG-DCL say-PF.P

'Liborio's wife said she was going to come.'

{JERAKUWENTA.282}

48
The relational noun precedes the locative enclitic. Relational nouns are primarily grammaticalized body-part nouns encoding the subregion at which a participant is located as in (17).

(17)

Tsanhinasa

matuteri

ya

tsan-i-na-sa

matu=te=ri

ya

SMBL-BECOME:VLC-PRG-DR old.days=LOC=FOC house

punkise

sulonomantie.

punki=se su-lo-no-man-ti-e

ear=through feet.in.air-GO.OUT:GEN-SIT-RP-DCL

'When this happened (the red demons came) in the

old days they would jump out through the corner

of the house (roof).' {VLP.LUBANOKO.10}

In nominal compounds the dependent noun always precedes the head (18).

(18) a. pekaforo pe-ka-foro bottom-NCL-hole 'anus'
c. misubutu mi-su-butu think-rock-top 'The top of the head' fikiforo fiki-foro word-hole 'mouth'

b. kupi ku-pi breast-water 'milk'
d. fikikido fiki-kido word-skin 'lip'
f. temisu te-mi-su arm/hand-think-rock 'finger' (LIT:'head of the arm/hand'

49
The main verb precedes the auxiliary. Tsafiki only has three true auxiliaries, jo 'BE:AUX' (19), ito 'NOT.BE:AUX' (20) and i 'BECOME.-AUX' (see Chapter V). In (19) jo 'BE:AUX' appears with the imperfective participle wiru-rawin 'stand-BE.POSIT:GEN-IMPF.P' and ito 'N0T.BE:AUX' appears with the perfective participle ten-i-ka 'thinkBECOME:GEN-PF.P' (20).

(19) (20)

Ya dechiri ya de=chi=ri 3P2 edge=LOC=FOC

wiruramin

jotieti'.

wiru-ra-min

jo-ti-e-ti-e

stand-BE.POSIT-IMPF.P BE:AUX-RP-DCL-RP-DCL

'They say he would stand at the edge (of the

patio.' {SUYUN1.61}

Ya tenhika ya ten-i-ka 3P2 heart-BECOME:GEN-PF.P

itominnutie

finaeke,

yaka.

ito-min-nu-ti-e

fi-na-e=ke

ya=ka

NOT.BE:AUX-SIT-EV-RP-DCL eat-PRG-DCL=QT 3P2=ACC

'They say she must not have realized he was

eating her. {MV.TSAB01.76}

Nouns occurring in the position of the coverb exhibit a type of noun incorporation (see Chapter IV) and precede the generic verb (21).

50

(21)

Komuna Peripabi naika Komuna Peripa=bi na-i-ka commune Peripa=LOC child-BECOME:GEN-PF.P joe. jo-e BE:AUX-DCL 'He was born in the commune of Peripa.' {CIPANOl.3}

Complement clauses precede the main clause:

(22)

Tsachila talari toteno

tsachi=la tala=ri to-te-no

person=PL DIR=FOC kill-CAUSE.SUF:GEN-INF

podeitiyoe

timanti'.

pode-i-ti-yo-e

ti-man-ti-e

be.able-BECOME:GEN-NEG-CNJ-DCL say-SIT-RP-DCL

'They say he said he couldn't kill people-like

ones.' {TSACHIMANKAMOSO.7}

While the position of adverbs can vary (see Chapter III, Section 2.5), Tsafiki has three adverbial proclitics, man= 'again' (23), ka 'still' (24) and pe 'also' (25).

(23) (24)

Uyan sona mankae

tito...

uyan sona man=ka-e

ti-to...

other woman again=get-DCL say-DR

'....saying he got another woman again.'

{TSONPIPI.45}

Weyan postoteri

nakanan

kajoe.

weyan posto=te=ri na-ka=nan

ka=jo-e

other place=LOC=FOC small-NCL=INCL still=be-DCL

'In some places it (the corn) is still small.'

{SOKOKO.34}

(25)

51
Nu pemeratunjunda. nu pe=mera-tu-n-jo-n-da 2 also=listen-NEG-ST-BE:AUX-ST-DCL.GEN 'You also shouldn't listen.' {BITALISIIY02.36}

The majority of subordinate clauses in Tsafiki precede the main clause and take subordinating suffixes. However, in the texts the order can vary. An example of the canonical order is given in (26). The subordinator tenchi 'in order to' indicates that the action of the subordinate clause is necessary for the carrying out of the action of the main clause. The subordinator normally follows the subordinate clause and both precede the main verb (26).

(26)

Aman wanenan tenchiri

aman ina junse

aman wane=nan tenchi=ri

aman ina jun=se

now slice-INCL in.order.to=FOC now IMM 3Dl=through

manloka... man=lo-ka... man=come.out-PF 'Slicing (the whale open), he came out through there.' {VLP.DADAPOMIN.31}

However, there is one construction in Tsafiki that consistently violates this word order. In 112 examples containing the subordinator yape 'so that' not only does the subordinator precede the adverbial clause, but in 86 cases the subordinate clause also follows the main clause (27). This construction stands out as an anomaly, in that

52
it contradicts the otherwise strong verb-final structural properties of Tsafiki.

(27)

Yaka ponela mandomanti'

wari

ya=ka pone=la man=do-man-ti-e

wari

3P2=ACC shaman=PL again=close-SIT-RP-DCL EMPH

yaka okobinan

man=yape

ya=ka oko=bi=nan

man=yape

3P2=ACC spirit=LOC=INCL again=so.that

latusa

tamolante.

la-tu-sa

tamolan=te

come.out-NEG-DR door=LOC

'Him, the shamans shut him up again, well, in

spirit, so that he wouldn't come out the door

again.' {MV.AASUYUN.42}

Nevertheless, in terms of frequency and structural features, Tsafiki exhibits strong characteristics of a typical verb-final language.

4. Words and Phrases

4.1 Nominal Expressions

Nominal constructions include a head noun or independent pronoun and several modifiers. Nominative case is not marked (see Chapter IV). Noun phrases take casemarking enclitics.
In addition to the head noun, nominal constructions may include demonstratives, a relative clause, a possessor,

53
adjectives and quantifiers. Demonstratives most commonly precede the head noun but the other elements show varying behavior.

4.1.1 Nouns

Nouns can function as heads of noun phrases (28) and (29) .

(28) (29)

Junni aman wa pini jera jalinutie. junni aman wa pini jera jali-nu-ti-e then now big snake all bite-EV-RP-DCL 'Then a big snake bit them all.' {PINIJALA.41}

Junni, ya manka lake kela junni ya man-ka lake kela then 3P2 one-NCL yellow tiger

tefun arale

kakarinamanti'.

tefun ara-le

kakari-na-man-ti-e

tooth scatter-CAUSE.SUF laugh-PRG-SIT-RP-DCL

'Then this one yellow tiger laughed, loosing a

tooth.' {SALUN.81}

Nouns can also function as non-verbal predicates, taking the full range of finite verbal morphology (30-32).

(30) (31)

Kalue

kalue

latinutieti'.

kalu-e kalu-e la-ti-nu-ti-e-ti-e

horse-DCL horse-DCL PL-say-EV-RP-DCL-RP-DCL

'"It's a horse. It's a horse," they say they must have

said.'

Ya ponenutieti'.

ya pone-nu-ti-e-ti-e

3P2 shaman-EV-RP-DCL-RP-DCL

'They say he said he must have been a shaman.'

54

(32)

Baronin

baroyoe

tinutie

tie.

baro=nin

baro-yo-e

ti-nu-ti-e ti-e

buzzard=CNTR buzzard-CNJ-DCL say-EV-RP-DCL say-DCL

'She said he said, "A buzzard, I'm a buzzard.'

{BAROUNI.34}

Pronouns can also serve as non-verbal predicates (33).

(33)

Yayoe

titieti'.

ya-yo-e

ti-ti-e-ti-e

3P2-CNJ-DCL say-RP-DCL-RP-DCL

'"It's me," they say she said.' {TSONPIPI.12}

In (34) the pronoun takes the possessive enclitic followed by the declarative verbal suffix.

(34)

Junni aman, kelabe junni aman, kela=be then now, tiger=COM pataalakinatieti' pata-a-la-ki-na-ti-e-ti-e argue-RECIP-PL-DO:VCL-PRG-RP-DCL-RP-DCL yachieke. ya=chi-e=ke 3P2=POSS-DCL=QT 'They say he said he was arguing with the tiger, (saying the Tsachi) was his.' {CCMANTSA.68}

Nominative case is unmarked. Nouns can take the accusative enclitic =ka. Nominative and accusative casemarking are discussed in some detail in Chapter IV, Section 1.0, and will not be discussed in detail here.

55
Accusative and other case-markers occur suffixed to the final element of the noun phrase. In (35) the possessive enclitic is suffixed to the imperfective participle of the relative clause.

(35)

Ya puyan tsominchi

fikiforonan...

ya puya-n tso-min=chi

fiki-foro=nan

3P2 dead-ST lie-IMPF.P=POSS word-hole=INCL...

'The one who lay there dead's mouth "

{VLP.DONUNPE.15}

The comitative enclitic =be appears suffixed to the numeral in rather than the head noun in (36).

(36)

Aman junni jun mate tarato aman junni jun ma=te tarato now then 3D1 day=LOC contract

kilakimantie,

tsachi mankabe

ki-la-ki-man-ti-e

tsachi man-ka=be

DO:GEN-PL-DO:VCL-SIT-RP-DCL person one-NCL=COM

watsa kabi

jichun.

watsa ka-bi ji-chu-n

fish get-PURP go-IRR-ST

'They say he made a contract to go fishing with a

man.' {B0PI.5}

Noun phrases may take a number of inflectional morphemes. All occur as suffixes on the noun itself or the final element of the noun phrase. The order of the morphemes is given below. The locatives and the final three

56
enclitics also occur on subordinate verb forms, although in a different order than with nouns.

(37)

ROOT 1. Nominal Classifier (-ka, -ni, -de, -pe, -ki) 2. Plural (=la) 3. Possessive (=chi) 4. Accusative (=ka) Dative (=chi) Locative (=bi 'in/at',=ka 'to/at',=le 'in/on', =te 'in', =se 'through', =chi 'in general area') Instrumental (=chi) 6. Locative (=le 'LOC', =te 'LOC') 7. Contrastive (=nin) 8. Grade (=si) 9. Focus (=ri)
10. Semblative (=tsan) 11. Inclusive (=nan)

The locative postpositions are simply glossed as locatives in the texts. The meaning of many of them does not translate easily into English. For example, =chi 'LOC' is used for rooms, caves and the jungle, i.e. it means something like 'go into the general area of a bounded region.' While -bi 'in/on' and -se 'through' can in most cases be translated directly into English, -le and -te mean something such as 'on the general area of' with some unclear differences between the type of contact the object has with the location. The postposition -ka when occurring with motion verbs has an allative sense but this is due to

57
the semantics of the motion verb. Further study is needed to determine the exact range of meaning carried by each locative.
Plural marking is facultative in Tsafiki. In some cases, most often with non-humans, neither the verb nor the noun takes plural marking and the plural reading is inferred from the context as in (38).

(38)

Junni jatele

para

joe titi'.

junni ja=te=le para

jo-e ti-ti-e

then 3D2=LOC=LOC wild.pig be-DCL say-RP-DCL

'Then they say he said that over there are wild

pigs.' {KELATSACHI.14}

In (39) plural marking only occurs on the verb.

(39)

Aman, tsanketobi,

unila mantiminni

aman, tsan-ke-to=bi

unila mantiminni

now SMBL-DO:VCL-SR=LOC man EMPH

jelenchi jilaie. jelen=chi ji-la-i-e jungle=LOC go-PL-BECOME:VCL-DCL 'Now, when they had done this the MEN went to the jungle.' {KASAMA.121}

In (40) the plural marking occurs on both the noun and verb.

(40)

58
Tsachila sufenin Tsachi=la su-fe-nin person=PL feet.in.air-ARRIVE.THERE:GEN-CNTR ilaiyotieti'. i-la-i-yo-ti-e-ti-e BECOME:VCL-PL-BECOME:VCL-CNJ-RP-DCL-RP-DCL 'They say he said the people arrived there running. {DOBE:53}

Plurals are more likely to occur with humans. When the plural marker occurs with animals or inanimates it tends to have a collective reading (41a). To express plurality with non-humans a quantifier such as duke 'a lot' is usually employed (41b). To get a collective reading with a noun that refers to humans the plural is often repeated (41c).

(41) a. pichu=la 'many classes/all types of birds'

b. duke pichu 'many birds'

c. sona=la

'women'

d. pone=la=la 'all types of shamans'

There is some variation among speakers in the use of the plural. Probably due to the influence of Spanish many of the younger speakers do not recognize or utilize the collective sense of the plural exhibited in (41a.)
Plural marking is discussed further in Chapter IV, Section 1.1 and Chapter V, Section 1.2.1)
The two ubiquitous nominal enclitics =nan 'Inclusive' and =ri 'Focus' still require an in-depth discourse study

to explain their function. Both can occur on any element in the sentence except a finite verb. The inclusive =nan often has a reflexive reading (42), although Bruce Moore (1991) from whom the term 'Inclusive' is borrowed consistently translates the morpheme with the Spanish tambien 'too.'

(42)

Tsenan espejobi kirayoe. tse=nan espejo=bi kira-yo-e 1F=INCL mirror=LOC see-CNJ-DCL 'I saw myself in the mirror'

I use the term 'Focus' for =ri because at this point (a discourse study is needed) it appears to only mark a prominent element within the sentence. In this study, I reserve the term topic for an element that is prominent within an extended stretch of discourse. More than one focus marker can appear in a single sentence and the focus marker attracts negation as in examples (43-45).

(43)

Kisin

Fan=ri kuchi

Kisin

Juan=ri kuchi

yesterday Juan=FOC pig

totetue. to-te-tu-e kill-CAUSE.SUF:GEN-NEG-DCL 'Yesterday JUAN didn't kill the pig (someone else did).'

(44) (45)

60

Kisin

Juan kuchiri

Kisin

Juan kuchi=ri

yesterday Juan pig=FOC

totetue. to-te-tu-e kill-CAUSE.SUF:GEN-NEG-DCL 'Yesterday Juan didn't kill the PIG (he killed something else.'

Kisinri

Juan kuchi

Kisin=ri

Juan kuchi

yesterday=FOC Juan pig

totetue. to-te-tu-e kill-CAUSE.SUF:GEN-NEG-DCL 'YESTERDAY Juan didn't kill the pig (he did it some other day.'

The Contrastive =nin, Accusative =ka, and Dative =chi are discuessed in Chapters IV and V and will not be discussed further here. Examples of the other nominal morphology are given below.
In possessive constructions the possessor precedes the possessee (46).

(46)

Ya Chipiri Katochi yabi.... ya Chipiri Kato=chi ya=bi 3P2 Chipiri Kato=POSS house=LOC 'In Chipiri Kato's house...' (CHIPIRI.17}

The instrumental =chi can occur on nouns (47), or it can occur on coverbs coding emotions to indicate the source or cause for a certain behavior (48).

61

(47) (48)

Nuchi tedechi

aman foroto

nu=chi te-de=chi

aman foro-to

2=P0SS hand-NCL=INSTR now hole-SR

ara::le

erena timanti'.

ara::-le

ere-na ti-man-ti-e

IDEO:scatter-CAUSE.SUF send-PRG say-SIT-EV-DCL

'They say he said "Open it with your hand and send it

scattering araa.' {KELATSACHI.55}

Yaka pachi

piyanada,

yari.

ya=ka pa=chi

piya-na-da

ya=ri

3P2=ACC anger=INSTR lose-PRG-DCL.GEN 3P2=FOC

'She's dying from anger at him.' {PILABAN.122}

Examples of the various nominal postpositions are given below:

(49)

Junni nalala

mantiminni nunchi jito

junni na=la=la mantiminni nun=chi ji-to

then child=PL=PL EMPH

which=LOC go-SR

uyan yabi uyan ya=bi strange house=LOC

felaimantie. fe-la-i-man-ti-e arrive.there-PL-BECOME:VCL-SIT-RP-DCL '(The children got lost.) Then they say they went every which way and arrived there at a strange house.' {CHIPIRI.15)

(50) (51) (52)

62

Tamolante temisu larisa tamolan=te temisu la-ri-sa wall=LOC finger come.out-CAUSE.SUF:GEN-DR

tinuda

mulu inanunka

ti-nu-da

mulu i-na-nun=ka

say-EV-DCL:GEN fat BECOME:GEN-PRG-NOM=ACC

miichun. mi-i-chu-n know-BECOME:GEN-IRR-ST 'She told them to stick their finger through the wall, so she could see if they had gotten fat.' {CHIPIRI.KATO}

...man pisase

man

...man pisa=se

man

...one island=through one

patilaiyoe

titi'

pati-la-i-yo-e

ti-ti-e

go.down-PL-BECOME:VCL-CNJ-DCL say-RP-DCL

'They say he said they went down by way of another

island.' {MALI.51}

Junka mantiminni minule

j un=ka mantiminni minu=le

3D1=ACC EMPH

road=LOC

chutenan

kururi

chu-te-nan

kuru=ri

sit-CAUSE.SUF:GEN-INCL guatusa=FOC

paide

janamantie.

pa-i-de

ja-na-man-ti-e

angry-BECOME:GEN-ASSOC.M come-PRG-SIT-RP-DCL

'They say when they had set this in the road the

guatusa was coming angry.' {VLP.KURU.57}

The following examples (53-55) below illustrate cases in which more than one postpostion occurs on the noun. The postpositions listed as occurring in position 4 in (37), cannot

co-occur with each other, but can occur with all of the morphemes listed in the other positions.

(53)
(54) (55)

Yari mankasirinan

kuru

ya=ri man-ka=si=ri=nan

kuru

3P2=FOC one-NCL=GRAD=FOC=INCL guatusa

pamin

joti'.

pa-min

jo-ti-e

call-IMPF.P BE:AUX-RP-DCL

'They say he goes alone to call the guatusa'

{JAKURU1.64}

Jeralete pinisiri

jominnutie.

jera=le=te pini=si=ri

jominnutie

all=LOC=LOC snake=GRAD=FOC be-IMPF.P-EV-RP-DCL

'(Her body) all over was just snake/Snakes were

all over (her).' {GA.23}

Junni leyan

sona=ri man-ka pone

junni leya-n

sona=ri man-ka pone

junni illegitimate-ST woman=FOC one-NCL shaman

unichika

jinutie.

uni=chi=ka ji-nu-ti-e

old=POSS=LOC go-EV-RP-DCL

'They say the mistress went to the old shaman's.

{VLP.TSEITON.2}

4.1.2 Relational Nouns

As noted above, nouns, particularly body parts can serve as relational nouns. Some of the more frequent relational nouns include beten 'back', pe 'feces/bottom', punki 'ear', and ne 'foot'. The latter occurs frequently

64
with the locative =chi to express the idea of 'from' (56) An example with pe 'feces/bottom' is given in (57).

(56) (57)

Junni ya, ya kolejiyobi nechi jada. junni ya, ya kolejiyo=bi ne=chi ja-da then 3P2 3P2 school=LOC foot=LOC come-DCL.GEN 'Then he, he came from the school.'

Junni aman jun tsantinari pone junni aman jun tsan-ti-na-ri pone then now 3D1 SMBL-SAY:VCL-PRG-FOC shaman

unichi

ya pekachi

nosa

uni=chi ya pe-ka=chi

nosa

old.M=POSS house bottom-NCL=LOC silent

tiwinpoleto

junchi

tiwin-pole-to

jun=chi

turn-GO.ACROSS:GEN-SR 3D1=L0C

katsolaimantie. katso-la-i-man-ti-e sleep-PL-BECOME:VCL-SIT-RP-DCL 'They say while he was saying this they quietly went around back behind the old shaman's house to sleep there.' {VLP.LUBANOKO.25}

4.1.3 Independent Pronouns

Three persons are distinguished in the paradigm of independent pronouns, first, second and third person. Third person pronouns are recruited from demonstratives and hence exhibit deictic distinctions. In '3P1' is a proximate marker indicating 'close to speaker'. It is an emphatic form, often accompanied by a pointing gesture and higher

tone. Ya '3P2' the second proximate pronoun is the most commonly occurring demonstrative and indicates 'close to speaker', but is not emphatic. Jun and jaa indicate 'distal', the difference between these two is not clear. I simply gloss them as 'Distal One (Dl)' and 'Distal Two (D2)'. Jein is an emphatic proform. It can be used to refer to a noun or can function with a verb class marker as a proverb. First person pronouns distinguish between masculine and feminine gender. The plural form is based on the feminine first person pronoun. Plural forms are formed with the same plural marker that occurs with nouns.

(58)

IF 1M 3 (PI)
(P2) (Dl) (D2) PROrEMPH

Singular chike/tse la in ya jun jaa jein/jeen

Plural chikela/chila (M and F) inla yala junla jaala jeinla/jeenla

First and second person pronouns are used for contrast, emphasis and clarification. In (59) the father is contrasting what he wants the children to do as opposed to what HE is going to do.

(59)

66

Nalalaka

nulari intele

na=la=la=ka

nu=la=ri in=te=le

child=PL=PL=ACC 2=PL=F0C 3P1=L0C=L0C

chularana

lari chinape

chu-la-ra-na

la=ri china-pe

sit-PL-BE.POSIT-PRG 1M=F0C bee-feces

porechinayoe

titie.

po-re-chi-na-yo-e

ti-ti-e

cut-CAUSE.SUF:GEN-INGR-PRG-CNJ-DCL say-RP-DCL

'They say he told the children, "You stay right

here, I'11 go cut down the honey.' {RLAPAK.7}

In (60), a speaker has been retelling a story about an arrest she heard from someone else. Suddenly she starts using the eye-witness evidential form, the listener immediately questions this asking "You saw it?" The speaker answers with "I saw it."

(60) a. Nu kiramanyun? nu kira-man-yo-n 2 see-SIT-CNJ-INT 'You saw it?"
b. Tse kiramanyo'. tse kira-man-yo-e IF see-SIT-CNJ-DCL 'I saw it.'

An example of the third person distal pronoun jun '3D1' is given in (61). In discourse, jun is often used to reintroduce an entity that has already been talked about, but no in the immediately preceding stretch of discourse.

67
The narrator had been talking about a woman's suitor. She then goes on to talk about other aspects of the woman's life before she returns to talking about the suitor.

(61)

Junni jun jito mantiminni wari

junni jun jito mantiminni wari

then 3D1 go-SR EMPH

EMPH

manjatunutie. man=j a-tu-nu-ti-e again=come-NEG-EV-RP-DCL 'Then they say that one left and didn't come back again.' {PILABAN.44}

An example is taken from a conversation in which a woman is pointing to a radio. She first refers to it with innin, which carries the contrastive marker and contrasts with the radio someone was thinging of buying. She then refers to the buyer with ya, then to the radio again, this time with the accusative form inka, and then refers to the radio again with yari.

(62)

Innin ya inka

munatinari,

in=nin, ya in=ka

muna-ti-na-ri,

3P1=CNTR 3P2 3P1=ACC desire-SAY:GEN-PRG-FOC

ya=ri kase man miyon. ya=ri kase man miyon 3P2=FOC almost one million 'This one, if he wants to buy this one, it is almost one million (sucres).' {JERAKUENTA1.332}

68
Tsafiki also has a set of interrogative pronouns. They can take case markers to function as different kinds of interrogative pronouns, e.g. mo 'who', mo=ka 'whom', mo=chi 'whose' etc.

(63)

mo ti numasi nuwi nisi niyanka nun

'who' 'what' 'when' 'where' 'how much' 'how many' 'which'

4.1.4 Demonstratives

Tsafiki has five demonstratives: in '3P1', ya '3P2', jun '3D1', jaa '3D2 and jein 'PRO:EMPH. They commonly occur before the head noun and as the initial element of the noun phrase (64) and (65).

(64)

Ya unilari wari uyan sonala mantato ya unila=ri wari uyan sona=la man=ta-to 3P2 man=FOC EMPH other woman=PL again-have-SR

wari in paluka sonalaka wari in palu-ka sona=la=ka EMPH 3PI two-NCL woman=PL=ACC

puyarichun

tito...

puya-ri-chu-n

ti-to...

die-CAUSE.SUF:GEN-IRR-ST say-SR...

'This man, taking another woman, wanted to cause

these two women to die...' {VLP.SUPAN.5}

(63)

69
Aman manka tsachiri, yari jun sonalaka aman man-ka tsachi=ri ya=ri jun sonalaka now one-NCL person=FOC 3P2=FOC 3D1 woman=PL=DCL munainutieti'. muna-i-nu-ti-e-ti-e desire-BECOME:GEN-EV-RP-DCL-RP-DCL 'Now one man, he desired that woman.' {WILINKI.2.46}

4.1.5 Adj ectives

Tsafiki adjectives may function as modifiers and as non-verbal predicates. The majority of elements serving in an adjectival function in Tsafiki are derived from coverbs or verbs. In addition nouns may modify other nouns. There is only one, undisputable, underived adjective wa 'big', which is probably related to the coverb owa 'grow'. Other adjective-like elements such as kumana 'weak', epe 'useless', laki 'sad' and lake 'yellow' can function as adjectives, adverbs or coverbs.
Adjectives may appear before or after the modified noun. The underived adjectives, including wa 'big' and the pseudo-adjectives, such as lake 'yellow' and nouns functioning as modifiers almost always precede the head noun. (64) contains two nominals functioning as adjectives, lake 'yellow', which modifies the noun kala 'money', which in turn modifies tolo 'bag'. In (65) wa 'big' modifies the

70
noun paru 'waterfall7 and in (66) the noun kuwafu 'white clay' modifies the noun sona 'woman'.

(64) (65) (66)

Ya lake kala toloka kato ya lake kala tolo=ka ka-to 3P2 yellow money bag=ACC get-SR

manjalaimantie. man=j a-la-i-man-ti-e again-come-PL-BECOME:VCL-SIT-RP-DCL 'They say they grabbed the gold money bag/bag of gold money and came back.'

Wa parubi

manpiyapolenin

wa paru=bi

man=piya-pole-nin

big waterfall=LOC again=lose-GO.ACROSS:GEN-CNTR

imanti'. i-man-ti-e BECOME:VCL-SIT-RP-DCL 'They say he disappeared again in the big waterfall. {MV.AASALUN.118}

Jun kuwafu

sona ya

jun kuwafu

sona ya

3D1 white.clay woman 3P2

kanaminnutieti'. ka-na-min-nu-ti-e-tie get-PRG-SIT-RP-DCL-RP-DCL 'They say he said the white clay woman must have taken it.' {CCTSONPIPI.8O}

The adjectives derived from coverbs and verbs are essentially relative clauses, and like relative clauses the order of head noun/relative clause varies. Perfective participles (67) and predicates nominalized with -n 'be in a state' can function as adjectives (68). Example (67) is

71
.an example of a pre-head derived adjective while (68) is an example of a post-head derived adjective.

(67) (68)

Junni na palukabe, junni junbi yari junni na palu-ka=be junni jun=bi ya=ri then child two-NCL=COM then 3D1=L0C 3P2=FOC

sona piyaka yabinan,

chuti'.

sona piya-ka ya=bi=nan

chu-ti-e

woman dead-PF.P house=LOC=INCL sit-RP-DCL

'They say the dead woman/the woman who had died

lived in the same house with the two children.'

{SONAPUYAN.23}

Junni yari piyan

oko mma

junni ya=ri piya-n oko mma

then 3P2=FOC dead-ST spirit madam

manjanutieti'. man=j a-nu-ti-e-ti-e again-come-EV-RP-DCL-RP-DCL 'They say he said the dead woman must have gone back again.' {PIYANOKOMMA.73}

The majority of adjectives expressing emotional qualities have a special form. They occur with the nominalized generic verb po-n 'put-ST' as in (69).

(69)

Amali susu tamin

jominnutie,

amali susu ta-min

jo-min-nu-ti-e

many dog have-IMPF.P BE:AUX-EV-RP-DCL

wa susu papunla. wa susu pa-pu-n=la big dog angry-PUT:GEN-ST=PL 'They say they must have had many dogs, all kinds of big, angry dogs.'

72
Adjectives, like nouns, many function as non-verbal predicates:

(70)

Patele lan punmanti'. patele lan po-n-man-ti-e priest lazy PUT:GEN-ST-SIT-RP-DCL 'They say the priest was lazy.' {ICMATU5.5}

Ajectives may also occur followed by an existential copula expressing either permanent (71) or transient states (72) :

(71) (72)

Weyan tsachiri sen

jolajoyoko.

weyan tsachi=ri se-n jo-la-jo-yo-ko

other person=FOC good-ST be-PL-BE:AUX-CNJ-DUB

'The other people were good?' (JCPUKA11.28}

Ya jodo

mmari

papun

ya jodo

mma=ri pa-po-n

3P2 armadillo madam=F0C angry-PUT:GEN-ST

animali jotie. animali jo-ti-e very be-PR-DCL 'They say the armadillo woman was very angry.' {VLP.SUPAN.17}

4.1.6 Relative Clauses

Relative clauses are formed with the imperfective participle suffix -min and the perfective participle suffix -ka, to form a nominative and accusative aligned relative clause respectively. Relative clauses of locatives and

73
instruments are formed with the nominalizer -nun. The order of relative clause/head noun varies. The most common order given in elicitation is relative clause/head noun (73).

(73)

To tenpe chumin tsachi junmanti'. to tenpe chu-min tsachi jo-man-ti-e earth under be-IMPF.P person be-SIT-RP-dcl 'They say (they) were the tsachi that lived under the ground.' {VLP.DATSANIN.2}

In texts, the head noun can appear before the relative clause (74).

(74)

Na tsotsoka wiloraminka na tsotso-ka wilo-ra-min=ka child infant-NCL h&ng BE.POSIT:GEN

fiminmantie,

Malaba.

fi-min-man-ti-e

Malaba

eat-IMPF.P-SIT-RP-DCL NAME

'They say the Malaba (people) eat the little

infants that are hanging (in a papoose).'

{MALABA.4}

Headless relative clauses are quite common (75). In this case the relative clause functions as a referring noun phrase.

(75)

74

Pibi

uraminka

unila

pi=bi

ura-min=ka

unila

water=LOC float-IMPF.P=LOC man

supatito... su-pati-to... feet.in.air-go.down-SR... 'The man jumped down to the one that was floating in the water and...' {CCTSONPIPI.209}

Relative clauses are discussed at more length in Chapter III, Section 1.2.

4.1.7 Quantifiers and Numbers

Tsafiki has a number of quantifiers that generally precede the head noun. The most common quantifiers are nasi 'a little', duke 'a lot', jera 'all', amali 'many', and piyanle 'all, total'. Duke and amali can also function as adverbs.
Tsafiki appears to have orginally had a number system based on five: man 'one', palu 'two', peman 'three', junpalu 'four' and mante 'five'. The other numbers which complete the present day system based on ten are borrowed from Quichua and Spanish: sota 'six' (from Quichua sucta), siyete 'seven' (Spanish siete), ochu 'eight' (Spanish ocho), nue 'nine' (Spanish nueve), chunka 'ten' (Quichua),

75
patsa 'one hundred' (Quichua), mili 'one thousand' (Spanish mil), and miyon 'one million' (Spanish mil Ion).

4.1.8 Nominal Classifiers

Tsafiki has five basic nominal classifiers, as well as several nouns that have a double function as nouns as well as nominal classifiers (Moore 1991). The semantic basis for the majority is shape. Classifiers are required for all numerals except man 'one' when they occur with concrete nouns. When occurring without the classifier, man generally is interpreted as 'other'. Classifiers do not occur with abstract nouns such as ma 'day' or wata 'year'. The five basic classifiers are listed in (76) and examples are given in (77).

(76)

Five basic nominal classifiers -ka General classifier, any three dimensional
objects. Is the only classifier for humans. It has two possible sources which in turn may be related: ka 'fruit' and kaka 'eye'. -ni Small grain-like objects. It is transparently related to ni 'grain'. -de Long, rigid object, -pe Hard, planular object. -ki Planular and flexible, cloth, paper, leaves. It is possibily derived from kido 'skin'.

76

(77)

peman-ka sonala 'three women' peman-ni arosi 'three grains of rice' peman-de chide 'three planks, boards.' peman-pe kutape 'three tables' peman-ki tunan 'three skirts'

Some nouns can occur with more than one classifier and the use of a different classifier results in a difference in meaning:

(78)

palu-de ano 'Two single bananas' palu-ki ano 'Two banana leaves.' palu-puka ano 'Two stalks of bananas'

Tsafiki also has a classifier for actions -ne, which occurs suffixed to numerals and indicates the number of times the action was performed (79)

(79)

Palune o pemanne dilikate palu-ne o peman-ne dili-ka=te two-NCL o three-NCL massage-PF=LOC manseimin joe. man=se-i-min jo-e again=good-BECOME:GEN-IMPF.P BE:AUX-DCL 'After it gets massaged two or three times, it will get better.' {MV.ACPONE.100}

In addition there are a number of nouns that can function as classifiers including sili 'rope/vine', as well as reduced forms of nouns, ja 'leaf' from japisu 'leaf'.

(80) a. junpalu-sili nepi

'Four ayaguasca vines'

b. junpalu-ja(pisu) ano 'Four leaves of platano'

Although it is possible to elicit classifiers with nouns, particularly to create elements that refer to parts of wholes such as in (78) above, most nouns do not occur with classifiers. Although some nouns, such as na 'child/small', uni 'old.man', and sinu 'old.woman' more often than not do occur with a classifier. This is probably due to their uncertain status as nouns. Na 'child can occur alone as a referring element, but it always takes a classifier when functioning as a modifier (81). Na is also one of the few nouns that can occur in the position of a coverb (see Chapter III, Section 2.1.1). A thorough investigation of the function of nominal classifiers and under just what conditions they occur with nouns still needs to be undertaken.

(81)

Naka

chide ali jera patie.

na-ka

chide ali jera pati-e

child-NCL tree branch all fall-DCL

'All the little leaves fell.' (SUPAN.35}

Some of examples of nominal classifiers ocurring in texts are given below (82):

(82)

78

Nominal Classifier with Nouns

Wari ano

mokininsileri

wari ano

mo-ki-nin-si-le-ri

EMPH platano desire-DO:GEN-CNTR-IMM-LOC-FOC

jun nakaka

wari finin kinun

jo'

jun na-ka=ka

wari fi-nin ki-nun

jo-e

3P1 child-NCL=ACC EMPH eat-CNTR DO:VCL-NOM

jo'

pinbabe anoberi,

jo-e

pinba=be ano=be=ri

BE:AUX-DCL salt=COM platano=COM=FOC

anodeka. ano-de=ka platano-NCL=LOC 'Well when one gets hungry (when in the jungle on a long hunting trip), one would have to eat a little something, platano and salt, a platano.' (JAKURU5.1320}

A numeral plus classifier can be used as a referring element as the first uses of manki 'one cloth thing' in (83) and mande 'stick/pole' in (84).

(83)

Kasaleri

duke, duke moora, manki, manki

kasa=le-ri duke duke moora, man-ki man-ki

first=LOC=FOC a.lot a.lot quick one-NCL one-NCL

manki sita tunan manpetsanpa kimin man-ki sita tunan manpetsanpa ki-min one-NCL weave skirt male.skirt DO:VCL-IMPF.P

j omin

j onhon.

jo-min

jo-n-jo-n

BE:AUX-IMPF.P BE:AUX-ST-BE:VCL-ST

'At first she did it very very quickly, another

one, another one, another woven skirt, a male

skirt.' {TSAB02.5}

(116)

Mannan unilari chide mande mande

mannan unila=ri chide man-de man-de

again man=FOC tree one-NCL one-NCL

poreto

kuwanutie

junchi

po-re-to

kuwa-nu-ti-e jun=chi

cut-CAUSE.SUF:GEN-SR give-EV-RP-DCL 3D1=L0C

supanka misulakisa

tito.

supan=ka misu-la-ki-sa

ti-to

bat=ACC head-PL-DO:VCL-DR say-DR

'Now they say the man cut a stick and then

another one and gave them (to the women) saying

hit the bats in there hard.' {VLP.SUPANDO.3}

Nominalized coverbs also occur with noun classifiers (see Chapter III, Section 2.1).

4.2 Verbs

The majority of verbs in Tsafiki are complex, and Chapters Three and Four describe both elements of the complex predicate as well as the basic structure of a simple clause in Tsafiki. In this section, I will discuss finite inflectional morphology and subordinate clause constructions not discussed in the following chaters.

4.2.1 Finite Verb Morphology

Finite verbs are defined in Tsafiki by their ability to take evidential, mirative and mood markers. As mentioned previously, nouns functioning as non-verbal predicates can

also take these inflectional morphemes. Verbs can however, be distinguished from nouns in that they require nominalizing morphology to be used as nominals. Tsafiki has no morphemes dedicated to tense distinctions. The only agreement on the verb is the non-obligatory subject plural marker -la (See Chapter IV, Section 1.0, and Chapter V, Section 1.2.1). The perfective and imperfective/habitual aspects are formed with participle forms and an auxiliary (See Chapter V, Section 2.0). The only aspectual marker found on the verb is the progressive suffix -na, which can also occur on subordinate clauses (see below). The remaining suffixes include: the negative -ti/-tu, the disjunct -i/-ya, the conjunct -yo, the evidential -nu, the situational -man, the INGRtive future chi-na, the irrealis chu-na, the reportative -ti and the mood suffixes: the speculative -nka, the declarative -e, the declarative general knowledge -da, the interrogative -n, the dubitative -ko and the certainty marker -re. There are four adverbial proclitics: 'semblative' tsan=, 'also' pe=, 'again' =man, and 'still' =ka. There are, of course, restrictions on which morphemes can co-occur. In addition, there is some flexibility, but the most common basic order of the verbal morphemes is given below.

81

(85)

1. ADV1 'still'

ka= 'still'

2. ADV2 'also'

pe= 'also'

3. SMBL

tsan=

4. ADV3 'again

man- 'again'

5. COVERB

6. VERB

7. RECIPROCAL

-(ka)a

8 . NEG

-tu

9. PLURAL

-la

10. VERB CLASS M.

-ki, -i, -ti, -ra -jo

11. NEG

-ti/tu

12. DISJUNCT

-i/ya/ka-i

13. PROGRESSIVE

-na

14. INGRTIVE

-chi-na

IRREALIS

-chu-na

EVIDENTIAL

-nu

SITUATIONAL

-man

HISTORICAL HABITUAL -noman

15. CONJUNCT

-yo

16. MOOD

Speculative

-nka

Interrogative

-n

Declarative

-e

Declarative.General -da

Dubitative

-ko

Certain

-re

The plural and negative forms are discussed at some length in Chapters Four and Five and will not be addressed here. The majority of the remaining morphemes can be grouped into the categories evidential/mirative markers and mood markers. So after first discussing the proclitics and the progressive I'll discuss with some detail the complex evidential/mirative system.
The adverbal proclitics usually occur on the first element of the complex predicate (86) or before a simple

82
verb (87) and (88). The proclitic ka= 'still' co-occurs with the progressive marker when attached to an active verb (86). This is not necessary with a stative verb (87) or if the verb phrase contains a stative auxiliary (88) (see Chapter V).

(86) (87)
(88)

Kasutanjinae. ka=su-ta-n-ji-na-e still=feet.in.air-have-ST-GO:GEN-PRG-DCL 'He's still chasing her." {PACHIP.46}

Junni wari ichinakari junni wari ichi-na-ka=ri then EMPH tiny-small-NCL=FOC

kajomintieti'. ka=j o-min-ti-e-ti-e still=be-IMPF.P-RP-DCL-RP-DCL 'Then they say he said it is still pretty small.' {VLP.DAWILINKI.36}

Nukari matunan

kasa tinasa

nu=ka=ri matu=nan

ka-sa ti-na-sa

2=LOC=FOC old.days=INCL get-DR say-PRG-DR

kameraka

itominlae.

ka=mera-ka

ito-min=la-e

still=listen-PF.P NOT.BE:AUX-IMPF.P=PL-DCL

'You wouldn't listen when I was telling you

before to grab him.' {BOPI.48}

Examples of the other two proclitics are given below (89) and (90). There is also an independent word with roughly the same meaning as man= 'again', formed with the

83
same morpheme followed by the inclusive man-nan 'againINCL' (91).

(89) (90) (91)

Meri, nu pejino

joyun ayuna?

Meri, nu pe=j i=no jo-yo-n ayuna

Meri, 2 also=go-INF BE:AUX-CNJ-INT tomorrow

'Meri, do you have to go tomorrow too?'

{JERKUWENTA4.121}

Junsiri

manjanin

jun=si=ri man=ja-nin

3D1=GRAD=F0C again-come-CNTR

iyotie. i-yo-ti-e BECOME:GEN-CNJ-RP-DCL 'He said after that he came back.' {SUPAN.14}

Mannan

wanbi mannan

lati'.

man=nan wanbi man=nan la-ti-e

again=INCL after again=INCL come.out-RP-DCL

'They say again, afterwards, he came out again.'

{TSACHIMANKA.13}

The semblative =tsan is discussed at some length in Chapter V.
The progressive (Comrie 1976; Dahl 1994) primarily appears on active verbs1 as in (92) and (93). Active verbs, out of context, are considered by default to be past tense. The presence of the progressive marker, out of context with an active verb, can signal present tense.

1 Active verbs are defined as verbs which take the verb class markers i 'become', ki 'do' and ti 'say'. See Chapter V for further discussion.

(92) (93)

84

Ya nene tsantinae

ti'.

ya nene tsan=ti-na-e

ti-e

3P2 lie SMBL=SAY:GEN-PRG-DCL say-DCL

'He said "He is lying like this."' {BITALISIYO.2}

Tseri kiranayoda. tse=ri kira-na-yo-da 1F=F0C see-PRG-CNJ-DCL.GEN 'I was looking.' {JERAKUWENTA.50}

The progressive -na can occur on stative verbs, carrying much the same meaning as the English progressive does when occurring with a stative verb. Note the translation of (94) 'he is being a man' has a sense of irony in the English, i.e. it implies he is only a man for the moment. The Tsafiki has the same sense of irony. It can also indicate doubt as in (95) and often occurs with the complements of tenja 'imagine'. In (95) the speaker is simply speculating on how a woman in jail contacted her family.

(94) (95)

Ya unila jonae. 3P2 man be-PRG-DCL 'He is being a man.'

Ya kiranun tiri

junnae

ya kira-nun tiri

jo-na-e

3P2 see-NOM something be-PRG-DCL

tenjae. ten-ja-e heart-COME:GEN-DCL 'I imagine how they found out was something like that.' {JERAKUWENTA.116}

85
The progressive is also used as an imperative (96). It is a more polite, less forceful form than the imperative -de.

(96)

Yachi mala kuwana. ya=chi mala kuwa-na 3P2=DAT chicha give-PRG 'Could you give him the chicha?'

4.2.2 Reciprocals and Reflexives

Reflexives in Tsafiki are to a large degree derivational. All but what Kemmer (1993) calls the direct reflexive, are formed with a coverb and different generic verbs (See Chapters Three and Four). Direct reflexives, or actions performed directly on oneself, can occur with the affected body part either as a direct object or a locative (97), although most of the time it is simply understood from the context. The use of the enclitic =nan, 'INCLUSIVE' further clarifies that this is a reflexive construction. There is a reflexive pronoun tenkachikenan, but in all the texts it only occurs twice. One of those examples is given below (98).

(97) (98)

86

Tse tedeka/bi=nan

poreyoe

tse tede=ka/=bi=nan pore-yo-e

IF hand=ACC/=LOC=INCL cut-CNJ-DCL

'I cut my hand/I cut my own hand/myself on the

hand.'

Junni aman yalanan

tenkachikenan

junni aman ya=la=nan ten-ka-chike=nan

then now 3P2=PL=INCL heart-NCL-lF=INCL

paito pa-i-to angry-BECOME:GEN-SR

warenaminnan,

su tikatiya

wa-re-na-min=nan

su tikatiya

cry-CAUSE.SUF:GEN-PRG-IMPF.P=INCL rock whatever

jera walakeerelakimantie. jera wala-ke-ere-la-ki-man-ti-e all toss-hit-SEND:GEN-PL-DO:GEN-SIT-RP-DCL 'They say now the ones that were crying, angry at themselves, threw all the (shaman) stones out.'

There are two reciprocal constructions. The first construction occurs with inherently reciprocal coverbs (Kemmer 1993). The reciprocal is formed with the coverb, the generic verb i 'become' and the plural. The coverb aman 'hug' appears in three basic constructions in (99) below. The coverb with the generic verb i 'become' and the plural, codes a reciprocal event (99a). With just the generic verb and without the plural it codes a permissive event (99b) (See Chapter IV, Section 2.0). Finally, with a different

87
generic verb ki 'do' it codes a one way hug. Juan does not necessarily hug back in (99c).
(99) a. Yala amanhilaie. ya=la aman-i-la-i-e 3P2=PL hug-BECOME:GEN-PL-BECOME:VCL-DCL 'They hugged.'
b. Gloria Fanbe amanhie. Gloria Fan=be aman-i-e Gloria Juan-COM hug-BECOME:GEN-DCL 'Gloria let Juan hug her.'
c. Gloria Fanka amankee. Gloria Fan=ka aman-ke-e Gloria Juan-ACC hug-DO:GEN-DCL 'Gloria hugged Juan.'
The second reciprocal construction occurs with predicates that are not inherently reciprocal. This construction consists of the optional augmentative suffix ka followed by -a suffixed to a bivalent predicate. The augmentative suffix is more likely to occur on the finite verb form. The reciprocal construction always takes a single core argument (100).

(100)

88

Junni ponela tala pataato

chuto

junni pone=la tala pata-a-to

chu-to

then shaman=PL DIR argue-RECIP-SR be-SR

yuka kikaato yuka ki-ka-a-to evil DO:GEN-AUG-RECIP-SR

totekaalakimantie. to-te-ka-a-la-ki-man-ti-e kill-CAUSE.SUF:GEN-AUG-RECIP-PL-DO:GEN-SIT-RP-DCL Then they say the shamans kept arguing among themselves, cursing each other and trying to kill each other.' {VLP.PINIJAL.1}

4.2.3 Evidentiality, Mirativity and Epistemic Modality

The majority of the verbal suffixes are dedicated to the three categories of evidentiality, mirativity and epistemic modality (see Dickinson 2000; DeLancey 1985, 1986a, 1990a, 1992, 1997, 1999; Slobin and Aksu 1982; Aksu and Slobin 1986; Chafe and Nichols 1986 inter alia). These three categories are closely related and often conflated in languages such as English, i.e. the 'must have' construction. In Tsafiki these three categories are distinct. They are defined as:

(101) a.

Mirative indicates the relationship the information coded in the proposition has to the speaker's general expectations and knowledge.

b. Evidential indicates the source of the information coded in the proposition.

89
c. Epistemic Modality indicates the speaker's attitude towards the proposition in terms of certainty, probability, desirability etc.

In Tsafiki all three of these categories can be coded separately as in (102). In this example, a man is waking up "the morning after" and realizes he must have made a foolish mistake while intoxicated the night before and revealed some secret information. He doesn't really remember it, so the verb is marked with -nu 'EV, deduced from physical evidence' and because he doesn't remember his own behavior, (normally one does), the clause takes the disjunct -ya indicating the information is not congruent with normal expectations. Finally, it takes the mood marker -ko because he is not sure what really happened.

(102)

Tichun

painke

ti-chu-n pa-i-n=ke

what-IRR-ST speak-DSJ-INT=QT

tenhimantie,

winan ito

ten-i-man-ti-e,

winan i-to

heart-BECOME:GEN-SIT-RP-DCL drunk BECOME:GEN-SR

epe

warente kuchito payanukoke.

epe

warente kuchi-to pa-ya-nu-ko=ke

useless liqueur drink-SR speak-DSJ-EV-DUB=QT

'Why did I speak? they say he thought, Getting

drunk, drinking that useless liqueur, I must have

told them, didn't I?' (FLABIYA.36-37)

90
4.2.3.1 Mirativity

The mirative system consists of two distinctions (Dickinson 2000; DeLancey 1997, 1999). If the information in the proposition is congruent with the speaker's expectations and general knowledge the conjunct -yo is used. If the information is not congruent with the speaker's expectations the disjunct suffix -ya/i is used. These markers generally only occur when the source of the information is the same as a participant in the event.
However, at first glance the system looks like a person-marking system distinguishing first person from second and third. In (103) below the subject is first person and the verb is suffixed with -yo 'conjunct.' The next two clauses have second and third person subjects and the verb is unmarked for mirativity.

(103)

First Person

Aman pamukinasa

kirato

aman pa-mu-ki-na-sa

kira-to

now angry-desire-DO:GEN-PRG-DR see-SR

wirurayoe,

tse=ri.

wiru-ra-yo-e

tse=ri

stand-BE.POSIT:GEN-CNJ-DCL 1F=FOC

'Now as this was pissing me off, I was standing

(there) watching it.' {JRKW3.16-17}

(104) (105)

91
Second Person, Declarative Nu, nu pasuwato nu nu pa-suwa-to 2 2 anger-CAUSE.BECOME:GEN-SR wirurae. wiru-ra-e stand-BE.POSIT:GEN-DCL 'You, you are standing (there) bothering (us).' {JERAKUWENTA3.56} Third Person, Declarative Tsachi pasuwato tsachi pa-suwa-to person anger-CAUSE.BECOME:GEN-SR wiruraetieti'. wiru-ra-ti-e-ti-e stand-BE.POSIT:GEN-RP-DCL-RP-DCL 'They say she said that a man was standing there bothering (her).' {SUYUN.8}

In questions the conjunct marker -yo now appears with a second person subject (106), a first person question occurs with the disjunct -i (107), and third person remains unmarked (108). Note that both the question and the answer in (106a-b) appear with the conjunct marker.

(106) a.

Second Person, Question Junni panhanutie junni, panha-nu-ti-e then ask-EV-RP-DCL

nu tika

finayunke?

nu ti=ka fi-na-yo-n=ke

2 what=ACC eat-PRG-CNJ-INT=QT

'Then they say he asked, "What are you eating."'

b. First Person, Declarative

Mololo finayoe

tinin

mololo fi-na-yo-e

ti-nin

firefly eat-PRG-CNJ-DCL say-CNTR

tinutie. ti-nu-ti-e SAY:GEN-EV-RP-DCL 'They say he said that he was just eating fireflies.' {AAPALUKA.31-32}

(107)

First Person, Question

In sonakari

niyaito

iton

in sona=ka=ri niya-i-to

ito-n

3PI woman=ACC=FOC how-BECOME:VCL-SR not.be-ST

suwano

joinke?

aman

suwa-no

jo-i-n=ke

aman

CAUSE.BECOME:GEN-INF BE:AUX-DSJ-INT=QT now

tenka

kankee...

ten-ka ka-n-ki-e

heart-NCL get-ST-DO:VCL-DCL

'Now he must have been thinking "How can I get

rid of this woman...'" {URU.23}

(108)

Third Person, Question Jaabi Rinti jan? jaa=bi Rinti ja-n? 3D2=LOC Rinti come-INT 'Did Rinti come there? (JRKWT1A.496)

The conjunct/disjunct markers can only be used when the source of the information is a participant in the event. Complements of speech verbs or verbs coded with reportative suffixes (-ti) can carry the conjunct/disjunct markers if the subjects of both clauses are co-referent (109). The absence of the conjunct/disjunct marker

93
indicates the subjects are not co-referent (110).

(109) (110)

Jera jera all sujilaiyotieti'. su-ji-la-i-yo-ti-e-ti-e feet.in.air-GO:GEN-PL-BECOME:VCL-CNJ-RP-DCL-RPDCL 'Theyi said that theyi all ran.' {CCANKULU.197} Jera jera all sujilaitieti'. su-ji-la-i-ti-e-ti-e feet.in.air-GO:GEN-PL-BECOME:VCL-RP-DCL-RP-DCL 'They say theyi said that theyj all ran.' {CCTSONPIPI.268}

Evidence that the conjunct/disjunct markers are not first person agreement markers comes from the use of the first person pronoun in (111). The verb is not marked for conjunct/disjunct. The subject of the complement is different than the matrix clause hence the conjunct marker does not appear despite the presence of the first person pronoun.

(Ill)

Ya la mantoka

jie tie.

ya la man-to=ka

ji-e ti-e

3P2 1M other-earth=LOC go-DCL say-DCL

'He said that I went to Santo Domingo.'

94
Further evidence that these are not direct quotes comes from the possessive pronoun in both (112a) and (112b) below. In this example a lizard is asking a man if he eats her children (lizard eggs). If this were a direct quote the expected form of the possessive pronoun form would be tse=chi 'my', not ya=chi 'his/her'.

(112) a. Yachi naka

fitumanyun?

ya=chi na=ka

fi-tu-man-yo-n

3P2=POSS child=ACC eat-NEG-SIT-CNJ-INT

tinutieti'. ti-nu-ti-e-ti-e say-EV-RP-DCL-RP-DCL 'They say he said she asked him if he ate hers (her children).'

b. Yachi fitumanyoe ya=chi f i-tu-man-yo-e 3P2=POSS eat-NEG-SIT-CNJ-DCL

ti-nin tito

kirawoyoe

ti-nin ti-to

kira-wo-yo-e

say-CNTR SAY:VCL-SR see-CAUSE.SUF:GEN-CNJ-DCL

tieti'. ti-e-ti-e say-DCL-RP-DCL 'They say he said he showed (her) (his teeth) saying he didn't eat hers.' (CCMANTSA.107,110)

(113a-b) are direct quote forms with the appropriate first and second person pronouns occurring with the conjunct marker.

95

(113) a.

Laka tsantie

nu merayun?

la=ka tsan-ti-e nu mera-yo-n

1=ACC SMBL-say-DCL 2 hear-CNJ-INT

'So he said to me, "Do you hear it?'"

b. La merayoe

tiyoe.

la mera-yo-e ti-yo-e

lm hear-CNJ-DCL say-CNJ-DCL

'I said, "I hear it."' (AAKMEDI2.9-10)

As noted above, the conjunct/disjunct markers can only occur when the source of the information is the same as a primary participant. Only a participant can evaluate the status of the event. The conjunct/disjunct markers can occur when the speaker is part of the group. The speaker is talking about the habits of the Tsachila in the old days in (114a). The verb takes no conjunct/disjunct marking. In (114b) she is speaking about their present day habits. Although the subject is technically third person here, she is part of the group, knows the situation well and the verb takes the conjunct marking.

(114) a. Jun materi

Tsachila pini

jun ma=te=ri tsachi=la pini

3D1 day=LOC=FOC person=PL snake

fiminla

jomantie.

fi-min=la

jo-man-ti-e

eat-IMPF.P=PL BE:AUX-SIT-RP-DCL

'They say in the old days the Tsachila used to

eat snakes.'

96

b. Amana Tsachila amana tsachi=la nowadays person=PL

fituminla

joyoe.

fi-tu-min=la

jo-yo-e

eat-NEG-IMPF.P=PL BE:AUX-CNJ-DCL

'Nowadays the Tsachila don't eat snakes.'

{CCTSAPINI.20-21}

The next example is similar to the above. Here the speaker is asking a question about everybody, a group to which he undoubtedly belongs, so he uses the disjunct form on the verb even though the subject here is technically third person.

(115)

Junni piyanle tsachilanan mowin pun junni piyanle tsachi=la=nan mowin po-n junni total person=PL=INCL spirit put-ST jolajoin? jo-la-jo-i-n be-PL-BE:VCL-DSJ-INT 'Then does everybody have this spirit?' {JCPUKA6.16}

The conjunct/disjunct markers also often occur with predicates coding the arrival of dawn and dusk (116) with a reading much like English 'it got dark on me'. Two forms are possible, one with and one without the conjunct marker depending on the degree the participant is affected (117) and (118).

(116)
(117) (118)

Sano tsala tenpe wito sano tsala tenpe wi-to twine mound under go.in-SR

paloranle

tseiyoe

palo-ra-n=le

tse-i-yo-e

face.down-BE. POSIT: GEN-ST=LOC light-become-CNJ-DCL

titi'

yari.

ti-ti-e ya=ri

say-RP-DCL 3P2=FOC

'They say he said going underneath the mound of

twine, he stayed face down (until) it got light

(on him) .' {AATETOMINU.117}

Jayanato kebi iyoe. jaya-na-to kebi i-yo-e work-PRG-SR night become-CNJ-DCL 'While I was working it got dark on me (As a consequence I couldn't finish).'

Jayanasa kebi ie. jaya-na-sa kebi i-e work-PRG-DR night become-DCL 'While I was working it got dark (Doesn't matter).'

An interesting aspect of this construction is that even though with the conjunct marker the subordinate verb takes -to 'Same Reference', unless there is a subordinate verb the phrase kebi i 'get dark' does not take another argument. Hence the first person pronoun in (119) is not acceptable in any form.

(119)

*Tse/*tsechi kebi iyoe. Tse/tse=chi kebi i-yo-e 1F/1F=DAT night become-CNJ-DCL '*It got dark on me.'

98

The conjunct/disjunct suffixes interact differently with different verb classes (Dickinson 2000). A disjunct marker with a transitive active verb often indicates accidental behavior (120b), whereas the conjunct can signal intention (120a).

(120) a.

La yaka kiyoe. la ya=ka ke-yo-e 1M 3P2=ACC hit-CNJ-DCL 'I hit him (intentionally).'

b. La yaka keie. la ya=ka ke-i-e 1M 3P2=ACC hit-DSJ-DCL 'I hit him (unintentionally).'

With monovalent verbs with a single undergoer argument, the disjunct indicates unawareness or unconsciousness. Both (121a-b)indicate an accident, but the first indicates that the speaker was aware that a fall was possible—the ground was slippery or he was dizzy. In (121b) the speaker just suddenly found himself on the ground.

(121) a.

La keereiyoe. la ke-ere-i-yo-e 1M hit-send-BECOME:GEN-CNJ-DCL 'I fell (expected).'

b. La keeraiie. la ke-ere-i-i-e 1M hit-send-BECOME:GEN-DSJ-DCL 'I fell (unexpected).'

With a stative verb, the disjunct indicates that there is a feature of the situation that does not correlate with the features usually identified for that state. (122b) has a sense of irony, the speaker knows he appears to others as bad, but knows internally that he is not. (122a) indicates the speaker is bad and he knows it (Dickinson 2000: 386388) .

(122) a.

La seiton

joyoe.

la se-ito-n

jo-yo-e

1M good-NOT.BE:GEN-ST be-CNJ-DCL

'I'm bad. (and I know it).'

b. La seiton

joie.

la se-ito-n

jo-i-e

1M good-NOT.BE:GEN-ST be-DSJ-DCL

'I'm bad. (but I don't believe it).'

As with evidentials and certain types of epistemic modality (doubt) the use of the disjunct with an activity (123a) or motion verb (124a) leads to a somewhat odd reading—the speaker must have been in an extreme state of altered awareness when the event occurred. Note that these verbs are also odd with the English 'must have' translation. This can be remedied by elaborating the event in which case the focus of the disjunct is focused on the elaboration. In (123b) the disjunct marker indicates that it was the crossing over to the mestizo's land that was

100
unintentional and in (124b) the disjunct indicates that the location is a surprise. The speaker thought he was going to a new place and suddenly recognizes he has been there before.

(123) a.

La jaya keie. la jaya ki-i-e 1M work DO:GEN-DSJ-DCL ??'I must have worked.'

b. Fetochi

witaka poleto

feto=chi

wita=ka pole-to

mestizo=POSS farm=LOC go.across-SR

jaya keie. j aya ki-i-e work DO:GEN-DSJ-DCL 'Crossing (unintentionally) over to the nonTsachi's farm, I worked.'

(124) a.

Tse jiie. tse ji-i-e IF go-DSJ-DCL ??'I must have gone'

b. Carlobe tse inte faie. Carlo=be tse in=te fa-i-e Carlos=COM IF 3P1=L0C arrive.here-DSJ-DCL 'I've arrived here (before) with Carlos! (I just realized that Carlos' brother's house is the house I know as Juan's friend's house).'

The mirative markers code the relationship the information coded in the question has to the speaker's general knowledge. As might be expected there are special forms for rhetorical questions. The speaker already knows

101
the answer. A positive question implies a negative answer (125), (126) and (127a). A negative question implies a positive answer (127b). The first person and third person forms use the INGRtive future chi-na. The first person form is accompanied by the mirative marker. The second person has a unique form again based on the INGRtive chi.

(125)

First Person Rhetorical Question

Jiichinan?

(te)

ji-i-chi-na-n

(te)

go-DSJ-INGR-PRG-INT (no)

'Would I go? (No)

(126)

Second Person Rhetorical Question

Jichiton?

(te)

ji-chito-n

(te)

go-2RHET-INT

(no)

'Would you go?' (No)

(127) a.

Third Person Rhetorical Question (Positive)

Jichinan?

(te)

ji-chi-na-n

(te)

go-INGR-PRG-INT (no)

'Would he go?' (No)

b. Third Person Rhetorical Question (Negative)

Jituchinan?

(jaan)

j i-tu-chi-na-n

(jaan)

go-NEG-INGR-PRG-INT (yes)

'Wouldn't he go?' (yes, (he's going))

There is also a special form, the historical habitual, that is used to code events which the speaker used to do in the past but no longer does. These verbs always indicate

102
that the speaker was a participant in the event. In (128b) there are no pronouns or other indication of first person, but this can only be interpreted with a first person reading. The speaker knows this because he habitually did this action, although he no longer does it.

(128) a. Walpakari

jun materi

bopi kela

walpa=ka=ri jun mate=ri

bopi kela

chiken=ACC=FOC 3D1 old.days=FOC fox tiger

kamin

jomanhe

kepen.

ka-min

jo-man-e

kepen

get-IMPF.P BE:AUX-SIT-DCL night

'In the old days the foxes and tigers used to get

the chickens, at night.'

b. Jun tenchi

walpaka

dotosiri

jun tenchi

walpa=ka do-to-si=ri

3D1 in.order.to chicken-ACC close-SR-IMM=FOC

katsonomanhe. katso-noman-e sleep-HAB.P-DCL 'Because of this we used to sleep, closing in the chickens.' {CCANKULU.142-144}

4.2.3.2 Evidentials

There are three basic evidential constructions. The first (129a), unmarked form, is based on direct sensory experience. The second (129b), coded with the suffix -nu, is based on knowledge inferred from direct physical evidence and the third (129c)is deduced from general

103
knowledge. This form uses a nominalized verb form and a VCL (see Chapter V and (Dickinson 2000:407-408).

(129) a. Manuel ano fi-e. Manuel food eat-DCL 'Manuel ate.' (The speaker saw him.)
b. Manuel ano fi-nu-e. Manuel food eat-EV-DCL 'Manuel has eaten.' (The speaker sees the dirty dishes.)
c. Manuel ano fi-n-ki-e. Manuel food eat-ST-DO:GEN-DCL 'Manuel must have eaten.' (He always eats at 8:00 it's now 9:00.)

Tsafiki also has a reportative. When this suffix -ti, tranparently derived from ti 'say' occurs with another evidential form it indicates the basis for the original speaker's information (130).

(130)

Manuel ano finutie. Manuel ano fi-nu-ti-e Manuel food eat-EV-RP-DCL 'He said/they say Manuel has eaten.' (They didn't see him, but they have direct physical evidence.)

This suffix may be employed up to three times to indicate that three different speakers intervene between the original coding of the event and its present recounting
(131).

(131)

104

Mantoka

jitie

titie

tie.

man-to=ka

ji-ti-e ti-ti-e ti -e

other-earth=LOC go-HS-DCL say-HS-DCL say-DCL

'They say they say they say he went to Santo

Domingo.'

The evidential -nu can also be interpreted as a mirative marker with third person. It indicates that the event coded in the proposition is unexpected from the perspective of the speaker. In (132) below, a man has had has head snipped off by a giant firefly. The perspective is set with one of the primary protagonists who has witnessed the whole event. Here he has direct sensory evidence, he sees that the head is not dead, but the -nu is used to indicate that this is unexpected. Detached heads are generally dead.

(132)

Misukari

puyatunutieti'!

misu-ka=ri puya-tu-nu-ti-e-ti-e

head-NCL-FOC die-NEG-EV-RP-DCL-RP-DCL

'They say he said the head wasn't dead!'

(PALUKA.133)

A similar situation holds in (133) . A man thinks he has gone up the hill to attend a fiesta with what it turns out are a group of bewitched animals. When he wakes up in the morning he realizes he is actually in a giant tree. The balsa bench he is lying on is actually a tree limb. Again,

105
he has direct sensory evidence he is in a tree.

(133) a.

To jomintsannan

joe tieti'

To jo-min=tsan=nan/

joe ti-e-ti-e

earth be-IMPF.P=SMBL=INCL be-DCL say-DCL-RP-DCL

'They say he said it seemed to be the ground.'

b. Aman, kiranari jamobi aman kira-na=ri jamo=bi now see-PRG=FOC top=LOC

jomin

jonue!

tieti'

jo-min jo-nu-e

ti-e-ti-e

be-IMPF.P BE:AUX-EV-DCL say-DCL-RP-DCL

'They say he said now, looking he was up high.'

{MV.AASALUN.73-77}

In (134) a mother is showing a paper her young son has written to some relatives. The mother watched her son write the whole page. Hence here the evidential is expressing her surprise that he can write so well, rather than coding an event that is only known through its results.

(134)

Tsan jera kinu'

yari!

tsan jera ki-nu-e

ya=ri

SMBL all DO:VCL-EV-DCL 3P2=FOC

'Like HE wrote it all!' {JERKUW.34}

The suffix -man 'situational' is somewhat in contrast with the mirative sense of -nu 'evidential.' The two morphemes cannot co-occur2. It indicates that the situation

106
coded by the verb is expected—the final sequence in a series of actions (Moore 1991). At present, this morpheme is poorly understood. A constrastive pair is given below. (135) was pronounced in a situation in which I had left my son in Quito, thinking he was returning to the United States. He decided not to leave and unexpectedly showed back up in Congoma. Everyone was surprised and a young girl in the house uttered (135), indicating the unexpectedness of his return. She saw his return. Had his return been expected (136) could have been used to code the event.

(135) (136)

Aeson manjanue! Aeson man=ja-nu-e Aeson again-come-EV-DCL 'Aeson came back (unexpected).' Aeson manjamanheAeson man=ja-man-e Aeson again=come-SIT-DCL 'Aeson came back (expected).'

The situational always has a past tense interpretation except when it occurs with the conjunct -yo and an active verb. In this construction it indicates a habitual activity (137). Otherwise, the habitual is coded with the
2 The -noman 'historical habitual' is sometimes pronounced -/nvman/ due to the nasalization of the 'o' before the nasal stop. This should not be confused with the evidential -nu which is never pronounced /no/.

107
imperfective participle (See Chapter V).

(137)

Ya manka na

sujimanyoe

ya man-ka na

su-j i-man-yo-e

3P2 one-NCL little feet.in.air-go-SIT-CNJ-DCL

tieti'. ti-e-ti-e say-DCL-RP-DCL 'They say this little one said "I run (races)." {SA7.4}

This habitual sense does not occur when -man-yo occurs with a stative verb. (138) codes a singular, stative situation. A man has gone hunting, as a natural sequence to this the woman is left with the children.

(138)

Junni, nalabe

chumanyotieti'.

junni na=la=be

chu-man-yo-ti-e-ti-e

then chi1d=PL=COM sit-SIT-CNJ-RP-DCL-RP-DCL

'Then they say she said she was (there) with the

children.' {KATIMOWIN.6}

When -man 'Stituational' occurs with of -na 'progressive' it indicates past progressive (139) and an expected action given the situation.

(139)

108
Jun ayanni ano kabi Jun ayanni ano kabi 3D1 mother food get-LOC jinamanyotieti'. j i-na-man-yo-ti-e-ti-e go-PRG-SIT-CNJ-RP-DCL-RP-DCL 'They say the mother said she was going to get food.' {CCMANTSA.110}

The evidential coding information that is deduced from general knowledge is formed with a nominalized verb and a verb class marker. This construction is discussed in Chapter V, Section 1.2.3. so will only be discussed briefly here. In (140) below the parents are trying to figure out why their daughter, normally an early riser, is still abed. She is sleeping with a child so they deduce that this could be the reason.

(140)

Nabe

lobale

katsoto

na=be

lo-ba-le

katso-to

child=ASSC heat-QUAL-CAUSE:SUF sleep-SR

tsankari

katsonhinae.

tsan=ka=ri katso-n-i-na-e

SMBL=ACC=FOC sleep-ST-BECOME:VCL-PRG-DCL

'She is sleeping warmly with the child that's why

she is sleeping (so long).' {AASALUN.87}

This is the verb form found in past conditionals. In (142) the subordinate verb is suffixed with -manpa 'Past Conditional' while the main verb takes the nominalized verb

109
with a verb class marker, indicating this is deduced from general knowledge.

(142)

Nasi

kajamanpari

ponekari

na=si

ka=j a-manpa=ri

pone=ka=ri

small=GRAD still=come-P.COND=FOC shaman=LOC=FOC

fino jominla jonhunhe

son

fi-no jo-min=la jo-n-jo-n-e

son

eat-INF BE:AUX=PL BE:AUX-ST-BE:VCL-ST-DCL alive

'If he had kept going just a little bit more,

they would have eaten the shaman alive.'

{TET0MINU2.115}

4.2.3.3 Evidentials and conjunct/disjunct

While as shown in (120-122) above, the conjunct/disjunct markers can appear in free distribution with an unmarked verb form, only the disjunct occurs with both -nu and the deductive evidential -n-VCL. This follows from the meaning of the conjunct/disjunct markers. Normally one is a direct witness to one's own actions. To only know of one's own actions by the results (physical evidence) or by deduction, is not the expected situation. In (143) a blind witch has been sucking the eyes out of a group of sleeping men. One of the men, a shaman, is aware of what is happening and when she reaches him, he kneels down, lifts up his kilt, and lets her feel his behind. She assumes from the physical evidence that she has already eaten his eye.

110
The disjunct marker -ya is reduced to a glottal stop here. Speakers vary as to whether they express the disjunct here with just the glottal stop or the full morpheme.

(143) a. Junni aman jera peforolate junni aman jera pe-foro=la=te then now all feces-hole=PL=LOC

tala

tala

kee titie

wari.

tala

tala

ke-e ti-ti-e wari

touch:IDE0 touch:IDEO do-DCL say-RP-DCL EMPH

'They say he said she touched and touched all

over his behind, well.'

b. Junsi tsantitie

wari. "Aaaaa" titie.

jun=si tsan=ti.-ti-e wari. aaaaa ti-ti-e

3D1=GRAD SMBL=say-RP-DCL well aaaaa say-RP-DCL

'At this they say he said she said this.

"Aaaaaa," she said.

c. Inkari

fika jo'nue

titie.

in=ka=ri fi-ka jo-ya-nu-e

ti-ti-e

3P1=L0C=F0C eat-PF BE:AUX-DSJ-DCL say-RP-DCL

'"I must have already eaten this one," they say

she said.' {MV.TETOMINU.235}

The next example (144) codes a situation in which the speaker believes he has never eaten armadillo, until someone tells him it was in last week's lunch soup (See Dickinson 2000). He had had soup all that week, if armadillo was in the soup he must have eaten it3.

3 Note that the verb class marker is i 'become' here, not the expected ki, that normally occurs with the verb fi 'eat. There is some evidence that ya is the original

Ill

(144)

Jodoka

fiinhie.

jodo=ka

fi-i-n-i-e

armadillo=ACC eat-DSJ-ST-BECOME:VCL-DCL

'I must have eaten armadillo.'

While the conditions controlling the use of an evidential generally hold—direct sensory evidence, direct physical evidence, deduction from general knowledge—the evidentials in fact have been extended to code the speaker's relationship in the event in terms of degree of participation. Speakers living in the same household may use the direct sensory form even when they have not directly witnessed the event. In (145) below, a husband uses the direct form to state that his wife had forgotten a chicken (for dinner) on the bus. He only knows she forgot it because she told him. He did not see her leave it on the bus. He can use this form because he is a participant in this event. He's not having chicken for dinner. A person who did not live in the household would be considered presumptuous (were they expecting to be invited for dinner?) if they used this form.

disjunct marker, which was often accompanied by i 'become'. Ya has dropped out in many environments, leaving the i 'become' which is now interpreted as a disjunct marker. This would explain why here it controls the verb class marker (See Chapter V.)

(145)

112

Patarinonan pata-ri-no=nan come.down-CAUSE.SUF:GEN

pansika

joe

wari.

pan-si-ka

jo-e

wari

calm-REMOVE.SUF:CAUSE-PF.P BE:AUX-DCL well

'She forgot to bring (the chicken) down (off the

bus).' {JRKW3.7}

One of the more interesting extensions of the mirative/evidential system is its role in reference tracking. As noted previously, almost half of Tsafiki narrative sentences have no overt expression of arguments and there is a single non-obligatory plural agreement marker. Reference is tracked through the use of switchreference markers, conjunctive phrases (see Chapter V) and the mirative/evidential markers. In the narratives the perspective is usually placed with one of the main protagonists in the story. The use of the mirative and evidential markers then clearly indicates who is doing what. In the following examples (146a-d) the perspective has been initially set with a man who has gone fishing and has an encounter with a water monster. Despite the fact that there are no overt arguments in this stretch of discourse, the referents are being tracked by the mirative/evidential markers. In (146a) there is no

113
conjunct/disjunct marking on the verb sujamantieti' which indicates this is not an action of the main protagonist but rather of the monster. In (146b) the conjunct marker on the verb manfayoe indicates this is an action carried out by the protagonist. In (146c) there is again no conjunct/disjunct marking on the verb, keereka jonutieti', indicating this is not an action of the protagonist. The evidential suffix, -nu, on the main verb, indicates that the main protagonist just sees the result of the throwing of the canoe. He did not see the event. Finally in (146d) there are no reportative markers on the verb, indicating this information is a direct interjection from the present narrator, and the perspective is not with the main protagonist. The verb form used junjunhe indicates that he is deducing what must have happened from his knowledge of the overall situation.

(146) a.

Todato kade kade sujamantieti'. 'They say he (the man) said exploding (out of the water) (the water monster) came running grabbing (at him) grabbing (at him).'

b. Tsaninasa tule mansupatato kanowa tsonunte manfayoe timantie. 'They say he (the man) said while this was happening he (the man) ran straight down and arrived where the canoe was lying.'

114
c. Kanowaka dilan tala kato keereka jonutieti'. 'They say he (the man) said that (someone) had grabbed the canoe and turned it over.'
d. Junni ya wilinki nalala jomin junjunhe 'Well it must have been the water monster's children.' {VLP.DAPOMIN.123-126} 4.2.4 Irrealis Constructions

Tsafiki has four irrealis (Givon 2001) constructions that can serve as futures. They may also be used in past contexts, but out of context are interpreted as futures. The first two constructions most commonly occur with the conjunct marker, although the disjunct marker is possible in special contexts (see Dickinson 2000). The second two constructions can only occur with the disjunct marker.
The first construction consists of the suffix -chi 'INGRESSOVE' followed by -na 'PROGRESSIVE'. This construction codes an event that is at the beginning stages of inception. In (147) a wife sees her husband preparing to leave the house and asks:

(147)

Nu jichinayun

minuchi?

nu j i-chi-na-yo-n

minu=chi

2 go-INGR-PRG-CNJ-INT road=LOC

'Are you going up to the road?' (wife to husband)

{JRKW.la.19}

In the following clause, the eye-eating witch from

115
(148) above is beginning to move among the men to suck out their eyes, as she does so she begins to sing:

(148)

Kanta kinin

kinatie

kanta ki-nin

ki-na-ti-e

sing DO:GEN-CNTR DO:VCL-PRG-RP-DCL

ya kaka fichinayoeke. ya kaka fi-chi-na-yo-e=ke 3P2 eye eat-INGR-PRG-CNJ-DCL=QT 'They say she was just singing, "I'm going to eat the eyes.' {TET0MINU2.46}

This construction can also be used with third person. In (149) a trouble-making guatusa has been left tied up by a mob of angry people. He is trying to talk a lion into changing places with him, telling him that the people are going to feed him huge quantities of food:

(149)

Duke animali kuwalakechinae duke animali kuwa-la-ke-chi-na-e a.lot much give-PL-DO:GEN-INGR-PRG-DCL 'They're going to give (me) a huge amount (of food).' {VLP.KURUKUW.75}

The second construction codes a situation in which someone has to do something in order to fulfill a specific goal. This construction is formed with the infinitive form of the verb and the auxiliary jo 'BE:AUX'. The action is usually something the speaker wants to do for his own benefit. In (150) a husband is asking what else he needs to

116
buy in town, while in (151) a woman is talking about her plans for the day. (152) has a third person subject and indicates the person needs to go to Santo Domingo for his own benefit.

(150) (151) (152)

Ayan, yakari

tanjano

ayan ya=ka=ri ta-n-ja-no

mother 3P2=ACC=FOC have-ST-COME:GEN-INF

joyoko? jo-yo-ko BE:AUX-CNJ-DUB 'Mother, is this all I have to bring (from town)?'

Amana tse kebiinasa

peloto kebi

amana tse kebi-i-na-sa

peloto ke-bi

today 1FE night-BECOME:GEN-PRG-DR ball do-PURP

]ino j oyoe. jino jo -yo-e go-INF BE:AUX-CNJ-DCL 'Today, when it gets dark, I have to go play soccer.7 {SA3.1}

Ya Mantoka

jino joyoe.

ya man-to=ka

ji-no jo-yo-e

3P2 other-earth=LOC go-INF BE:AUX-CNJ-DCL

'He has to go to Santo Domingo.'

The next two constructions can only occur with disjunct marking, (when the source of the information is the same as the primary participant). The first construction is formed with the irrealis suffix -chu and the progressive -na. With a first person, but not a third,

117
this codes obligation, often with a strong sense that this is not something the speaker wishes to do. In (153) a woman is talking about taking her mother to a curandero 'healer' in a town several hours away on the coast.

(153)

Junte ayanka jun=te ayan=ka 3D1=L0C mother=ACC petanj iichunae. pe=ta-n-j i-i-chu-na-e also=have-ST-GO:GEN-DSJ-IRR-PRG-DCL 'I should take (my) mother there.' {JRKla.331}

In (154) the speaker is talking about what they would have to do in the old days, when they went hunting and saw lots of signs of wild pigs, but no actual wild pigs.

(154)

Niyan ti jonan niya-n ti jo-nan how-ST what be-INCL wanilaiichunaeke. wan-i-la-i-i-chu-na-e=ke wait-BECOME:GEN-PL-BECOME:VCL-DSJ-IRR-PRG-DCL=QT 'For whatever reason we would have to wait.' {KURUKUWENTA4.141}

When the subject is third person and not the source of the information this sense of obligation is not there. In (155) some tigers who have restored an old woman to her youth are simply stating their predictions concerning her

118
future.

(155)

Junni aman nuri unila mankichunaeke. junni aman nu=ri unila man-ki-chu-na-e=ke then now 2=FOC man again-do-IRR-PRG-DCL=QT 'Then (they said) "You will get another husband."' {SINUKA.271}

The next construction, only occurs when the source of the information is the same as the primary participant. It carries an opposite sense than the above construction. Whereas with -chuna, there is a conflict between the protagonist's obligation to do something and his desires (he doesn't really want to), in the next construction the protagonist wants to carry out the action but extenuating circumstances may not permit it. This construction is formed with the progressive marker -na and the disjunct marker. In (156) the son of a somewhat evil bear plans to kill his father, but the bear is big, the son is small and it might not come to pass. The ke 'DO:VCL' in (156) is functioning as a proverb, referring to the verb tote 'kill' in the previous sentence.

119

(156)

Yari apa janaminka

itsan

ya=ri apa ja-na-min=ka

in=tsan

3P2=FOC father come-PRG-IMPF.P=ACC 3Pl=like

ke'naeke ki-ya-na-e DO:VCL-DSJ-PRG-DCL (He said) he would kill his father who was coming (if he could){PAYA1.62}

In (157) the speaker is talking about buying a part for a car in Santo Domingo. The part might not be available

(157)

Jaan ayuna, mantobi jaan ayuna man-to=bi jaan tomorrow other-earth=LOC one-NCL=CNTR

mankanin

ke'nae

man=ka-nin

ki-ya-na-e

again=get-CNTR DO:VCL-DSJ-PRG-DCL

'Yes tomorrow, I will just get one in Santo

Domingo (if I can).' {JRK.156}

4.2.5 Mood

The final position in the verb is filled by one of several mood markers: -e 'DECLARATIVE', -da 'DECLARATIVE GENERAL', -ko 'DUBITATIVE', -n 'INTERROGATIVE', -de 'IMPERATIVE' and -re 'CERTAIN'. All but the last two occur in free distribution with the evidential and mirative markers discussed in the previous section.
The imperative -de contrasts with the use of the progressive marker -na as an imperative in that it is much

120
stronger and more likely to be used with a child or someone over whom the speaker has some authority. The following is from a personal narrative concerning the old days when they would have to carry a priest down from Quito every year or so to marry, baptize or bury. Here the speaker is talking about how hard it was but still, the priest would insist on being carried.

(158)

Wari podeitiyoe. wari pode-i-ti-yo-e well be.able-BECOME:GEN-NEG-CNJ-DCL

Mannan

panalakede

man=nan pana-la-ke-de

again=INCL carry.on.back-PL-DO:VCL-IMP

panalakede. pana-la-ke-de carry.on.back-PL-DO:VCL-IMP 'I couldn't do it. But (the priest would say) "Carry me! Carry me!"' {ICMATU5.7}

The suffix -re does not appear directly on verb roots nor occur with any of the other finite verbal morphemes. It can occur directly suffixed to nouns or to non-finite verb forms creating a finite verb. It codes speaker certainty. In (159) the speaker, missing a previous portion of the discourse, wants to know who had been shouting angrily. The other speaker simply answers with the name of the person affixed with -re.

121

(159) a.

Mo? mo who 'Who?'

b. Liroire. Liroi-re Leroy-CERT 'Leroy/It was Leroy (for sure)'

In (160) a speaker accepts and confirms that she forgot a chicken on the bus.

(160)

Juntonan jun orari junto=nan jun ora=ri but=INCL 3D1 hour=FOC

wari pansikare

wari

wari pan-si-ka-re

wari

well calm-REMOVE:GEN-PF-CERT well

'But at that time, it was already forgotten (for

sure, nothing to be done about it).' {JRK.4}

The remaining mood markers are fairly self-evident in their function. The difference between the two declaratives is that the -da 'DECLARATIVE.GENERAL' indicates that this is general knowledge 'as everybody knows', whereas -e is solely coding the speaker's perspective. All of the mood markers can occur in free distribution with mirative and evidential markers. They clearly form a separate category.
In questions, the evidential or mirative marker is always based on the speaker's assumptions about how the

122
questionee knows the information. In (161) an aunt is questioning her niece about a theft of some items from her neice's bag at school. She uses the evidential -nu because the neice did not see the theft. She is simply asking her neice if she has evidence the items were taken.

(161)

Tanjanun? ta-n-ja-nu-n have-ST-GO:GEN-EV-INT 'Did (they) take (some other items in the bag)?' {JRK.423}

In (162) the speaker is asking the questionee to give a speculative answer as to whether the questionee is going to go into town.

(162)

Speculative Kati, jinola joyonkan? Kati, ji-no=la jo-yo-nkan Kati, go-INF=PL BE:AUX-CNJ-SPEC 'Kati, do you think you are going to have to go?' {JRKW3.364}

In (163) a narrator is beginning a story and asking the listener to use his own judgement based on his general knowledge as to whether the story is true or not.

(163)

Tsa junhunkan

o nene junhunkan?

tsa jo-n-jo-nkan

o nene jo-n-jo-nkan

true be-ST-BE:AUX-SPEC or lie be-ST-BE:AUX-SPEC

'Could it be true or is it a lie?' {JCMALI.2}

123

The following examples illustrate different mood markers with various evidentials.

(164)
(165) (166)

-da 'DECLARATIVE.GENERALf

Tsanke

tenka

tsan-ke

ten-ka

SMBL-DO:VCL heart-NCL

and -nu

'EVIDENTIAL'

kalakinuda

yala sonala.

ka-la-ki-nu-da

ya=la sona=la

GET:GEN-PL-DO:VCL-DCL.GEN 3P2=PL woman=PL

'Doing this the woman must have found out (as

everybody knows)' {MALILI.21}

-ko 'DUBITATIVE' and -nu 'EVIDENTIAL' Padeseilaiannuko. padese-i-la-i-na-nu-ko suffer-BECOME:GEN-PL-BECOME:VCL-PRG-EV-DUB ' (The children) must be suffering right?' {JRKW5.354}

-da 'DECLARATIVE.GENERAL and -nVCL (deduced from

general knowledge)

Ya man tenkarin

Diyosichika

ya man ten-ka=ri-n

Diyosi=chi=ka

3P2 one heart-NCL=FOC-ST God=POSS=ACC

jinhida. ji-n-i-da go-ST-BECOME:GEN-DCL.GEN 'It is this other heart (soul) that must go to God.' {ACPUKA1.34}

(167)

124

-ko 'DUBITATIVE and -nVCL (deduced from general

knowledge)

Amanari

itonin

amana=ri

ito-nin

nowadays=FOC not.be-CNTR

itonjunhunko ito-n-jo-n-j o-n=ko NOT.BE:AUX-ST=BE:VCL-ST-BE:VCL-INT-DUB 'Nowadays (there) just aren't any (fish in the river) right?' {PUKA1.34}

4.3 Complement Clauses

Tsafiki has both independent and dependent complement clauses (Noonan 1984; Zavala 2000; Givon 2001b; inter alia). The form of the complement clause is determined by the governing predicate, although some predicates can occur in more than one type of construction.

4.3.1 Dependent Complement Clauses

Dependent complement clauses will be examined first. There are two different forms depending on whether the subjects of the two predicates exhibit co- or disjoint reference. When the subjects are co-referent the complement verb is suffixed with the infinitive -no and occurs immediately preceding the verb with no other elements intervening between the complement and matrix verb. The matrix verbs occurring in this construction include jo

125
'be', the modality complex predicates: mi-i 'learn', pode-i 'be able', mi-ra 'know', mu-ke 'want', muna-i 'desire', and muna-ra 'need' and the speech verb ti 'say'. Examples of intransitive clauses are given below. Note that in both examples there is a single negative marker on the matrix verb. The complement in this construction cannot be individually negated.

(168) (169)

Manlono

podeitutie.

man=lo-no

pode-i-tu-ti-e

again=go.out-INF be.able-BECOME:GEN-NEG-RP-DCL

'They say she couldn't go out again.'

{URUSONA.87}

Ayan junto pi kabi

jino

ayan junto pi ka-bi ji-no

mother but water get-PURP go-INF

muketue

tinutie.

mu-ke-tu-e

ti-nu-ti-e

desire-DO:GEN-NEG-DCL say-EV-RP-DCL

'They say she said, "But Mother, I don't want to

go get water.' {VLP.SUYUN.10}

In (170) and (171) the complements are transitive verbs. The object of the complement verb can carry accusative marking (170).

(170)

Yaka, yaka miino ya=ka, ya=ka mi-i-no 3P2=ACC 3P2=ACC know-BECOME:GEN-INF muke'. mu-ke-e

126

(171)

desire-DO:GEN-DCL 'This, I want to learn this.' {ICMATU3.42}

Tunan tsanla manpetsanpa tsanla tunan tsan=la manpetsanpa tsan=la skirt SMBL=PL male.skirt SMBL=PL

kino

podeitue

tito...

ki-no

pode-i-tu-e

ti-to...

DO:VCL-INF be.able-BECOME:GEN-NEG-DCL say-SR

'Saying she couldn't do (weave) like women's

skirts, like male skirts.' {TSAB02.25}

When the matrix verb and complement have different subjects, the suffix -sa 'DIFFERENT REFERENCE' is suffixed to the complement verb. The matrix verbs listed above as well as kari 'cause', manta 'order', and ere 'send' can be used in this construction to form a periphrastic causative. The complex predicate mera 'wait' can also occur in this construction. Intransitive examples are given below (172) and (173). The subject of the complement verb takes accusative marking.

(172)

Yaka jasa ya=ka ja-sa 3P2=ACC come-DR munaratiyoeke. muna-ra-ti-yo-e=ke desire-BE.POSIT:GEN-NEG-CNJ-DCL=QT '(He said) the he didn't want him to come.' {MV.ACKELA.36}

(173)

127

Jaan, (nalaka)

tera kisa

jaan, (na=la=ka)

tera ki-sa

yes, (chi1d=PL=ACC) step DO:GEN-DR

karilakina'. kari-la-ki-na-e cause-PL-DO:GEN-PRG-DCL 'Yes, she's making (the children) dance.' {JRKW.67}

When the complement clause is transitive, the subject as well as the object of the complement clause can carry accusative case marking (174) to form a double object construction (Dryer 1986). The subject of the complement clause is the primary object in that it has access to relativization. A relative clause cannot be formed from the object of the complement (secondary object). The absolutive aligned relative clause in (175) can only refer to the actor participant (subject) of the complement. The word order of complement subject and object is strict. A reversal of order signals a reversal of roles.

(174)

Jeinka,

bebo

malilaka timan,

jein=ka

bebo

malila=ka ti-man,

PRO:EMPH=ACC woodpecker malila=ACC say-SIT,

sonalaka

kasa erekayoe

titi'.

sona=la=ka ka-sa ere-ka-yo-e

ti-ti-e

woman=PL=ACC get-DR send-PF.P-CNJ-DCL say-RP-DCL

'They say she said that she sent that one, the

woodpecker called malila, to get the women.'

{TSABO.27}

(175)

128

Kasa ereka

manjie.

ka-sa ere-ka man=ji-e

get-DR send-PF.P again=go-DCL

'The one they sent went back/*the one they sent

someone to get went back'

4.3.2 Independent Complement Clauses

Independent complement clauses can take full finite morphology and unlike dependent complements they can occur postverbally. As demonstrated by numerous examples throughout this text, complements of the speech verb ti 'say' simply occur with full finite morphology before the verb of speech. Independent clauses can also occur with matrix verbs formed from the coverb ten 'think', with complex predicates formed with the generic verb ti 'say', with panha 'ask', pa-i 'get angry' and pa 'speak'. However, with verbs other than ti 'say' the complement verb phrase takes the enclitic =ke 'QUOTATIVE'. Complements of ti 'say' when occurring postverbally also take =ke 'QUOTATIVE'. While the complements with =ke are more often than not direct quotes, they are not necessarily so. As elsewhere the form of the pronoun distinguishes a direct from an indirect quote. Example (176) with the pronoun nu 'you' is a direct quote.

(176)

129

Junni, panhanuti'

nu tika

junni, pan-a-nu-ti-e

nu ti=ka

then speak-RECIP-EV-RP-DCL 2 what=ACC

finayunke? fi-na-yo-n=ke eat-PRG-CNJ-INT=QT 'Then he asked (him), "What are you eating?'" {PALUKA.19}

In (177) the possessive pronoun is third person, not first, indicating this is an indirect quote.

(177)

Manfanasa,

ya namari

man=fa-na-sa

ya nama=ri

again=arrive.here-PRG-DR 3P2 daughter=FOC

panhananketi'

yachi unila

pan-a-na-n-ke-ti-e

ya=chi unila

ask-RECIP-PRG-ST-DO:VCL-RP-DCL 3P2=POSS man

nunchi niyainanke. nun=chi niya-i-na-n=ke which=LOC how-BECOME:VCL-PRG-INT=QT 'They they say when he arrived back his daughter must have been asking him about where her husband (had gone).'

Example (178) is an example of a complement occurring pre-verbally with =ke.

(178)

130

Jalainakoke ja-la-i-na-ko=ke come-PL-BEOME:VCL-PRG-DUB=QT

tenhinayotie

yalari.

ten-i-na-yo-ti-e

ya=la=ri

heart-BECOME:GEN-PRG-CNJ-RP-DCL 3P2=PL=FOC

'They say they wondered if they were coming.

{JRKW.432}

4.4 Adverbial subordinate clauses

Adverbial subordinate clauses (Foley and Olson 1985) can be sorted into three types. First, there are two constructions that only occur subordinated to motion verbs-a purpose clause, and an associated motion clause. Second, there are clauses that are specifically marked for switch reference, and third there are subordinate clauses that are indifferent to switch reference.

4.4.1 Motion Verbs

The adverbial clauses that only occur with motion verbs are suffixed with -bi purpose or -de 'ASSOCIATED MOTION'. An example of a purpose clause is given in (179).

131

(179)

Motion Purpose Clause Junni junka junni jun=ka then 3D1=ACC

kabi

jilainutieti'.

ka-bi ji-la-i-nu-ti-e-ti-e

get-PURP go-PL-BECOME:VCL-EV-RP-DCL-RP-DCL,

'They say he said then they went to get them.'

{DOBE:157}

Associated motion clauses (Koch 1984; Wilkins 1991) indicate that the eventuality coded by the verb occurred simutaneously with the motion (180) and (181).

(180) (181)

Associated Motion

Aman warede

manjanutie.

aman ware-de man=ja-nu-ti-e

now cry-ASSC.M again-come-EV-RP-DCL

'Now they say she came crying.' {VLP.SUYUN.74}

Associated Motion

Juntonan sonakari

paide

junto=nan sona=ka=ri pa-i-de

but=INCL woman=ACC=FOC angry-BECOME:GEN-ASSC.M

manjanatie. man=j a-na-ti-e again=come-PRG-RP-DCL 'But they say he was coming back again angry at the woman.' {VLP.MMAPINI.il}

4.4.2 Purpose Clauses

Purpose clauses subordinated to other verbs can carry one of either two suffixes -chun (182) or -chike (183).

132
Both code purpose but -chike primarily codes desire and carries an implication that the task may not be accomplished.

(182) (183)

Desirative Junni aman tsanhinasanan junni aman tsan-i-na-sa=nan then now SMBL-BECOME:GEN-PRG-DR=INCL

nenanin

rayotieti'

nena-nin

ra-yo-ti-e-ti-e

go.around-CNTR BE.POSIT:GEN-CNJ-RP-DCL-RP-DCL

yari, bonkoroka

kachike.

ya=ri bonkoro=ka ka-chike

3P2=FOC partridge=ACC get-DESIR

'They say that then while this was happening he

just went around because he wanted to get

partridges.' {TSAONPIPI.30}

Purpose

Junni aman inlaka

manfichun

junni aman in=la=ka man=fi-chu-n

then now 3P1=PL=ACC again=eat-IRR-ST

aman wa paila dakarimantie. aman wa paila da-kari-man-ti-e now big pan cook-CAUSE:GEN-SIT-RP-DCL 'Then they say she heated up a big pan to eat them again.' {VLP.CHIPIRI.27}

4.4.3 Secondary Predicates

One of the essential characeristics of a secondary predicate construction is that a single clause contains two predicating elements that refer to a single core argument (Schiiltze-Berndt and Himmelman 2001) . In Tsafiki depictive

133
secondary predicates are formed with the stative -n that most often occurs on a verb or coverb that encodes a physical state or condition (e.g. son 'alive', katso 'asleep', se 'good', puya 'dead'). The main predicate is often a verb of motion, manipulation or change-of-state. In this sense Tsafiki depictive secondary predicates may be considered 'canonical' (Schultze-Berndt and Himmelman 2001). In (184) katso 'sleep' and tso 'lie' both predicate on the single core argument ayan 'mother'. There is no causative relationship between the two predicates. I am using the term secondary predicate in the sense of. Tsafiki secondary predicates consist

(184)

Secondary Predicate

Mannan

ayannin

winanhito

man=INCL ayan=nin winan-i-to

again-INCL mother-CNTR drunk-BECOME:GEN-SR

katson tsomin

jominti'.

katso-n tso-min jo-min-ti-e

sleep-ST lie-IMPF.P BE:AUX-IMPF.P-RP-DCL

'But they say the mother getting drunk lay there

sleeping.' {AASUYUN.37}

4.6.4 Resultatives

Resultatives, like depictive secondary predicates, consist again of two predicating elements in a single

134
clause that share a single core argument. Unlike depictive secondary predicates however, the main clause and the resultative clause have a casual relationship. The resultative clause comes about because of the action coded in the main clause. The resultative clause is formed with the perfective participle form of a monovalent, undergoer aligned predicate and is usually also suffixed with -ri 'FOC' (185) .

(185)

Kala tseikari kala tse-i-ka=ri silver light-BECOME:GEN-PF.P=FOC sikiteyoe. siki-te-yo-e rub-CAUSE.SUF:GEN-CNJ-DCL 'I rubbed the silver shiny.'

4.6.5 Aspectual Suordinating Suffixes
There are two aspectual morphemes besides the progressive -na that occur on subordinate clauses. The first is -si 'IMMEDIATE' that indicates the eventuality coded in the main clause happens immediately after the eventuality coded in the subordinate (186).

(186)

135

Ina

ina

nuchi bonkoro tisi

ina

ina

nu=chi bonkoro ti-si

Immediately immediately 2=P0SS partridge say-IMM

pole

walakeeree

titi'.

po-le

wala-ke-ere-e ti-ti-e

IDEO-CAUSE.SUF toss-hit-SEND:GEN-DCL say-RP-DCL

'Immediately, immediately after she said "Your

partridge," she tossed it (to him).'

{CCTSONPIPI.97}

The second, -di 'PUNCTUAL' indicates that the eventuality coded by the subordinate verb is completed before the eventuality coded by the verb in the main clause (187).

(187)

Aman tsankedi

ya, yari seiton

aman tsan-ke-di

ya, ya=ri se-ito-n

now SMBL-DO:VCL-PUNC 3P2 3P2=FOC good-NOT.BE:GE

sinuka manjimanti'. sinu-ka man=ji-man-ti-e old.F-NCL again=go-sit-RP-DCL 'When she had done this, this evil old woman went back.' {TET0MINU2.42}

When the progressive -na combines with the focus marker -ri, and the main clause contains an irrealis suffix, it can have a conditional reading (188).

(188)

136

Junni tile

ya kantsa ja jera petenari

junni ti=le ya kantsa ja jera pete-na=ri

then what=LOC 3P2 liver NCL all rot-PRG=FOC

kela yari janin

inano

kela ya=ri ja-nin i-na-no

tiger 3P2=FOC come-CNTR BECOME:GEN-PRG-INF

jotie. jo-ti-e BE:AUX-RP-DCL 'If the liver leaf rots there, a tiger is going to be coming.' {ACKELA.54}

However, when it occurs with in other constructions na-ri often indicates that the two events coded by the verbs happen simultaneously (189).

(189)

Mannan

mantanjinari

aman

man=nan man-ta-n-j i-na=ri

aman

again=INCL again-have-ST-GO:GEN-PRG-FOC now

nin furi

jera piyamantie.

nin fu=ri

jera piya-man-ti-e

fire feather=FOC all lost-SIT-RP-DCL

'When he was taking them (out to the jungle)

again (this time) all the ashes got lost.'

{CHIPIRI.13}

4.4.6 Switch Reference Clauses

The final three suffixes code switches in reference, or continuity of action (Haiman and Munro 1983; Stirling 1993). The co-reference suffix -to, and the disjoint reference suffix -sa normally indicate co/disjoint

137
reference for the nominative argument of a subordinate verb and the following verb. In (190) -to 'SR' indicates coreference between the nominative arguments of all the verbs. In (191) -sa 'DR' indicates disjoint reference of the subordinate clause with the following clause.

(190) (191)

Tsanhito

aman owoole

kaya

tsan-i-to

aman owoole

ka-ka

SMBL-BECOME:GEN-SR now silence:IDEO get-PF.P

ito

kebi tala mankatsto

i-to

kebi tala man=katso-to

BECOME:AUX night DIR again=sleep-SR

katsolaimanti'. katso-la-i-man-ti-e sleep-PL-BECOME:VCL-SIT-RP-DCL 'They say doing this, quieting down owoo, sleeping they slept.' {AAMALI.37}

Junnasari,

jinasari

mantsa

jo-na-sa=ri

ji-na-sa=ri mantsa

BE:VCL-PRG-DR=FOC go-PRG-DR=FOC mantsa

jominnutie. j o-min-nu-ti-e be-IMPF.P-EV-RP-DCL 'They say meanwhile, when he was going (there) was a sloth (there).' {CCMANTSA.42}

However, there are exceptions and these two suffixes might best be considered markers of action continuity or sequentiality. An example of -sa 'DR' occurring in a clause in which there is co-reference between the nominative arguments of the verbs is given in (192). This is taken

138
from a text in which a husband has buried his dead wife in a remote location. After one year he goes back to retrieve her bones. Although the referents are the same there is a discontinuity of action, much has intervened during the year, so the disjoing marker -sa is used.

(192)

Junni manjanasa,

watate aman chide

junni man=ja-na-sa

wata=te now chide

then again=come-PRG-DR year=LOC now bone

laribi

manjimanti'.

la-ri-bi

man=ji-man-ti-e

come.out-CAUSE.SUF:GEN-PURP again=go-SIT-RP-DCL

'They say then coming back, after one year he went to

take out the bones (of his dead wife).' {MALI.42}

Both the switch reference constructions are nominal to the degree that they can take locative postpositions (193).

(193)

Jun tsanhinasale

kiranari,

jun tsan-i-na-sa=le

kira-na-ri

3P1 SMBL-BECOME:VCL-PRG-DR=LOC see-PRG-FOC

jamobi chutobile

tenjati',

jamo=bi chu-to=bi=le ten-ja-ti-e

above=LOC sit-SR=LOC=LOC heart-COME-RP-DCL

chide chide palabi. chide chide pala=bi tree tree fork=LOC 'They say while this had been going on, looking, he realized he had been sitting in a tree, the fork of a tree.' {SALUN.97}

139
The same reference marker also occurs in serial verb like constructions (Durie 1988, 1997; Givon 1991a-b; Lord 1993 inter alia), in which the subordinate verb and the main verb code a single event. This primarily occurs with pole 'go across' and chu 'sit' as main verbs in the construction. The construction with 'poie' occurs with a subordinate motion verb and is usually just translated with the motion verb. In the texts it always occurs when a protagonist is escaping from someone or something. In (194) the protagonist is escaping from a water monster.

(194)

Junni tsanhinasa,

man kanowa ya wito

junni tsan-i-na-sa

man kanowa ya wi-to

then SMBL-BECOME:VCL-PRG-DR one canoe 3P2 go.in-SR

sujato

polemanti'.

su-ja-to

pole-man-ti-e

feet.in.air-come-SR go.across-SIT-RP-DCL

'Then they say while this was going on, getting in

another canoe he came running/escaped.' {MALI.76}

The construction with chu 'sit' as the main verb is usually translated as 'keep doing X' as in (195) below.

(195)

Jelen yate

fato,

manfanasa

jelen ya=te

fa-to

man-fa-na-sa

jungle house=LOC arrive.here-SR

manfanasa

sonala tala

man-fa-na-sa

sona=la tala

again-arrive.here-PRG-DR woman=PL DIR

140

pataito

chunlamantie.

pata-i-to

chu-n-la-man-ti-e

argue-BECOME:GEN-SR be-ST-PL-SIT-RP-DCL

'They say arriving at the jungle house, when he

arrived, the women kept arguing.' {MALI.33}

Finally, the inclusive enclitic indicates disjoint reference of the nominative arguments. In these cases it appears as a suffix rather than as an enclitic. However, unlike -sa 'DR', rather than simply coding sequential events, there is usually a causal relationship between the two events. In (196) a lizard woman is trying to grab an armadillo out of his hole, instead the armadillo pulls her into the hole and as a consequence she dies.

(196)

Chuinaminka

jodo

chu-i-na-min=ka

jodo

clutch-BECOME:GEN-PRG-IMPF.P=ACC armadillo

murikanan

jeenbi forobi

muri-ka-nan

jeen=bi foro=bi

drag-GET:GEN-INCL PROrEMPH hole=L0C

manlano podeituto man=la-no pode-i-tu-to again=come.out-INF be.able=BECOME:GEN-NEG-SR

forochi puyanutie foro=chi puya-nu-ti-e hole=L0C die-EV-RP-DCL 'They say that because the armadillo dragged the one that was clutching him in there, in the hole, she died in the hole.' {CCTSAPAPA.46}

141
5.0 Summary
In this chapter I have tried to give an overview of Tsafiki morphosyntax. The remainder of the chapters will examine complex predicates and verb class markers and explore with more depth some of the constructions only briefly mentioned here. In the following Chapter, the morphosyntactic behavior of the complex predicate will first be examined as a whole and then the individual elements, coverb and generic verb, will be analyzed separately. In addition, categories which are closely related to coverbs will be analyzed. These include adverbs and ideophones. Chapter IV looks at the argument structure of complex predicates and gives a more in-depth analysis of simple clause structure, particularly case-marking of core arguments.

142
CHAPTER III
SIMPLE AND COMPLEX PREDICATES
1. Introduction
As mentioned previously, the majority of predicates in Tsafiki are complex. Two distinct speech elements combine to perform the function fulfilled by a single "verb" in other languages. Complex predicates consist of an inflecting verb and a non-inflecting element. The inflecting elements form a closed class of approximately thirty-three 'generic verbs', whereas the non-inflecting elements (coverbs) form a large, open class. As illustration, three examples of Tsafiki coverb-generic verb constructions are given below. In (1) the coverb ja 'fly' is followed by the generic verb lo 'GO.UP:GEN'. In (2) the coverb pa 'anger' is followed by the generic verb suwa 'CAUSE.BECOME:GEN' and in (3) the coverb mi 'know' is followed by the generic verb kuwa 'GIVE:GEN'.

(37)

Aman ele

kopebi

nechi

aman ele

kope=bi ne=chi

now wild.turkey bamboo=LOC foot=LOC

jalolaitie. ja-lo-la-i-ti-e fly-GO.OUT:GEN-PL-BECOME:VCL-RP-DCL 'Now they say the wild turkey came flying out of the bamboo.' {AATETO.MINU.20}

(2)

Nuri, nuri, unila nukari

nu=ri nu=ri unila nu=ka=ri

2=FOC 2=FOC man 2=ACC=FOC

manpasuwachunaeke. man=pa-suwa-chu-na-e-ke again=angry-CAUSE.BECOME:GEN-IRR-PRG-DCL-QT '(They said) "You, you, the men will be bothering you again.'" {KELAFIMIN.67}

(3)

Jaatsanke

manjina

tito jera minu

jaa-tsan-ke

man=ji-na ti-to jera minu

3D2-SEMBL-DO:VCL again=go-PRG say-SR all road

mikuwae

titie,

ya tsabo sonari.

mi-kuwa-e

ti-ti-e ya tsabo sona=ri

know-GIVE:GEN-DCL say-RP-DCL 3P2 star woman-FOC

'They say she said in this way, saying "go back!"

the star woman showed her the way (home).'

{TSAB01.243}

The primary purpose of this Chapter is to establish the degree to which the coverb and generic nouns form distinct morphosyntactic categories, not only in relation to each other, but also to other closely related categories such as adverbs and ideophones, with which the coverbs bear a fair amount of similarity both notionally and in terms of function. There is some overlap between the categories and

144
I will be employing the concept of a cline, similar to a grammaticalization chain to describe the system. If grammaticalization is considered a process of increasing generalization of semantic content (Hopper and Traugott 1993) rather than specifically referring to an endpoint with strictly grammatical rather than lexical characteristics, then at least some of the various elements discussed in this chapter can be seen as having undergone a process of grammaticalization from: ideophone > coverb > generic verb > verb class marker. Roughly half the coverbs can function as ideophones. In turn, some of the generic verbs can function as coverbs and all the verb class markers can function as generic verbs, resulting in a clear cline, with a single overlap, i.e. none of the generic verbs that can function as coverbs can function as ideophones and none of the verb class markers that can function as generic verbs can function as coverbs. Despite the overlap between the categories, the different functions can be clearly identified by the phonological and morphosyntactic properties the element has within the construction as a whole, so in any given example there is little doubt as to what function the element is serving.

145
And in each category there are elements that only carry the functions and morphosyntactic behavior of that category.
However, following Sweetser (1990) I will be arguing here and in Chapter Four, that rather than simply loosing semantic meaning the generic verbs and verb class markers actually gain information lacking in the coverbs and ideophones. The coverbs and the ideophones are both very rich in semantic meaning or texture. They more often than not have strict constraints on the type of semantic participants they code, and are often quite specific in terms of the manner in which an action occurs. The generic verbs have far fewer constraints on the type of semantic participants they code and the manner in which the action occurs. However, as will be argued forcefully in Chapter Four they carry information about the schematic structure of the event that the coverbs lack, most notably infomation as to the type of eventuality that is being coded by the predicate. However, in this Chapter an emphasis will be put on exploring the type of semantic meaning carried by the coverbs. I will begin by discussing the complex predicate construction as a whole and then discuss the individual elements, coverb and generic verb separately.

146
2. Canonical Complex Predicates
Canonical complex predicates consist of a generic verb and an unmarked coverb, co-occurring in a single intonation contour, very often forming a single phonological word and coding events which could, for the most part be represented by a single verb in a language such as English. They fit the standard definition of complex predicate in that "two semantically predicative elements jointly determine the structure of a single syntactic clause" (Mohanan 1997:42). The argument structure of complex predicates will be addressed in Chapter Five, but to summarize the results of that Chapter, while in some cases the coverb could be analyzed as an adverbial modifier in an endocentric construction, there are clearly cases where the coverb contributes to the syntactic valency of the clause. For example in (4) below the generic verb ra 'be in a position' occurs with a positional coverb nan 'lie horizontal' to form a monovalent, seemingly endocentric construction. In (5) this same generic verb ra 'be in a position' combines with the coverb muna 'desire' to form a bivalent construction. While the omission of the coverb in (4) would not result in a significant difference in meaning—the

147
generic verb appears to carry the greater semantic load—the omission of the coverb in (5) would result in a meaningless construction. As will be discussed more thoroughly in Chapter Four, the coverb can definitely contribute to the valency of the complex predicate in these types of constructions.

(4)

Manka nedele

man-ka ne-de=le

one-NCL leg-NCL=LOC

nanratieti'. nan-ra-ti-e-ti-e horizontal-BE.POSIT:GEN-RP-DCL-RP-DCL 'One (woman) was lying across his legs.' (DOBE.234}

(5)

Niyanka munarayun

titi'.

niya-n=ka muna-ra-yo-n

ti-ti-e

how-ST=ACC desire-BE.POSIT:GEN-CNJ-INT say-RP-DCL

'They say he said how much do you want?'

{KELA.TSACHI.27}

In this section I am primarily concerned with the degree to which the coverb and generic verb function syntactically as a single predicate. I will begin with word order and prosody.

2.1 Word Order and Prosody

Unmarked coverbs always immediately precede the generic verb. They occur under a single intonation contour and the three

148
proclitics, man= 'again'; pe= 'also' and ka= 'still' most commonly occur on the coverb (6-8), although there are a handful of examples in the texts where the proclitic intervenes between the coverb and generic verb and speakers, in some cases, in elicitation accept the proclitic on the generic verb, even though it intervenes between the coverb and generic verb (9). The acceptability judgment of (9) varied amongst the speakers. Note in (7) that the proclitic ka= is acceptable on the coverb because the generic verb carries the progressive marker -na.

(6)

Tsachiri nin kito

tsachi=ri nin ki-to

person=FOC fire DO:GEN-SR

peasuwamanti'. pe=a-suwa-man-ti-e also=cook-CAUSE.BECOME:GEN-SIT-RP-DCL 'They say the man, making a fire, also cooked.' fMV.KELA.43}

(7)

Kakole

kanae.

ka=ko-le

ka-na-e

still=break.large.branch-CAUSE:SUF get-PRG-DCL

'She is still breaking them (the branches).

{CHICOPA.16}

(8)

Man tsachi ito

man tsachi i-to

one person become-SR

mansujananutie. man=su-ja-na-nu-ti-e again=feet.in.air-COME:GEN-PRG-EV-RP-DCL 'Turning into a person, he was coming running back. {KELATSACHI.32}

149

(9)

Tera mankee.

tera man=ke-e

step again=DO:GEN-DCL

'He danced again.'

In terms of prosody, the most common pattern is for the primary accent to fall on the coverb, the final syllable in a bisyllabic coverb (10), with a secondary accent on the generic verb, again on the final syllable if bisyllabic (11). In some cases however there are two primary accents (12).

(10) (11) (12)

Pi=bi

ter6-po-e

water=LOC step-PUT.INSIDE-DCL

'S/he stepped in the water.'

Ano &-suwa-e. food cook-CAUSE.BECOME:GEN-DCL 'S/he cooked the food.'

Ter£ ke-e. step DO:GEN-DCL 'S/he danced.'

In most cases, the degree to which the elements form a single phonological word is clear. In this study I follow the orthography used by the speakers. In most cases the writing system accurately reflects the phonological structure of the elements. In any case the two elements are tightly bound syntactically.

150
2.2 Negation

Unmarked coverbs do not take negative suffixes. The negative suffix occurs on the generic verb (13). The constituents cannot be negated individually and the negative suffix has scope over the whole complex predicate. As illustrated throughout this study, all aspect, evidential, mirative and mood markers are suffixed to the generic verb.

(13)

Aman junbiri aman jun=bi=ri now 3Dl=LOC=FOC puraitiyotie. pura-i-ti-yo-ti-e abandon-BECOME:GEN-NEG-CNJ-RP-DCL 'He said he didn't stay there.' {VLP.SUPANDO.21}

2.3 Summary

Tsafiki complex predicates form a close-knit unit in terms of word order and usually also in terms of prosody. The constituents share their values in terms of aspect, evidentiality, mirativity, mood and polarity and take a single set of morpho-syntactic arguments, determined jointly by the generic verb and coverb.

151
3. Coverbs
The open class of lexemes (coverbs) which combine with inflecting verbs (generic verbs) to form a complex predicate, translate into English as verbs, adverbs and in some cases as adjectives or nouns. Throughout this study I translate the coverbs with the closest English equivalent, sometimes as verbs, sometimes as adjectives and even at times as nouns. However, the translations are somewhat misleading in that the coverbs form their own grammatical class and their meaning is often difficult to translate. While a subset of coverbs can occur as individual elements functioning as ideophones, many do not occur independently. The coverbs, in most cases, can only occur in a discourse if nominalized or 'verbalized' by a generic verb. While, as will be argued more forcefully in Chapter Four, the coverbs do carry information concerning semantic participants, they are ambiguous as to whether the framework in which they are to be viewed is a static relationship, as with a noun, or a sequential relationship as with a verb (Talmy 2000; Langacker 1987b).
So bear in mind that the translations are only approximations. For example I translate bare as 'stretch',

152
biti as 'snap' and pa as 'angry', but a more accurate translation would be along the lines of 'of stretching', 'of snapping' or 'of angering'.
3.1 Coverbs and Nouns
The coverbs differ from nouns in that, like verbs, in order to function as nominals, i.e. modifiers or referring elements in a noun phrase, coverbs are suffixed with nominalizing suffixes. In (14) tera 'step' occurs with the nominalizer -n 'be in the state of', followed by a noun class marker -ka to form teranka 'ladder' which is followed by the enclitic -se 'by/through.' In the second occurrence of teranka 'ladder', the nominalized coverb is followed by the accusative enclitic -ka. Compare terankaka 'step-STNCL=ACC' to palukaka 'two-NCL=ACC'.

(14)

153

Junni jun terankase

sonala

junni jun tera-n-ka=se sona=la

then 3D1 step-ST-NCL=by woman=PL

palukaka patarisiri

unilari

palu-ka=ka pata-ri-si=ri

unila=ri

two-NCL=ACC come.down-CAUS:SUF-IMM=FOC man=FOC

mantiminnin

yari terankaka

man=ti-min-nin

ya=ri tera-n-ka=ka

again=say-NOM-CNTR 3P2=FOC step-ST-NCL=ACC

manmurikanin

kimantie.

man=muri-ka-nin

ki-man-ti-e

again=drag-GET:GEN-CNTR DO:VCL-SIT-RP-DCL

'When the women had gone down the ladder, the

man, well, he just hauled the ladder up again.'

{VLP:SUPAN:DO.4}

In the next two examples bare 'stretch' occurs suffixed with the nominalizer -n 'be in the state of', functioning first as the adjectival predicate in a stative construction (15) and then as an adjective (16). Note that the nominalizer -n can also be used to nominalize a simple verb, tanka 'to the one who has' (16).

(15) (16)

Numiri baren

baren

animali jotie.

numi=ri bare-n

bare-n

animali jo-ti-e

penis=FOC stretch-ST stretch-ST very be-RP-DCL

'They say his penis was really really long.'

{VLP.URUSONA.IC.59}

Ya numi baren tanka... ya numi bare-n ta-n=ka 3P2 penis long-ST have-ST=ACC 'To (the one) who has a long penis...' {MV.ACPONESILI.585}

154
These same coverbs tera 'step' and bare 'stretch' can also occur in combination with a generic verb to form complex predicates (17) and (18).

(17) (18)

Tera kinatieti'

yari.

tera ki-na-ti-e-ti-e

ya=ri

step DO:GEN-PRG-RP-DCL-RP-DCL 3P2=FOC

'They say she was dancing.' {CCTSONPIPI.244}

Ku ku breast

baresuwalakimantieti'. bare-suwa-la-ki-man-ti-e-ti-e stretch-CAUSE.BECOME:GEN-PL-DO:VCL-SIT-RP-DCL-RPDCL 'They say (they) stretched (the women's) breasts.' {D0BE.114}

Besides the nominalizing suffix -n, the coverbs take the same set of suffixes as do generic verbs. The coverb do 'close' directly takes the imperfective participle suffix min in (19). Note that without a generic verb dominla in (19) is ambiguous. Do 'close' with the nominative-aligned, imperfective participle -min (19) could mean 'the one who closes it' based on a causative construction coded in Tsafiki by do-ke-e 'close-DO:GEN-INF', or 'the one that closes/gets closed/is closed' based on an inchoative construction coded in Tsafiki by do-i-no 'close-BECOME:GEN-

155
INF'. In fact, the presence of the plural indicates it is probably the causative do 'close'.

(19) a. Nunchi jun mantobi? nun=chi j o-n man-to=bi which=LOC be-INT other-earth=LOC 'Where is it, in Santo Domingo?'

b. Mantobi

merkado minu wari

man-to=bi

merkado minu wari

other-earth=LOC SP:store road well

biya

dominla

j unte

biya

do-min=la

jun=te

SP:street close-IMP.P=PL 3D1=L0C

'In Santo Domingo, the market street well, where

they closed the street.' {JERAKUWENTA.624-625}

In (20) the perfective participle suffix -ka in occurs directly suffixed to the coverb without a generic verb. In the same manner as (19) above, do 'close' with the absolutive-aligned perfective participle -ka could mean 'the thing that somebody closed' or 'the thing that closed' and in this case doka (20) remains ambiguous.

(20

Aman kolon, mala kolon doka

jun

aman kolon, mala kolon do-ka

jo-n

now vessel chicha vessel close-PF.P BE:AUX-ST

tsominyae

titi'.

tso-min-ka-e

ti-ti-e

lie-IMPF.P-PF.P-DCL say-RP-DCL

'They say he said the the chicha vessel that was

closed/that somebody closed had been lying

there.' {SONPURA.35}

156
Finally in (21), do 'close' occurs with the nominalizing suffix -nun in (21).

(21)

Junni donunpe

panamantie,

junni do-nun-pe

pana-man-ti-e

then close-NOM-NCL carry.on.back-SIT-RP-DCL

sona. sona woman 'They they say the woman carried the door (lit: the flat rigid thing that closes).' {VLP.DONUNPE.2}

Do 'close' occurs in a complex predicate construction in (22).

(22)

Mandokee. man=do-ke-e again-close-DO:GEN-DCL 'She closed (the door) again.' {CHICOJA.48}

Examples (23-25) contain the generic verb pa 'speak', functioning here as a 'simple' verb, occurring with the same nominalizing suffixes -min 'IMPF.P' (23), ka 'PF.P' (24) and -nun 'NOM' as the above examples (19-21).

(23)

Yari tsankeri

tsankenan

ya=ri tsan-ke=ri

tsan-ke=nan

3P2=FOC SMBL-DO:VCL=FOC SMBL-DO:VCL=INCL

pamin

j oda.

pa-min

j o-da

speak-IMPF.P BE:AUX-DCL:GEN

'So he says, so he says.' {VLP.PONE.339}

(24) (25)

157

Man fiki man fiki paka man fiki man fiki pa-ka one word one word speak-PF.P

jolajoda. jo-la-jo-da BE:AUX-PL-BE:VCL-DCL:GEN 'They said one word, one word.' {VLP.PONE.341}

Ya kuru panunka

sonala kiratusa

ya kuru pa-nun-ka

sona=la kira-tu-sa

3P2 guatusa speak-NOM-ACC women=PL see-NEG-DR

manta jotinkan? manta jo-ti-nka-n SP:order BE:GEN-NEG-SPEC-INT 'Wouldn't the order be that the women were not to look at the guatusa whistle? {JAKURU1.60}

However, not all coverbs are equal in terms of their ability to directly take nominalizing suffixes. For example in a total of twenty-five examples, taken from the whole corpus, of the coverb ba 'unstick' occurring in subordinate clauses, none, including seven nominalized clauses, were found to occur without a generic verb. The complex predicate as a whole was nominalized (26-28).

(26)

Junsiri

manbajitumin

jun=si=ri man=ba-j i-tu-min

3D1=GRD=F0C again=unstick-GO:GEN-NEG-IMPF.P

jotie. jo-ti-e BE:AUX-RP-DCL 'She in no way was able to unstick it (the head). {BOPI.84}

(27) (28)

158

Misu bajika

jun

joti'.

misu ba-ji-ka

jo-n

jo-ti-e

head unstick-GO:GEN-PF.P BE:AUX-ST be-RP-DCL

'The head was unstuck' (BOPI.113)

Jun misuka balekanun jun misu=ka ba-le-ka-nun 3D1 head=ACC unstick-CAUSE:SUF-GET:GEN-NOM

tenchi

yari, aman finutieti'.

tenchi

ya=ri aman fi-nu-ti-e-ti-e

in.order.to 3P2=FOC now eat-EV-RP-DCL-RP-DCL

'Now they say they must have unstuck the head in

order to eat.' {MMAPIYAN.74}

3.1.1 Nouns with coverb function

Coverbs cannot be distinguished from nouns on the basis of their ability to occur with generic verbs in complex predicate constructions in that in Tsafiki, a small subset of nouns can occur in the same position as the coverb (29), with a similar function.

(29)

Ya sonaka na poe. ya sona=ka na po-e 3P2 woman=ACC child put-DCL 'He impregnated the woman/LIT:He child-put the woman.'

Evidence that na 'child' in (29) is part of the predicate and not a noun comes from a combination of the meaning and the case-marking. The normal case-marking for po 'put' would require that the theme take the accusative

159
enclitic, and the woman a locative enclitic. The standard order would be agent/theme/loc/verb as in (30) and the variance exhibited in (29) is not permitted with other types of semantic participants (31).

(30) (31)

Ya piyoka tsalachi poe. ya piyo=ka tsala=chi po-e 3P2 corn=ACC basket=LOC put.inside-DCL xS/he put the corn in the basket.' *Ya tsalaka piyo poe. ya tsala=ka piyo po-e
3P2 basket=ACC corn put.inside-DCL *'He corn-put inside the basket.'

If (29) occurs with the order and case-marking pattern of (30), it can only mean that the man literally put a fully-formed child inside the woman (32).

(32)

Ya naka

sonachi poe.

ya na=ka

sona=chi po-e

3P2 child=ACC woman=LOC put.inside-DCL

?'He put the child inside the woman.'

3.2 Nouns, Verbs and Coverbs

One of the primary ways that coverbs differ from both nouns and verbs, is that both nouns and verbs can occur with finite, declarative mood markers (see Chapter II, Section 3.1). In non-verbal predicate constructions the copula may be dropped, in which case the noun directly

160
takes the declarative and dubitative mood markers. In (33) the noun unila 'man' is suffixed with the simple declarative -e, the emphatic declarative -da, which has the connotation 'as everybody knows' and the dubitative suffix -ko. Generic/simple verbs can also occur suffixed with these mood markers (34). This has not been found to occur, either in texts or in elicitation with coverbs.

(33) (34)

Noun Fan unila-e Fan unila-da Fan unila-ko

'Juan is a man' 'Juan is a man (as everybody knows)' 'Juan is a man right?'

Generic/simple verb

Fan ji-e

'Juan went'

Fan ji-da

'Juan went (as everybody knows).'

Fan ji-ko

'Juan went right?'

Coverbs can occur with the imperative suffix (35-36). Note that in an imperative construction the meaning, valency and argument structure can be recovered from the context, which is not the case with the other mood suffixes.

(35) (36)

161

Junni aman sonakari

tsapaito

junni aman sona=ka=ri tsapa-i-to

then now woman=ACC=FOC hurry-BECOME:GEN-SR

dana tinutie. da-na ti-nu-ti-e cook-PRG say-EV-RP-DCL 'They say he told the woman to hurry up and cook.' {VLP.Ilusun.24

Te se kiratiyoe,

mannan

te se kira-ti-yo-e mannan

NEG good see-NEG-CNJ-DCL again

manterade. man=tera-de again=REP-dance-IMP 'I didn't see well, dance again!' {VLP.CHIPIRIDZ.30}

3.3 Coverbs and Subordinate Clauses

Coverbs, unlike nouns and similar to verbs, can also occur directly suffixed with morphemes coding other types of subordinate clauses. The frequency with which an individual coverb will appear in a subordinate clause without the generic verb varies according to the individual coverb. For example, Tsafiki has a number of coverbs depicting 'cooking'. The coverb da 'prepare cooked food/medicine' contrasts with a 'cook' in that, while both can be used for cooking in general, i.e. boiling, roasting, steaming (frying was traditionally unknown), da depicts the whole process including peeling, mashing, stirring etc.,

whereas a 'cook' focuses on the internal change undergone by the food. Hence da forms bivalent complex predicates with ki 'do' or kari 'cause' and more rarely1 i 'become' to depict a monovalent undergoer-aligned predicate. A 'cook' forms a bivalent complex predicate with suwa 'cause to become' and a monovalent undergoer-aligned predicate with i 'become'. Da 'prepare cooked food/medicine' appears quite frequently without a generic verb in subordinate clauses, including the nominalized clauses discussed above. Out of the 75 subordinate clauses (including nominalized clauses) formed with da 'cook' found in the texts, 67 or 89% occurred without the generic verb and only eight or 11% occurred with the generic verb. This contrasts with the coverb a 'cook'„ Out of the 24 subordinate clauses formed with a 'cook' only four or 17% occurred without the generic verb whereas 20 or 83% occurred with the generic verb. In (37) and (38) examples of da 'cook' and a 'cook' are given suffixed with the same reference marker -to.
1 Da 'cook' plus the generic verb i 'become is rare with this sense. It can be used to refer to an erupting volcano.

(37)
(38)

Junni junbi junkari, yalari aman junni jun=bi jun=ka=ri ya=la=ri aman then 3=L0C 3=L0C=F0C 3P2=PL=FOC now

asuwato

tsachikaka

a-suwa-to

tsachika=ka

cook-CAUSE.BECOME:GEN-SR meat=ACC

asuwato a-suwa-to cook-CAUSE.BECOME-SR

kufilakinayotieti'. ku-fi-la-ki-na-yo-ti-e-ti-e breast-eat-PL-DO:VCL-PRG-CNJ-RP-DCL-RP-DCL 'Then they said that there, cooking, cooking they were feeding the meat to them.' (JERAKUWENTA2.736}

Daka

pi tape layato dato yaka

da-ka

pi tape layato da-to ya=ka

cook-PF.P water weed gather-SR cook-SR 3P2=ACC

kutsawotsan

joe.

kuchi-wo-tsan

jo-e

drink-CAUSE:SUF-SMBL BE:AUX-DCL

'Gathering up the cooking herbs, cooking them,

it's like one has them drink it.' {MV.ACPONE.28}

In (39) a 'cook' first appears as a relative clause in one of the few clauses in which it appears without a generic verb and then in the causative construction which is suffixed with the irrealis/purpose suffix -chu-n. In (40) da 'cook' also appears suffixed with -chu-n, but without a generic verb.

(39)

Yachi yabi, ya=chi ya=bi

ya tsachila anaminka ya tsachi-la a-na-min=ka

(40)

164

3P2=POSS house=LOC 3P2 people-PL cook-PRG-IMPF.P=ACC

pitato niyan tsachilaka asuwachun pita-to niya-n tsachi=la=ka a-suwa-chu-n smoke-SR how-ST people=PL=ACC cook-CAUSE.BECOME-IRR-ST

pitato pechusa

tito

pita-to pe-chu-sa ti-to

smoke-SR also-sit-DR say-SR

junto kato tanjinutieti', junto ka-to ta-n-ji-nu-ti-e-ti-e then get-SR have-ST-go-EV-RP-DCL-RP-DCL

yachi yaka. ya=chi ya=ka 3P2=P0SS house-ACC 'They say she had grabbed him and taken him to her house saying he was to live there too, smoking whatever kind of person to cook them, to smoke the people that were getting cooked, in her house {MMAPIYA2.28-30}

Wari, ano dachun

wiruideke

wari, ano da-chu-n wiru-i-de=ke

well food cook-IRR-ST stand-BECOME:GEN-IMP=QT

'Well (she said) "Get up to cook the food."'

(CCSALUN.45}

I looked at four different coverbs occurring in subordinate clauses, the related da 'prepare cooked food/medicine' and a 'cook', ba 'unstick' and the positional coverb wiru 'stand'. There is a fair amount of variation in the likelihood that the coverb will occur as the sole predicating element in the clause, with da 'cook' being the most likely and ba 'unstick' the least (Table 4).

165

TABLE 4: Frequency of Occurrence of Coverb with a Generic Verb

Coverb Coverb plus Total

Alone Generic Verb

da 'cook (process' 67 89%

8 11%

75 100%

a 'cook'

4 17% 20 83%

24 100%

wiru 'stand'

7 7% 92 93%

99 100%

ba 'unstick'

0 0% 25 100%

25 100%

The coverbs occur in subordinate clauses with the generic verb more often than not. I looked at 314 subordinate clauses containing a coverb, 59 or 19% occurred without a generic verb. The remainder, 255 clauses or 81% occurred with the generic verb. Since the possibility of occurring without a generic verb is not evenly distributed among the coverbs, certain coverbs make up a disproportionate number of the 59 examples found without a generic verb. In particular four coverbs make up roughly half the tokens, da 'cook' and ware 'cry' each occur nine times, nana 'carry on the shoulder' eight times and do 'close' seven. In all, these four coverbs make up 33 of the 59 tokens of coverb without generic verb found in the study. As will be discussed further below, the overall pattern of the distribution of the coverbs indicates the variation could be due to a process in which certain

166
coverbs are beginning to exhibit properties of generic verbs.
3.4 Coverbs in Finite Clauses
Although coverbs cannot occur directly suffixed with the declarative and dubitative mood suffixes, they do occasionally occur directly suffixed with other finite morphology. Recall that in Tsafiki, finite clauses are defined by their ability to take evidential, mirative and mood suffixes. I looked at 326 finite clauses containing a coverb taken from eleven texts, six traditional narratives and five personal narratives/conversations. Out of these 326 clauses, only ten or just 3% occurred without a coverb. Da 'cook' and do 'close' once again are represented in the ten tokens. Da 'cook' occurring twice (41) and do 'close' twice (42). In the following examples the coverb first occurs in a finite clause without the generic verb, and then in a finite clause with the generic verb.
(41) a. Manjatobi ano dayoe. man-ja-to=bi ano da-yo-e 'When I came back I prepared food.' {SA2.4}

167

b. Jun junbi dakeda. jun jun=bi da-ke-da 3D2 3D2=LOC cook-DO:GEN-DCL:GEN 'He prepared food there (as everybody knows).' {CIPAN01.294)

(42) a. Manka namari,

walpa

man-ka nama=ri

walpa

one-NCL daughter=FOC chicken

donamanyoe

tie.

do-na-man-yo-e

ti-e

close-PRG-SIT-CNJ-DCL say-DCL

'One daughter said she was penning in the

chickens.' {CCANKULU.141}

b. Aman in suyun foroka aman in suyun foro=ka now 3P1 rainbow hole=LOC

dokechinayoe

tito

do-ke-chi-na-yo-e

ti-to

close-DO:GEN-IRR-PRG-CNJ-DCL say-SR

jera donutieti' . jera do-nu-ti-e-ti-e all close-EV-RP-DCL-RP-DCL 'They say that saying they wanted to shut the rainbow man up in the hole, they shut up all of them (the rainbow man's family) up.'

An Example of another coverb pura 'abandon' are occurring first without (43a) and then with a generic verb (43b) is given below:

168

(43) a. Tsan anodeka

ninbi lobato

tsan ano-de=ka

nin=bi lo-ba-to

SEMBL platano-NCL=ACC fire=LOC heat-QUAL-SR

fiina

ti sonala

puramantie

fi-i-na

ti sona=la pura-man-ti-e

eat-BECOME:GEN-PRG what woman=PL abandon-RP-DCL

ti' . ti-e say-DCL 'They say that if one eats this platano, heating it (directly) in the fire, women will abandon you.' {JAKURUKUWENTA4.56}

b. Yowelo yaka yabi

purakee.

Yowelo ya=ka ya=bi

pura-ke-e

Joel 3P2=ACC house=LOC abandon-DO:GEN-DCL

'Joel abandoned him (the dog) in the house.'

Overall coverbs without generic verbs are more acceptable in subordinate clauses than in main clauses. I have grouped the data discussed above in Table 5 below.

TABLE 5: Frequency of Occurrence of Coverb with a Generic Verb in all Clause Types

Finite Clause Subordinate Clause TOTAL

Coverb plus

Generic Verb

#

%

316

97%

255

81%

571

89%

Coverb Alone

#

%

10

3%

59

19%

69

11%

TOTAL

#

%

326 100%

314 100%

640 100%

169
In summary, coverbs cannot directly take the mood suffixes -e 'DECLARATIVE', -da 'DECLARATIVE:GLOBAL' or -ko 'DUBITATIVE.' They do sometimes take directly take other kinds of verbal morphology but this is fairly rare, particularly in finite clauses and tends to occur more with certain coverbs than others. Table 6 below summarizes the morphosyntactic behavior of nouns, verbs and coverbs discussed in this section.

TABLE 6: Morphological and Syntactic Properties of Nouns, Coverbs and Generic Verbs

NOUNS COVERBS

Require nominalizing suffixes

no

to function as nominals

Can oocur with a generic verb

yes

in complex predicates

Take mood markers: -e, -da, -ko yes

Take subordinating

no

morphemes

yes yes no 80% do not

GENERIC VERBS
yes sometimes
yes yes

Take other types of finite morphology

yes 97% do

yes

not

Table Three clearly shows that coverbs have mixed nominal and verbal properties, and overall form a distinct class in terms of behavior. What remains to be explored is the relationship of coverbs to adverbs and ideophones,

other elements with which coverbs share some notional as well as morphosyntactic characteristics.
4. Adverbs
As in Northern Australian languages (Shiiltze-Berndt 2000), in some constructions coverbs resemble adverbial modifiers. Like adverbs they do not inflect and grammatically, coverbs are never obligatory (all the generic verbs can also function as simple verbs). In some combinations of coverb and generic verb the coverb may be omitted without a significant change in meaning or argument structure. Particularly, it is difficult to determine whether manner-of-motion coverb-verb constructions are endocentric or exocentric. In (44) the coverb may be omitted and the construction will still convey roughly the same meaning, although with a loss of dramatic effectiveness.

(44)

171

Ti amali tsanhatinan

tito,

ti amali tsan-a-ti-nan

ti-to

what very SMBL-scream-SAY:GEN-INCL say-SR

yachibi

pipokalate

taichun

ya=chi=bi pipoka=la=te

ta-i-chu-n

3p2=POSS-LOC testicles=PL=LOC touch-BECOME:GEN-IRR-ST

sujamanti'. su-j a-man-ti-e feet.in.air-COME:GEN-SIT-RP-DCL 'They say screaming "What!" he came running up to him and ended up touching his testicles.' {MV.AAMALI.55}

However in the majority of cases the omission of the coverb renders the clause nonsensical as in (45) and (46).

(45) (46)

Misu bojika

itonke

misu bo-ji-ka

ito-n=ke

head crack-GO:GEN-PF.P NOT.BE:AUX-INT=QT

panhanin

kinayo'.

pa-n-a-nin

ki-na-yo-e

speak-ST-RCP-CNTR DO:VCL-PRG-CNJ-DCL

'I just asked him, "Wasn't (your) head

cracked?"'{PILABAN.131}

Junni yachi namae

tenjatie.

junni ya=chi nama-e

ten-ja-ti-e

then 3P2=DAT daughter-DCL heart-COME:GEN-RP-DCL

'It occurred to him that she was his daughter.'

(Seitonuni.4}

Tsafiki does have a small set of elements that directly modify the action of the verb. These adverbial elements include: duke 'very/a lot', amali 'very/many', jamimi 'slow/weakly' and moora 'brief time/quick' and to

172
some degree sonba 'strong' and we 'move'. The adverbs have a mix of properties resembling both coverbs and ideophones. In some cases the adverb appears directly before a coverb (47-48).

(47) (48)

Aman, jamimi telena tinati'. aman, jamimi tele-na ti-na-ti-e now slowly tie-PRG say-PRG-RP-DCL 'He was saying tie it weakly/loosely.' {MV.AASALUN.113}

Tsachiri sonba amali teleyoe

titi',

tsachi=ri sonba amali teleyoe

ti-ti-e

person=FOC strong very tie-CNJ-DCL say-RP-DCL

yape tsojitusa. yape tso-ji-tu-sa so.that loose-GO:GEN-NEG-DR 'The man said that he tied it really tightly so it wouldn't come loose.' {MV.AASALUN.114}

It can also occur before a complex predicate (49) or simple verb (50-51). The adverbs, like ideophones, are also often repeated more than once (50) or contain long vowels (49). Unlike ideophones however, they may occur without marked phonological features (47-48) and (51).

(49)
(50) (51)

173

Tiri

kuwenta yari jei::n jamimi:::

tiri

kuwenta ya=ri jein

jamimi

something like 3P2=FOC EMPH:PRO slowly

owainin

imin

jotieti'.

owa-i-nin

i-min

jo-ti-e-ti-e

grow-BECOME:GEN BECOME:VCL BE:AUX-PR-DCL-RP-DCL

'They say it was really something, it just

sloooowly kept rising (the floodwater).'

{VLP.CCMMAPIYA1.36}

Moora moora jinamanti'. moora moora ji-na-man-ti-e brief brief go-PRG-SIT-RP-DCL 'They say he went quickly quickly.' {MOLEN.4}

Aman kuruchibiri

duke pechuyotie.

aman kuru=chi=bi=ri

duke pe-chu-yo-ti-e

now guatusa=POS=LOC=FOC a.lot also-be-CNJ-RP-DCL

'She said she also stayed at the guatusa's place

for a long time.' {SUPAN.24}

However in many cases the adverb appears in a clause initial position (as do other temporal adverbs) and unlike coverb-generic verb combinations, other material can intervene between the adverb and the verb. Example (52) describes how the local schoolteacher told her students to do their work. In (53), in which the narrator is describing the manner in which a spirit can make itself known, moora has the connotation of suddenly.

(52) (53)

174

Aman jamimi jamimi::: mo nantiya aman jamimi jamimi mo nantiya now slowly slowly who nothing

apuro itoe

tie, inte.

apuro ito-e

ti-e in=te

hurry NOT.BE:GEN-DCL say-DCL 3P1=L0C

'She said "Slowly, slooowly, no one here needs to be

hurried.' {JERKUWENTA4.151}

Moora yari wube

kuwenta jeinchuna

moora ya-ri wu=be kuwenta jein-chu-na

quickly 3P2=F0C wind=COM like EMPH:PRO-IRR-PRG

kiraichuna,

jaan.

kira-i-chu-na,

jaan

see-BECOME:GEN-IRR-PRG yes

'Suddenly, it can appear as though with the wind,

yes.'{MV.ACPUKA1.134}

The adverb may also occur in other positions. In (54) below, moora appears in between the subject and the object of the subordinate clause. This clause concerns a daughter who went to live with the rainbow man and just as her mother would begin to miss her the daughter would suddenly return carrying a gift of guanta (a type of paca).

(54)

Namari

numa moora wale

nama=ri

numa moora wale

daughter=FOC already brief guanta

panasi

manjan.

pana-si

man=ja-n

carry.on.back-IMM again-come-ST

'The daughter would immediately already come back

carrying the guanta on her back!'

175
The adverb may also occur in clause final position. (55) comes from a narrative describing the traditional nose-piercing ceremony.

(55)

Atitiyoe a-ti-ti-yo-e scream-SAY:GEN-NEG-CNJ-DCL

Atitiyoe a-ti-ti-yo-e scream-SAY:GEN-NEG-CNJ-DCL

foro kinin keda

moora.

foro ki-nin ke-da

moora

hole do-CNTR DO:GEN-DCL:GL brief

'I didn't scream. I didn't scream. They pierced

it quickly.' {ICMATU9.24}

Some of the adverbs can function as noun modifiers without the presence of nominalizing morphology. In (56) duke amplifies the number of hard trees and in (57) moora 'brief' occurs in a nonverbal predicate construction. The narrator is describing a robbery and murder in (57).

(56) (57)

Duke duke chide polonla chue. duke duke chide polo-n=la chu-e many many tree hard-ST=PL be-DCL 'There were many many hard trees.' {SOKOK0.40)

Junnasa

kiranari, moora jotie

jo-n-na-sa kira-na=ri moora jo-ti-e

be-ST-PRG-DR see-PRG=FOC brief be-RP-DCL

titun? ti-tu-n say-NEG-INT

176
'Meanwhile let's see, it was quick/brief right?' {CCANKU3.78}

The only suffixes or prefixes that have been found to occur with the adverbs are the focus enclitic =ri (58) and the grade clitic =si (59). (58) describes the manner in which a herd of wild pigs would come running towards and then past the hunters.

(58) (59)

Moorari ta:::wu::: para

orainin

moora=ri ta:::wu::: para

ora-i-nin

brief=FOC IDEO

wild.pig good-BECOME:VCL-CNTR

wu::: atikachinan... wu::: a-ti-ka-chi=nan IDEO scream-SAY:GEN-AUG-AUG=INCL 'Suddenly ta:::wu::! the pigs would just do it (come running) wu:::! screaming!' {JAKURUl.299}

Moorasi jera kimin jotieti'. moora=si jera ki-min jo-ti-e-ti-e brief=GRAD all DO:VCL be-RP-DCL-RP-DCL 'They say she did them all (wove skirts)quickly.' {TSAB01.79}

To summarize, the adverbs differ from coverbs in that they can occur in a variety of positions in the clause and they do not take any kind of nominalizing, subordinating or finite verb morphology. As we will see, they not only differ from ideophones in that they can occur without marked prosody but they also do not occur in a rather specialized construction involving ideophones, see xxx.

177
5. Ideophones
Roughly half (249 out of 551) of the coverbs in Tsafiki can function as ideophones. In addition, there are ninety-one examples of ideophones in my data base that have no other function other than that of ideophones, i.e. they cannot occur in coverb-generic verb combinations. Hence, ideophones make-up a large part of the Tsafiki lexicon. Ideophones have been somewhat neglected in the linguistics literature, perhaps because, as pointed out by Kita (1997), they do not fit into the Saussurean research paradigm. De Saussure (1972 [1916])in his well known discussion of the arbitrariness of linguistic signs declared onomatopoeic words a marginal phenomenon.
There has been some recent interest in ideophones, most notably a collection of papers edited by Voeltz and Kilian-Hatz (2001) which demonstrate that ideophones are found throughout the world's languages. In addition, McGregor (2001) postulates that ideophones may be a source for uninflecting verbs (coverbs) in Australian languages and Schviltze-Berndt (2000, 2001) reports that coverbs in Jaminjung may, as in Tsafiki, function as ideophones.

178
5.1 Tsafiki Ideophones
Ideophones are often difficult to translate and in Tsafiki as in other languages (Kita 1997) speakers will often resort to gestures and facial expressions to depict the meaning of an ideophone. While many ideophones do represent sounds, many are hard to define except as vivid representations of certain ideas having to do with manner, actions or states. It has been postulated that ideophones primary function as 'verbal gestures' . In fact Kita (1993) drawing on experimental evidence found an overwhelming correlation between ideophones and gestures. And as with gestures, the meaning of ideophones is often hard to define.
Ideophones do not simply represent sounds or patterns of movement but can also be used for light emission, emotions and tactile sensations. As an immediate illustration of some of the ideophones found in Tsafiki, a representative sample is listed in below. Tsafiki even has an ideophone for the absence of sound owo 'silence'. In (60) the ideophones mainly have to do with tactile sensations or adjectival notions having to do with states or even lightness and darkness.

179

ota oto layun polo kapo lisin potsotso silan yabu piro ye neme pinda

'disgusting/dirty' 'soft' 'smooth' 'hard' 'uncombed hair/disheveled' 'tattered' 'shaggy as with shaggy fur' 'sticky/slimy' 'ugly tangle, as with gum in the hair 'to be wrinkled as with old skin' 'stinging/burning sensation' 'darkness' 'flash of light as lightening'

Ideophones also express configurations in space as illustrated in (61).

jiran papapa paran pelo sita suntu yabu soyo tin nako

'be twisted with head to side' 'three dimensional objects lined up 'arms opened wide' 'droop' 'be stuck as in fork of tree' 'hunch over' 'tangled up as with gum in the hair 'hang down from a single point' 'be stretched taut' 'head thrown back'

There are also ideophones which have to do with human emissions of sound.

(62)

Human Emissions

jayi

'scream'

achin

'sneeze'

are

'burp'

jeke

'hiccup'

chiki

'fart'

koron

'snore'

180

fiyo jojo jada jasa jejeje jijiji sin tufa dato jeejoo

'whistle' 'whistle with hand' 'yawn' 'breath' 'laugh' 'giggle' 'snort' 'spit' 'chattering teeth' 'sound of happiness

In (63) some of the ideophones having to do with animal noises and movements are given. Some animals are named for the sound they emit as illustrated by the first three examples.

(63)

Animal Emissions/movement

tsonpi

'sound of frog tsonpi'

sowi

'sound of bird sowi'

kikika

'sound of small frog kikika'

woun

'sound of a beetle flying'

jori

'sound of hedgehog bobo'

jayi

'yelp of dog'

yenyen

'bark of small dog'

kiri

'sound of bird corralera'

werewere 'sound of wild pigs para'

jun

'sound of angry wild pig'

banban

'sound of wild turkey ele'

seki

'movement of lightening bug'

potso

'sound of small animal jumping from

branch to branch'

kofo

'sound of small animal rustling in

leaves'

pipi

'sound of baby chick'

chiyo

'animal speech'

kikika

'sound of small frog kikika'

lolon

'raise ears'

seki

'movement of lightening bug'

sike

'centipede moving'

chun

'movement of hummingbird'

181

Many ideophones code manner of movement as in (64).

(64)

bokoboko buruburi
wayo jiwiya jowin kuma leka libilibi lilin milan piman yente sulo toto sutan

'sit with difficulty as does a very old, feeble person' 'small lump moving under the earth/as a small animal burrowing or a child moving under a blanket' 'slip on slippery surface' 'swing as in a hammock' 'tremble as with chills' 'stumble or stagger' 'flip over' 'flutter' 'go/be on tiptoe' 'lick' 'cross bamboo bridge' 'swirl as does a whirlpool' 'bob in water' 'sprout up as plant shoots' 'jump'

In other cases the ideophone seems to represent a mixture of sound and overall gestalt. There are a huge number of ideophones that resemble the following:

(65)

chilin deen dii
siti douu do dilo pesi wisi posi

'jingle small metal' 'hitting a tree with a hatchet' 'hitting something hard like a rock with a small light object such as a flower' 'rub as two sticks together' 'hitting something hard with a board' 'sound of a horse running, hard object hitting the ground' 'rocks falling' 'singing of fur or feathers' 'scraping with fingernails' 'small grain spilling out of sack'

182

kolon fofo dekun foouun biribiri betso bita bulubulu jori baru batu kau tun jipa poropo kelo seku kore bito sipi mudu bolo didi chiwu marisi siki mudu bolo

'something big burning' 'sound of throwing dirt/wind' 'tree branches hitting the house' 'sound of floodwater' 'light wind in trees' 'flat tire rolling /or something being flattened' 'slap' 'air escaping through water' 'biting on corn on the cob, apples, meat on the bone' 'crunching something hard, a stick, bone' 'crunching small seeds' 'crushing, opening platano skin with the teeth' 'crushing/mashing something fairly soft' 'smush' 'rain or small objects falling' 'rocks hitting each other' 'sand trickling' 'scraping metal' *pop balloon, rifle, testicles, oranges' 'splatter egg/mud' 'walking in mud' 'walking in water with boots on' 'walking on something hard with heels' 'grease sizzling' 'scratch' 'small object skittering' 'walking in mud' 'walking in water with boots on'

Ideophones intensify or vividly modify various aspects of the narration. In Tsafiki they tend to appear at pivotal moments in the text. For example in (66) below, a fatherin-law and his son are camping in the jungle. The son-inlaw has behaved badly and while he is sleeping the father-

183
in-law is lying by the fire watching as more and more fireflies, enormous numbers of fireflies, fill up the fire. Finally he sees off in the distance two great lights, like flashlights, coming closer and closer as a giant firefly arrives. The firefly crashes down through the trees and snaps off the son-in-law's head. The ideophones in this example (66) show typical phonological properties. The ideophone has its own intonation contour, separate from the main clause. The vowel is elongated in biti::le which represents the sound of the giant firefly crashing down through the forest canopy above. It is suffixed with -le which often occurs on ideophones and is characterized by a long vowel, common in ideophones but rare in regular text. The head is cut off and poton poton poton represents the sound of it j lamping around. Note that the event coded by biti::le does not have a resultative or depictive relation to the verb ka 'get', but rather represents a separate event—the firefly crashes through the trees and then snips the head off. Poton poton poton does modify su-lo 'jump up', in that it represents the sound of a heavy threedimensional object hitting the ground and the repetition indicates the event occurred more than once. In addition, biti::le is pronounced with an exaggerated high pitch on

the long vowel, and poton has an exaggerated low pitch with a slightly higher pitch on the second syllable.

(66) a.

Biti::le,

ka-ti-'.

biti::-le

ka-ti-e

snap-CAUSE:SUF GET:GEN-RP-DCL

'They say biti:: he grabbed it!'

b. Sulonin

iti'

su-lo-nin

i-ti-e

feet.in.air-go.up-CNTR BECOME:VCL-RP-DCL

poton poton poton, misu-ka-ri. poton poton poton, misu-ka-ri poton poton poton, head-NCL-FOC 'They say the head just jumped (around) poton poton poton!' {MVAAPALUKA.70}

The example above concerned ideophones which represent sounds. Tsafiki also has a large number of ideophones which represent manner of movement. In (67) below a whale has been molesting the Tsachila, swallowing up people and logs in the river. The shamans decide to sacrifice an illegitimate young man to the whale to correct matters. They send him out on a raft and sori sori represents the raft swirling in a whirlpool before it and its contents are swallowed up by the whale.

(67)

185

Juntele

wari sori

sori

numa

jun=te=le wari sori

sori

numa

3D1=L0C=L0C well IDEO.swirl IDEO.swirl already

luwa

ketie.

luwa

ke-ti-e

go.floating DO:GEN-RP-DCL

'They say there sori sori (swirling swirling) he

was just swallowed up.' {VLP.WILINKIIC.21}

The ideophones can also modify nouns as does silan 'sticky/sweaty' in (68). Both the ideophones in this example exhibit reduplication of the final syllable, which is also a characteristic of ideophones. Either the whole ideophone or just the final syllable may be reduplicated.

(68)

Junni aman numika silanlan junni aman numi=ka silan-lan then now penis=ACC IDEO:sticky-REDUP

murikade

jikaka

ne

muri-ka-de

ji-ka=ka ne

drag-GET:GEN-ASSC.M go-PF.P=ACC track

tanjinasa

jun parute

numiri

ta-n-ji-na-sa

jun paru=te

numi=ri

have-ST-go-PRG-DR 3D1 waterfall=LOC penis=FOC

sawiwi

katson tsonue

titie.

sawi-wi

katso-n tso-nu-e ti-ti-e

IDEO.slither-REDUP sleep-ST lie-EV-DCL say-RP-DCL

'Then they say he said they the track of the one

who had gone dragging his sticky sticky penis to

a waterfall and he was lying there asleep (his)

penis (going) sawiwi{VLP.URUSONAIC.58}

186
5.2 Semantic Constraints of Ideophones

Ideophones are rich in semantic meaning and are often quite constrained in terms of the type of semantic participants they take. In (69) below three ideophones having to do with the snapping of a stick or branch are given. Each is very specific in terms of the size of the branch it can refer to:

(69)

biti de ko

'small stick snapping' 'medium (1-3 inches in diameter) stick snapping' 'large branch/bone snapping'

Particularly with the ideophones denoting configurations in space, the semantic participants can be quite specific in that only certain kinds of objects can assume the position in question. In (70) three related ideophones having to do with the fanning out of items such as bird wings or fingers are given as illustration:

(70)

keken kelen kesen

'spread as a bird spreading its wings' 'spread as spread fingers or boards in a fence' 'spread unevenly as with damaged/frayed wings'

At other times the ideophone seems to take completely unrelated types of semantic participants. Jopo swell can be

187
used to either depict the swelling of a compact mass, such as a tight wad of cotton that is suddenly released, or it represents insects swarming. What is interesting here is that cotton swelling and insects swarming are of course, based on somewhat opposite phenomena in actuality, i.e. cotton appears to grow as the volume of space it occupies increases, whereas a mass of insects appears to grow as the insects decrease the volume of space they occupy. But the overall gestalt is the same—a mass with uneven boundaries swelling rapidly. Jopo can also occur as a coverb as in (71) where it occurs with the generic verb ji 'go'. In this example a magical tiger has packed five wild pigs into a very small, but heavy package. When the package is opened the meat swells to its normal size.

(71)

Nuwiri amali para

tsachika duke amali

nuwi=ri amali para

tsachika duke amali

far=FOC very wild.pig meat

a.lot very

nuwiri amali jopo jimanti'. nuwi=ri amali jopo ji-man-ti-e far=FOC very swell GO:GEN-SIT-RP-DCL 'They say the wild pig meat swelled enormously.' {AAKELA.120}

In the next two examples jopo occurs as an ideophone. In a situation similar to that of (71), the star woman has given a woman a tightly packed mass of skirts. She tells

188
the woman throw it down and it will swell. The long vowel indicates that the group of skirts appears to swell as a single mass. In this case, jopo functions as an ideophone. It does not normally form a complex predicate with keere 'throw'.

(72)

Junni ya tunanka fenan

tenchi

junni ya tunan=ka fe-nan tenchi

then 3P2 skirt=ACC more-INCL in.order.to

nuchi tedechinan

jopo:::::le

nu=chi te-de=chi=nan

jopo:::::-le

2=P0SS arm-NCL=INSTR=INCL jopo-GEN:SUF

keerena timanti'. ke-ere-na ti-man-ti-e hit-SEND:GEN-PRG say-SIT-RP-DCL 'They say she said, "The moment you arrive throw the skirt with your own hand jopoooooo." (AATSAB01.113}

In (73) jopo appears as an ideophone representing a situation much like the swarming of insects. The speaker is comparing a hord of children swarming around a teacher to red ant. Note that here the final syllable of jopo is reduplicated to represent the individual movement of the students.

(73)

189

Mmaka

chuika

tserin bolon

mma=ka chu-i-ka

tserin bolon

madam=ACC clutch-BECOME:GEN-PF red.ant group

tsanin ilaina

jopopopo

tsan-nin i-la-i-na

j opopopo

SEMBL-INCL BECOME:VCL-PL-BECOME:VCL-PRG jopopopo

'They clutched onto the teacher like a group of

red ants jopopopo.' {JERAKUWENTAla.531}

Note that in English we can use 'swell' to depict the situation depicted in the first two examples. But to use 'swell' for insects we first have to identify the insects as a mass, 'The swarm of insects swelled enormously.'

5.3 Phonological Properties of Ideophones

As mentioned above some of the typical characteristics of Tsafiki ideophones include long vowels, repetition and exagerrated pitch. Other than these features, ideophones conform to the regular CV structure of Tsafiki.
Movement ideophones are often reduplicated to indicate multiple instances of movement. One of the movement ideophones is listed below (74) . In this example, the mythical character, Salun, is taking out his penis and sending it up a tree so the man stuck in the tree can slide down it. Sawi sawi codes the slithering, coiling movement of the penis as it makes it way up the tree. Sawi can occur

190
with motion verbs to code translation motion, i.e. sawi jino 'to go slithering' and with ki 'do/make' to code nontranslational motion, i.e. sawi kino 'to writhe, coil in place.'

(74)

Sawi sawi sawi sawi sawi sawi sawi sawi sawi sawi slither slither slither slither slither

larinin

ketieti'

la-ri-nin

ke-ti-e-ti-e

come.up-CAUSE:SUF-CNTR DO:VCL-RP-DCL-RP-DCL

"They say he sent (the penis) up sawi sawi sawi

sawi sawil'

When a generic or simple verb itself is intensified, rather than repeating the bare root form of the verb, the speaker will repeat the finite or subordinate verb form several times. (75) concerns a narration describing the trip to Quito before the road was built, it would take five or six days of constant walking to traverse the eighty some miles to the highlands.

(75)

Tetobi titi

kabi

jito

Teto=bi titi

ka-bi ji-to

Quito=L0C something get-PURP go-SR

manjanasa

manjanasa

man=ja-na-sa

man=ja-na-sa

again=come-PRG-DR again=come-PRG-DR

manjanasa man=ja-na-sa

kebi janasa kebi ja-na-sa

feto feto

191

again=come-PRG-DR night come-PRG-DR non-Tsachi

ya kepuka

chunmanti'

ya ke-po-ka chu-n-man-ti-e

house hit-put-PF sit-ST-SIT-RP-DCL

feto

ya unika.

feto

ya uni-ka

non-Tsachi house old.M-NCL

'When they were coming back from buying things in

Quito, walking walking coming at nightfall there

was an abandoned mestizo house, an old mestizo

house.' (AATET0.MINU2.12}

5.4 Coverbs vs. Ideophones

As mentioned above, some of the coverbs can occur independently as ideophones but not all. Not all the ideophones, on the other hand can function as coverbs. For example, kerula in (76), codes the sound of some demons scratching at the wooden top of a large (shaped like a small canoe) chica vessel. Again this segment occurs at a pivotal moment in the text. A Tsachi jumps up and hides on the roof as he hears strange sounds approaching from the jungle. The evil spirits get closer and closer until they are on his property and begin to do mischief. I have not found any examples of kerula functioning as a coverb in the texts nor have I been able to elicit any examples. The speakers insist this is not possible.

(76)

192

Jein

kerula kerula kerula kerula:::

jein

kerula kerula kerula kerula

EMPH:PRO kerula kerula kerula kerula

takiralaketie ta-kira-la-ke-ti-e touch-SEE:GEN-PL-DO:VCL-RP-DCL 'He said they felt it (the chicha vessel) kerula kerula kerula kerula kerula:::' {CCSONPOURA.84}

In other cases the ideophone can also function as a coverb. In (77a) below pinda2 'lightning' occurs with ki 'do/make' in a complex predicate construction. It falls within the same intonation contour as the verb, does not have a long vowel nor is it repeated. In (77b) it occurs with a long vowel, the suffix -le, has it's own intonation contour and represents the flash of light. It is followed by chiwu an element that only functions as an ideophone and represents the sound of sizzling fat as well as lightening.

(77) a. Junni yari kunta junni ya=ri kunta then 3P2=FOC thunder

pinda

kinaminnutieti'.

pinda

ki-na-min-nu-ti-e-ti-e

lightening DO:GEN-PRG-IMPF.P-EV-RP-DCL-RP-DCL

'They say the thunder was making lightening.'

2 Kunta 'thunder' is an animate being in Tsafiki. This is the typical way to say it thundered. Kunta throws the lightening.

193

b. Junni aman pinda:::le junni aman pinda-le then now lightening-CAUSE:SUF

chiwu:::le

timin

joe

chiwu-le

ti-min

jo-e

sizzle-CAUSE:GEN say-IMPF.P BE:AUX-DCL

'It was going/saying pinda! chiwul'

(CCMMAPIYA2.93-93}

Speakers are fairly aware of the function of ideophones and can readily identify which ideophones can and cannot occur in complex predicate constructions. However there are intermediate cases. Poton above, which generally codes the sound of a hard three-dimensional object hitting solid ground is, for most younger speakers, only an ideophone. However, older speakers use it in a rather specific construction related to hunting. It is used to code the beating of the ground done to imitate falling fruit which then attracts the guatusa (a type of paca). In the following dialogue a son is questioning his father about hunting practices. Due to the loss of game the son does not hunt. The father first speaks of the guatusa earth-beating using poton as a coverb in a complex predicate (78a). He then uses it as an ideophone in (78b). The son, confused then asks his father if it is an ideophone (78c-d), yPoton is a sound right?' The father

194
answers that the word is poton kika 'beat/beaten' (78e). Hence poton can occur in a complex predicate construction but only with this rather specialized meaning. It cannot be used to refer to general beating on the ground.

(78) a. Tsante poton keina

ora

tsan=te poton ke-i-na

ora

SMBL=:LOC poton HIT-BECOME:GEN-PRG good

moora na-ka

sujaman.

moora small-NCL su-ja-man

brief small-NCL feet.in.air-COME:GEN-SIT

'Like there, if the ground gets beaten almost

immediately they (the guatusa) will come

running.' {JAKURU5.1274}

b. Toka

misukinin

kinun

jo',

to=ka

misuki-nin

ki-nun

jo-e

earth=LOC head-DO:GEN-CNTR DO:VCL-NOM BE:AUX-DCL

orotonle

jeen

kinan

tenchi

oroto-n=le jeen

ki-nan

tenchi

clear-ST=LOC PRO:EMPH DO:VCL-INCL in.order.to

poto:::nle

keina.

poto:::n-le

ke-i-na

poto:::n-CAUSE:SUF hit-BECOME:GEN-PRG

"It is to hit the ground really hard, doing it

where (the ground) is cleared in order to hit it

poto:::n! {JAKURU5.1284}

c. Poton, poton merako? poton, poton mera-ko poton, poton sound-DUB 'Poton, poton is a sound right?

d. Yakari

tsanke

fiki panun

jun?

ya=ka=ri tsan-ke

fiki pa-nun jo-n

3P2=ACC=FOC SMBL=DO:VCL word speak-NOM be-INT

'Is this what they call it?'

195

e. Yakari,

yakari

poton kika

ya=ka=ri ya=ka=ri poton kika

3P2=ACC=FOC 3P2=ACC=FOC beat DO:GEN-PF.P

ti-nun say-NOM 'This, this is called 'beaten'.' {JAKURU5.1291}

5.6 Ideophones with ti 'say'

In addition to taking the suffix -le 'CAUSE.SUF' all the ideophones can occur in a specialized construction with the simple verb ti 'say' in a construction roughly analogous to English, 'the balloons went pop! pop! pop!.' As noted above, adverbs do not occur in this construction. In (79) below ali ali describes the man waving his arms in the air gesturing to his wife.

(79)

Karsiyela manjade

tito

Karsiyela man-ja-de ti-to

Graciela REP-come-IMP say-SR

ali ali tinatie

titun.

ali ali ti-na-ti-e

ti-tu-n

ali ali say-PRG-RP-DCL say-NEG-INT

'They say that saying "Graciela come back!"

he went ali ali right?' {SEUNIRI.18}

Similar to coverbs, ideophones cannot take direct negative suffixes. Furthermore they can only occur under the scope of negation in the construction represented in

196
(80) and the negation represents a metalinguistic evaluation.

(80)

Poton poton poton titue. poton poton poton ti-tu-e poton poton poton say-NEG-DCL 'It didn't go poton poton poton (it made a different sound).'

5.7 Integration of Ideophone and Verb

Unlike coverbs the ideophone does not necessarily correlate with the action coded by the verb. In (81) a young woman has been picked down to the bone by a condor/ she speaks her final words, calling out to her mother and father and then her bones clatter to the ground dele:n dele:n. In (82) wo 'undo' an action ideophone, refers to the untying of the pack, which is a separate action from throwing down the pack. Wo 'untie' can occur as a coverb but not in conjunction with keere 'throw down'.

(81)

Ayanko apako tie titida ayan-ko apa-ko ti-e ti-ti-da mother-DUB father-DUB say-DCL say-EV-DCL.GEN dele::n dele::n dele::n dele::n dele::n dele::n 'They say she said, "Mother? Father?" (and then her bones fell) dele::n dele::nl' (Tsabol.354)

197

(82)

Wole wole keerenun tenchi we kiyobi

wo-le wo-le ke-ere-nun tenchi we kiyo=bi

undo-le undo-le ke-ere-nun tenchi quick shelf-LOC

jera nankariyotieti' jera nan-kari-yo-ti-e-ti-e all lie.horizontal-CAUSE: 'He threw down his pack wole wole (action of untying the pack) in order to lie it on the shelf. {CCSONPURA.33}

At other times the ideophone appears redundant as in (83). Here both the ideophone pupu and the complex predicate represent the boiling of water that suggests that while both code the same event, the type of information each carries is at least slightly different.

(83)

pupu, pupu, pupu, pupu, pupu pupu pupu pupu pupu pupu pupu pupu pupu pupu pupu

wara kinanunka

furinchi

wara ki-na-nun=ka

furin=chi

boil DO:GEN-PRG-NOM=LOC mate=INSTR

itsanke

kalake'

in-tsan-ke

ka-la-ke-e

3PI-SMBL-DO:VCL get-PL-DO:VCL-DCL

'When it's boiling, pupu, pupu, pupu, pupu, pupu,

get it with a gourd in this way.' {ICMATU5.43}

5.8 Summary

In Tsafiki ideophones make up large part of the lexicon. There are some elements which can only be used as

ideophones, but roughly half of the coverbs can also function as ideophones. Ideophones have been described as representing the affecto-imagistic dimension of language (Kita 1997). The relationship between ideophones and coverbs and some of their notional as well as morphosyntactic similiarities indicates that at least some of the coverbs may also code more affecto-imagistic notions than analytic or schematic notions.
6. Borrowed Words
When Tsafiki borrows verbs or other words from other languages such as Spanish or Quichua, the borrowed word is treated like a coverb in a complex predicate construction. One of the more commonly used borrowings is pode-i 'be able' (84) based on the Spanish verb poder 'be able' combined with the Tsafiki generic verb i 'become'. Note that the Tsafiki form is based on the infinitive form of the Spanish verb.

(84)

199
Me chuto chudino me chu-to chu-di-no tail sit-SR sit-INCH:SUF-INF podeitumantie. pode-i-tu-man-ti-e be.able-BECOME:GEN-NEG-SIT-RP-DCL 'They say having a tail he (the rainbow snake man) couldn't sit down.' {MV.AASUYUN.32}

At times the borrowed word has no ready equivalent in Tsafiki such as ayuda-i 'help' based on the Spanish ayudar in (85) below.

(85)

Ya nanato

ayudainae

ya nana-to

ayuda-i-na-e

3P2 carry.on.shoulder-SR help-BECOME:GEN-PRG-DCL

titi'. ti-ti-e say-RP-DCL 'They say he (the man) said he (the tiger) was helping him carrying (the heavy pack) on his shoulder.'

At other times the construction has roughly the same meaning as a Tsafiki construction and both constructions will use the same generic verb, as in (86) and (87) below.

(86) (87)

200

Ma kura jinati', ma kura ji-na-ti-e day each go-PRG-RP-DCL

tarabaja kinayoe

tito.

tarabaja ki-na-yo-e

ti-to

work

DO:GEN-PRG-CNJ-DCL say-SR

'Each day he went (to the field) saying he was

going to work.' {SOKOKO.23}

Jaan jaya kinkilake'. jaan jaya ki-n-ki-la-ke-e yes work DO:GEN-ST-D0:VCL-PL-DO:VCL-DCL 'Yes they would have to work (in the field).' {MATtJTECC .373}

4. Generic Verbs

Generic verbs can occur as the inflecting element in a complex predicate construction (88) or alone as the sole predicating element in the clause (89).

(88) (89)

Junpalu piti darapatatie. junpalu piti dara-pata-ti-e four pieces break.off-come.down-RP-DCL 'Four pieces came breaking down.' {KAWERE2.32}

Manfuinunsi tsachila

dubi

man-fu-i-nun-si tsachi=la

du=bi

again-dry-BECOME:GEN-NOM-GR people=PL mound=LOC

nechi manpatalaimantie ne=chi man-pata-la-i-man-ti-e foot=L0C again-come.down-PL-BECOME:VCL-SIT-RP-DCL 'When it dried (the floodwaters receded) the people came back down from the mountain.' {PAYACHI.32}

201
While the generic verb class only consists of approximately thirty-three verbs, they make up a disportionate number of the actual predicate constructions found in the texts. In a study of 1,064 clauses, taken from traditional narratives (583 clauses) and conversations (481), 493 or 46% consisted of a generic/simple verb as the sole predicating element. Shultze-Berndt (2000) reports similar figures for the generic verbs found in Jaminjung. The generic verbs are quite general in meaning and code common activities. A list of the generic verbs is presented in Table 7. The verbs are grouped according to semantic verb class. Every predicate in Tsafiki, whether simple or complex, can be grouped into one of five classes, based on overt morphological marking. This system will be discussed in Chapter Five.
The suffixes presented in Table Four function much like the generic verbs, although they are no longer extant verbs in the language. As mentioned above every predicate in Tsafiki is grouped into one of five verb classes depending on which verb class suffix it takes in certain constructions. Which verb class suffix is utilized is determined by the generic verb in complex predicates. In examples (90-92) a verb class marker occurs directly after

202

the plural marker. Note that it changes depending on which generic verb is used in the complex predicate.

(90) (91) (92)

Mali pele tenpe mali pele tenpe huito trunk under wiruilainake. wiru-i-la-i-na=ke stand-BECOME.GEN-PL-BECOME:VCL-PRG-QT '(He said) they were standing underneath a huito tree.' {JABUAMALILI.30} Wari chilari kachi wari chi=la=ri ka=chi well 1F=PL=F0C eye=LOC wiruralarayo'. wiru-ra-la-ra-yo-e stand-BE.POSIT:BEN-PL-BE.POSIT:VCL-CNJ-DCL 'Well we were standing in front.' {JAKURU1.290} Palaka chidebi nanle pala=ka chide=bi nan=e tool=ACC tree=LOC side=LOC wirukarilakinae. wiru-kari-la-ki-na-e stand-CAUSE:GEN-PL-DO:VCL-PRG-DCL 'They are leaning the tools against the tree.' {CHICOPA.2)

203

TABLE 7: Generic Verbs and Number of Coverbs with which they co-occur (out of 551)

Generic Verb

i 'become'-class

i

'become'

ji

'go'

ja* 'come'

lo

'go out/up'

la* 'come out/up'

fe

'arrive there'

fa* 'arrive here'

pati 'go down'

pata* 'come down'

pole 'go across'

pola* 'come across'

wi

'go in'

wiya* 'come in'

piya* 'lose'

puya 'die'

-di 'get into

position'

-wiya 'almost'

# 257 109
48 45 50 34 33 35 35 43 35 37 33
5 1 4 open

ti 'say' class

ti

'say/express'

39

'be'-class

jo

'be'

46

ito 'not be'

44

Generic Verb ki 'do/make'-class ki Mo/make' suwa 'cause to
become' kari 'cause' ere* 'send' po* 'put inside' ka 'get' pa* 'talk' kira* 'see' kuwa* 'give' fi 'eat' -le 'direct cause' -ri 'cause motion' -te 'set/place' -si 'remove' -re 'direct cause' -wo 'indirect cause' -miya 'associative
cause'

# of coverbs
269 156 149
50 43 35 10
9 4 1 76 39 17 15 5 5 open

ra 'be in position'

class

ra 'be in a

125

position'

nena 'go around'

33

ta* 'have'

11

chu* 'sit'

7

tso* 'lie'

5

•indicates generic verbs that can occur as coverbs

204
This same process occurs with the generic verb-like suffixes. In (93) chu occurs as a simple verb and is followed by the verb class marker ra 'be in a position.'

(93) chipolo

junbi chularati'

yala

chipolo

jun=bi chu-la-ra-ti-e

ya=la

balsa.bench 3D1=L0C sit-PL-BE.IN.POSITION-RP-DCL 3P2=PL

'They were sitting on a balsa bench.' {CCKASAMA.87}

In (94) and (95) chu is suffixed with -di and then -te with a respective differences in the verb class marker.

(94) yabe jito chudilainae ya=be ji-to chu-di-la-i-na-e 3P2-CON go-SR sit-INCH-PL-BECOME:GEN-PRG-DCL 'Going with her they are sitting down.' {CHICOPA.59}

(95) aman tanjato

chipolobi

aman ta-n-ja-to

chipolo=bi

now have-ST-come-SR balsa.bench=L0C

chutelakee

titida

chu-te-la-ke-e

ti-ti-da

sit-SET:SUF-PL-DO:GEN-DCL say-RP-DCL.GEN

'Then they say they brought him and sat him down on a

balsa bench.' {VLP.ILUSUN.96}

In (96) the complex predicate wiru-i is followed by the associative cause suffix -miya. As was shown in (90) wiru-i 'stand up' takes i 'become' as a verb class marker, here however it takes ki 'do/make' due to the presence of miya 'ASSOC.CAUSE'.

(96)

205

Aman jera aman jera now all

wiruimiyalakeda wiru-i-miya-la-ki-da stand-become-ASSOC.CAUSE-PL-DO:VCL-DCL.GEN

pone tera kichun. pone tera ki-chu-n shaman dance DO:GEN-IRR-ST 'Now they had us stand up dance.' {DZ.4 0}

(with them) to

shaman-

It is interesting to note that Vittadello (1988) lists -re, -te, -ie and -wa as causative suffixes in Cha'palaachi, a closely related Barbacoan language. It is possible that the suffixes are derived from very old verb forms no longer extant in the language. There are some semantic similarities between the meanings coded by these suffixes, for example all the predicates with the suffix si have to do with removal (97). Si 'remove' does occur as a predicate but only in a very specific context—to code yolk leaking out of an egg.

(97)

si kasi osi lasi pansi disi fusi wirisi

'yolk leaking out of egg' 'sweep' 'sell' 'open' 'forget' 'scratch earth for bugs like a chicken' 'aspirate liquid' 'scrape off as with burned food on a pan'

206
There is some evidence that the system is may recycle itself in certain constructions. Pore 'cut' appears in the texts both with and without a generic verb as does ara 'scatter spread.' Speakers accept both forms in (98) and (99) and we could find no meaning differences between the forms.
(98) a. Juan piyo=ka ara-le-e b. Juan piyo=ka ara-le ki-e 'Juan scattered the corn.'
(99) a. Juan sili=ka po-re-e b. Juan sili=ka po-re ki-e 'Juan cut the line/rope.'
The number of coverbs out of 551 with which each generic verb was found to co-occur are also listed in Table 7. Note that there is a great deal of variation, ranging from 269 for the generic verb ki 'do/make' to only one for puya 'die' and fi 'eat.' Also note that the most frequent generic verbs also occur as the five verb class markers.
The generic verbs followed by asterisks have also been found to occur in the coverb position in complex predicate constructions. In (100) kira 'see' first occurs as the generic verb in ta-kira 'touch-see/feel', and then in the coverb position in kira-po 'see-put/peek' (101).

207

(100) (101)

Junsi aman tede tenka

jera

junsi aman te-de ten-ka jera

then now arm-NCL heart-NCL all

takirachunae,

pele tenka

o

ta-kira-chu-na-e

pele ten-ka o

touch-SEE:GEN-IRR-PRG-DCL trunk heart-NCL or

sonba tenka

jonunka.

sonba ten-ka jo-nun=ka

strong heart-NCL be-NOM=ACC

'Then now they would take his pulse to see if his

heart was weak or strong.' (LIT:'they would see-

touch his hand-heart...') {VLP.FOR2.27}

Junni ya jokari

ya tsabo sonari

junni ya jo=ka=ri

ya tsabo sona=ri

then 3P2 condor=ACC=FOC 3P2 star woman=FOC

kirapobi

jimanti'.

kira-po-bi

ji-man-ti-e

see-PUT.INSIDE=LOC go-SIT-RP-DCL

'Then the star woman went to peek on the condor.'

{DATSABO.7}

Hence kira Asee' can function both as a generic verb and a coverb. Note that kira only occurs with nine coverbs when it functions as a generic verb none of the generic verbs that occur with over a hundred coverbs has been found in the coverb function. Given the generality and highly schematic meaning of the most common generic verbs, the more specific meaning of the coverbs, and the scalar nature of the generic verbs, both in terms of the frequency with which they occur with coverbs and in terms of the

208
specificity of their meaning it is not hard to imagine a scenario in which a coverb comes to acquire some of the properties of a generic verb. As we saw above there is a fair amount of variation amongst the coverbs as to which ones always require the generic verb even in subordinate clauses. As coverbs such as da 'cook' come to be used more and more often without the generic verb it's not hard to imagine they would come to be recognized and utilized without the generic verb.
8. Coverb Classes
While the focus of this study is the overt verbal semantic systems in Tsafiki, it should be noted that the coverbs can be covertly classified according to the set of generic verbs with which they regularly co-occur. While the system is productive and new collocations can readily be formed, particularly when telling a joke or in creative rhetoric, the combinations are conventionalized to a certain degree. In Table 8 I present some of the more typical covert coverb classes of Tsafiki.

209
Table 8: Tsafiki Coverb and Verb Classes

i-class 'become'

Motion Verbs + die lose Manner of Motion

pata 'come down' Piya
'get lost' soko-ji 'go writhing'

soko-i 'writhe'

Jri-class /'do/make/hit pata ri 'bring down'

ti-class 'say/exp ress'

ra-class 'be in a position'

piya ri 'Jose smth.'
soko-pata-ri 'cause to
come writhing down'
soko-ki 'writhe'

j oclass 'be'

soko-kari 'cause to writhe'

soko-ere 'send writhing'

Break Verbs
Stretch Ferment Emotion

biti-ji 'snap' (intransi tive) bare i 'stretch'

biti-le ki 'snap' (transitive)
bare suwa 'stretch
smth.'

bare ra 'be stretched

Positional

wiru-i stand-
BECOME
'stand up'

wiru kari 'stand up' (transitive)

wj.ru ra 'stand'

Cut/hit Body Emissions

pora x 'get cut/let cut/ cut easily' achi la 'sneeze'

Activity Cogni- mi-i
tive 'learn'

pore 'cut'
achi ki 'sneeze' achi lari 'let out a sneeze' jaya ki 'work physically' mi-ki 'count' mi-kari 'teach' mi-kuwa 'point out' mi-pa 'indicate'

mi-ti

mi ra

'get

'know'

used to'

210
mi ito 'not know/no t underst and'

9. Summary
While core members of each of the categories, ideophone, adverb, coverb, and generic verb, verbal suffixes do have distinct morphosyntactic behavior, in each class there is some overlap with other classes. Adding in verb class markers (discussed in the Chapter Five) I have diagramed the system in Figure One below. The system suggests that something similar to a grammaticalization

211
process is at work here, although the process concerns for the most part lexemes that are gradually moving from one category to another. The ideophones represent information high on the affecto-imagistic scale while verb class markers lie at the other extreme of analytic or schematic meaning. In the next Chapter, I will discuss the argument structure of complex predicates, and show that, while in terms of valency, complex predicates are primarily exocentric, the generic verb does control the schematic representation of the event coded by the complex predicate which supports the cline represented in Figure xxx below.

ideophone A

coverb generic verb

verb class markers •

AFFECTO-IMAGISTIC

SCHEMATIC

Figure One: Location of Tsafiki lexemes on a scale from affecto-imagistic to schematic

212
CHAPTER IV
ARGUMENT STRUCTURE OF SIMPLE AND COMPLEX PREDICATES
1. Introduction
The majority of predicates in Tsafiki are complex. Complex predicates in Tsafiki consist of an inflecting verb (generic verb) and a non-inflecting element (coverb). Each of the elements of the complex predicate contributes semantic participants, although syntactically, the complex predicate functions like a simple predicate in that it allows only one set of morphosyntactic arguments. Complex predicates of this type pose a challenge for mainstream approaches to argument structure, in that in the standard analysis, valency and argument structure are thought to be determined by the lexical properties of a single element, the head, exemplified by a simple verb. In formal analyses the argument structure of the clause is based on properties of the head and couched in terms such as, 'verbs govern their complements', 'verbs assign case' or 'verbs project their argument structure.'

213
In Tsafiki, the valency and argument structure of the clause cannot be determined solely by either the coverb or the generic verb. For example, in (la) the coverb son 'alive' first combines with kari 'CAUSE:GEN' to form a bivalent clause, and then with i 'BECOME:GEN' to form a monovalent clause in (lb). In these examples, it appears that the generic verb is determining valency, but in (2a), the coverb i 'BECOME:GEN' combines with mi 'know' to form a bivalent clause and kari 'CAUSE:GEN' combines with the same coverb to form a trivalent clause in (2b). Hence i 'BECOME:GEN' can occur in both monovalent and bivalent clauses and kari 'CAUSE:GEN' in both bivalent and trivalent clauses.

(1) a. ...(ya yalaka)

sonkarito

...(ya ya=la=ka) son-kari-to

...(3P2 3P2=PL=ACC) alive-CAUSE:GEN-SR

sulonayoe

titie.

su-lo-na-yo-e

ti-ti-e

feet.in.air-GO.UP:GEN-PRG-CNJ-DCL say-RP-DCL

'...they say he said he was jumping around waking

them up.'

214

b. Tsanhinasanan

mankati

tsan-i-na-sa-nan

man-ka-ti

SEMBL-BECOME:VCL-PRG one-NCL-NEG

sonhilaitumantie. son-i-la-i-tu-man-ti-e alive-BECOME:GEN-PL-BECOME:VCL-SIT-RP-DCL 'But despite all this, not one woke up.' {AATETOMINU.95-96}

(2) a. Junka kirasiri miiyun? jun=ka kira-si=ri mi-i-yo-n 3D1=ACC see-IMM=FOC know-BECOME:GEN-CNJ-INT

b. 0 (nu=ka junka) mikarilakin? o (nu=ka jun=ka) mi-kari-la-ki-n or (2=ACC 3D1=ACC) know-CAOSE:GEN-PL-DO:VCL-INT 'Did you learn this just by watching or did they teach (it to you)?' (KURU4.973)

Furthermore, in (3a) the coverb ba-le 'unstickCAUSE.SUF:GEN' combines with the generic verb ki 'EX):GEN'to form a bivalent clause, but with ji 'GO:GEN' in (3b-c) to form a monovalent clause. Hence in these examples the same coverb ba 'unstick' appears in both bivalent and monovalent clauses.

(3) a. Aman (pesilika) aman (pe-sili=ka) now (feces-NCL-ACC)

bale

kichi

tina.

ba-le

ki-chi

ti-na

unstick-CAUS:SUF:GEN DO:GEN-INCEP say-PRG

'Now he wanted to unstick them (the intestines).'

215

b. Tiyan

(pesili) bajichunan?

tiya-n (pe-sili) ba-j i-chu-na-n

what-INT (feces-NCL)unstick-GO:GEN-1RR-PRG-1NT

'How would they come unstuck?'

c. Bajitumin

jotietie.

ba-ji-tu-min

jo-ti-e-ti-e

unstick-GO:GEN-NEG-IMPF.P BE:AUX-RP-DCL-RP-DCL

'They say they wouldn't come unstuck.'

{CCTSONPIPI.261-263}

The generic verb ki 'DO:GEN' combines with the coverb tera 'step' to form a monovalent clause in (4), but in (5) the coverb tere 'step' combines with po 'put' to form a bivalent clause.

(4)

Tera kinatietie,

yari.

tera ki-na-ti-e-ti-e

ya=ri

step DO:GEN-PRG-RP-DCL-RP-DCL 3P2=FOC

'They say she was dancing.' {CCTSONPIPI.244}

(5)

Yari pika

tereputori

ya=ri pi=ka

tere-po-to=ri

3P2=FOC water=ACC step-PUT:GEN-SR=FOC

piino

jotieti'.

pi-i-no

jo-ti-e-ti-e

water-BECOME:GEN-INF BE:AUX-RP-DCL-RP-DCL

'They say he said if she stepped in the water she

would dissolve.'

Finally, in (6), two different generic verbs, i 'BECOME:GEN' and ra 'BE.IN.POSIT:GEN', combine with the same coverb wiru 'stand' with a change in aspect rather than valency.

216

(6)

Junni yari numa benele

junni ya=ri numa bene=le

then 3P2=FOC already back=LOC

wirurasa wiru-ra-sa stand-BE.POSIT:GEN-DR

manwiruinayoe man=wiru-i-na-yo-e again=stand-BECOME:GEN-PRG-CNJ-DCL

tinutietie,

tulipochun.

ti-nu-ti-e-ti-e

tuli-po-chu-n

say-EV-RP-DCL-RP-DCL push-PUT:GEN-IRR-ST

'Then they say he said she (the clay woman) said

that she (the frog woman) was already standing

behind her when she stood up, to push her.'

{CCTSONPIPI.69-70}

The results of the above examples are summarized in (7) .

Monovalent

son-i

' alive-BECOME:GEN'

ba-ji

'unstick-GO:GEN'

tera-ki 'step-DO:GEN'

wiru-i 'stand-BECOME:GEN

wiru-ra 'stand-BE.POSITION:GEN'

'wake up' 'come unstuck 'dance' 'stand up' 'stand'

Bivalent son-kari mi-i ba-le ki tere-po

'alive-CAUSE.BECOME:GEN' 'wake sm. up'

'know-BECOME:GEN'

'learn'

'unstick-CAUSE DO:GEN

'unstick sm.'

'step-PUT:GEN'

'step into'

Trivalent mi-kari 'know-CAUSE:GEN'

'teach'

217
According to the mainstream approach to argument structure there are three possible ways to analyze the above data as pointed out by Schultze-Berndt (2000). The first involves analyzing the generic verb as semantically 'empty' or at least radically reduced in terms of lexical complexity, without syntactic valency and lacking the potential to govern complements. Under this approach, the argument structure is determined by the more semantically specific coverb, i.e. the generic verb is a 'light verb'. This analysis would necessitate postulating more than one relational lexeme for the majority of Tsafiki coverbs including son 'alive', mi 'know', ba 'unstick' and tera 'step' to reflect their ability to occur in predicate constructions with variable valency.
The second possible standard analysis is the converse of above, i.e. the coverb is simply an adverbial modifier of the verb and the inflecting element, the generic verb, determines syntactic argument structure. Again this would lead to the necessity of postulating more than one relational lexeme for the majority of generic verbs.
The third approach is that the two elements form an unanalyzable lexical unit, roughly equal to a simple verb that determines argument structure as a whole. While this

218
approach is possible, it misses several important aspects of the system concerning the possible combinations of generic verb and coverb and does not explain how the coverbs can function as predicates, with a complete set of arguments in non-finite clauses (Schiiltze-Berndt 2000) .
A fourth approach, and the one used in this study and similar to the approach taken by Schiiltze-Berndt (2000) has three main components. First, both elements of the complex predicate are considered relational, jointly contributing semantic participants and contributing to the syntactic structure of the clause. Two, argument sharing is allowed, i.e. more than one semantic participant may converge on a single argument and three, the construction itself is considered a sign in its own right, capable of contributing its own share of information to the clause.
An approach in which two or more lexemes combine to determine the relationality of the complex predicate and which argument sharing is allowed has been proposed for Northern Australian languages by Schiiltze-Berndt (2000) for Jaminjung and Wilson (1999) as well as for the light verb constructions of Hindi (Mohanan 1994, 1997), Urdu (Butt 1995, 1997, 1998) and Japanese (Shibatani 1996). It has also been used in the analysis of serial verb constructions

219
in a number of languages (Durie 1997; Foley and Olson 1985).
The third factor lies in the consideration of the construction itself as a sign in its own right. This is loosely based on a Construction Grammar approach (Goldberg 1995). In this approach constructions are taken to be the basic units of language. Constructions are identified as phrasal patterns (or morphemes for that matter), which contain an aspect of form or meaning "that is not predictable from the properties of their component parts or from other constructions" (Goldberg 1995:4). In construction grammar, semantic participants can be directly mapped onto the grammatical roles of syntactic constructions. The interaction between construction meaning and verb meaning will be particularly important when the combination of a bivalent coverb and monovalent generic verb is discussed. In this construction the meaning of the clause is not predictable from either the coverb or the generic verb, but arises from the construction itself. I will basically contend that nominative and accusative casemarking in Tsafiki are semantic cases, highly schematic and abstract, but semantic nonetheless.

220
The primary purpose of this chapter is to analyze the valency and syntactic structure of the complex predicate. It will be shown that by considering the contribution of each lexeme, the coverb and generic verb, and taking the meaning of the construction itself into consideration, the argument structure and valency of complex predicates can be explained.
But before I begin the discussion of the argument structure of complex predicates, I will first look at the case-marking and argument structures of simple predicates to determine the meaning carried by the basic morphosyntactic structure of the clause in Tsafiki. Once the meaning and structure of simple clauses is determined, I'll return to the discussion of complex predicates
2. Simple Finite Clauses in Tsafiki
Tsafiki has relatively little variation in simple finite clauses. The majority of voice operations in Tsafiki are derivational, created through the use of different generic verbs in complex predicate constructions. There is no passive, nor antipassive, reflexives are either represented by simple bivalent constructions or formed derivationally (Chapter Two, Section 4.2). There is a

221
reciprocal construction, but basically, the only casemarking alternations found in Tsafiki are external possession constructions and locative alternations. I will claim that Tsafiki has this and just this set of casealternating constructions due to the fact that it lacks grammatical case.
Nominative case-marking has often been characterized as coding starting point or topic. Hence nominative case is associated with the coding of 'what the clause is about' (Mithun and Chafe 1999; Jesperson 1924; Givon 1984; inter alia). In fact, Givon (2001:203) calls nominativeaccusative systems "pragmatically-oriented case-marking" observing that in nominative-accusative systems nominative case can code a variety of semantic case roles including 'agents' and 'patients' which he takes as evidence that nominative case could not be coding semantic distinctions. He furthermore identifies accusative case as coding a secondary topic based on the same criteria—the ability for different semantic participants to occur as accusative arguments. However there is another semantic notion associated with these two cases that is often subsumed under the notion of starting point. This relates to the intiation and termination of a real or imagined event from

222
the viewpoint of the speaker. Nominative case is associated with the initiation of the event and accusative case with the termination, regardless of the agentivity status of the argument. Nominative and accusative case can be directly related to what DeLancey (1981) calls "natural attention flow." The most natural way for a speaker to code an event is to "recreate the flow of attention involved in actually witnessing the event" (DeLancey 1981:632). In a prototypical transitive clause in a nominative-accusative language like Tsafiki, as well as English, the nominative argument will be associated with the initiating point for the coding of the event. This does not mean initiating point in real world terms, but rather the point at which the speaker chooses to begin the coding of the event- For example in (8), based on DeLancey (1981, 1984), the nominative argument correlates with the initiating phase of the event according to the speaker's viewpoint.
(8) a. Lily broke the window with a rock. b. The rock broke the window. c. The window broke.
A schematic representation of (8a) and (8c) coding a causative and inchoative event respectively is given in Figure One below. The arrow represents initiating point in

223
relation to the viewpoint the speaker has or adopts in coding the event. For example in the inchoative the speaker codes the event as though the viewing of the event began with the breaking of the window and not the action of the actor.

CAUSE
t

> ACT
t

> STATE

IP here

IP here

Causative

Inchoative Construction

Actor=NOM=

Undergoer=NOM

Undergoer=ACC

'The window broke.'

Instrument=COM

"Lily broke the window'

Figure Two: Initiating Point (IP) and coding of nominative in causative and inchoative constructions

Note that despite the fact that most speakers do not believe that windows break without a 'cause', in the inchoative version of 'break' no cause is coded. The initiation of the event begins with the breaking of the window. Under this analysis of nominative case, there is no inherent contradiction in nominative case coding both an actor (or initiator of an event) and an undergoer (entity which undergoes a change of state or location) in that both

224
may be construed to correlate with the initiating phase of the event in relation to the speaker's viewpoint.
Now this analysis does not mean that nominative case never codes starting point or topic, and in some languages that may in fact be its primary function. Nominative case also differs depending on the internal aspect of the verb. In stative eventualities, where there is no event, there can be no initiating point in terms of action, only a starting point. So it is not being claimed that in Tsafiki, nominative case never codes starting point. In fact, in Tsafiki, starting point most often correlates with the initiating point, but, as will be shown below, when there is a conflict between starting point or topic and initiating point, the initiating point will take precedence over the starting point for nominative case. In the same manner I will show that accusative case correlates with the focus or endpoint of the action coded by the clause.
2.1 Morphosyntactic Properties of 'Subject' and 'Object'
In this study, subject and object are not taken to be primitives. The approach taken here follows much of the functional and typological literature in that subjects and objects are taken to arise from the convergence of certain

225
semantic and pragmatic constraints on specific syntactic constructions (Li and Thompson 1976; Foley and Van Valin 1984; Van Valin and LaPolla 1997). In other words, in certain constructions pragmatic considerations such as topicality and semantic considerations such as initiating point for the event will all converge on a single argument essentially creating a subject. In other constructions the pragmatic and semantic values may be split between more than one argument.
In Tsafiki, in general, it is not always easy to distinguish core arguments in morphosyntactic terms. While it does have fairly rigid AOV word order, in a study of 668 clauses, 294 or 44% had no expression of a core argument at all and only 30 or 4% had both core arguments of a bivalent clause overtly expressed. Hence word order is seldom utilized to distinguish or even identify subject and object. As will be illustrated below many of the behavioral properties usually associated with subjecthood—word order, agreement, switch-reference marking—do not always coincide with the nominative argument. And, as will be shown below objects are even more problematic. There is no passive in Tsafiki, the accusative marker is not obligatory and in any case is identical to one of the locative markers.

226
Nonetheless, core arguments can be identified as the arguments which are always either understood to be present or are actually present in the expression of a predicate, i.e. in clauses with no overt argument expression, core arguments are the arguments that are understood as being present from the context and that can be inserted into the clause with no significant change in meaning. Core arguments are not necessarily nominative and accusative. In particular, as will be discussed below, bivalent stative clauses take a locative as a core argument and Tsafiki has dative 'subject' constructions in which the dative is a core argument. This will be made more explicit as the discussion continues. Core arguments are the arguments that always have the potential to be overtly expressed in the syntactic configuration of the clause. Semantic participants are the semantic roles associated with the meaning of a generic verb or coverb. Core semantic participants are the participants obligatorily understood to be present whenever the predicating element occurs. Noncore semantic roles are roles that are latent in the meaning of the predicate but need not be expressed, most commonly instruments and locatives.

227
Despite the caveats above, in a prototypical transitive clause (Hopper and Thompson 1980), it not only makes some sense but is notionally convenient to speak of a subject in that one of the core arguments occurs in clause initial position and controls plural agreement and switch reference markers. Ignoring variation for the moment, examples of 'basic' Tsafiki transitive clauses are given in (9-10). In (9) the subject occurs sentence initially right after the temporal adverb and cannot take casemarking, which indicates unmarked nominative case. The object occurs in second position suffixed with the accusative case-marker -ka, followed by the verb. The only agreement in Tsafiki is a non-obligatory subject (nominative) plural suffix on the verb (10). Note that the plural object in (9) does not trigger plural agreement on the verb, whereas the plural subject in (10) does.

(9)

Jaatsanke

matuteri

luban

jaa-tsan-ke

matu=te=ri

lu-ba-n

3D2-SMBL-DO:VCL old.days=LOC=FOC red-QUAL-ST

oko tsachilaka finamantie. oko tsachi=la=ka fi-na-man-ti-e spirit person=PL=ACC eat-PRG-SIT-RP-DCL 'They say in the old days the red demon was eating the people in this way.' (VLP.LUBANOKO.69)

(10)

228
Ponela yaka kiralakimantie. pone=la ya=ka kira-la-ki-man-ti-e shaman=PL 3P2=ACC see-PL-DO:VCL-SIT-HS-DCL 'They say the shamans saw him.' {VLP.LUBANOKO.69}

However as noted in Chapter Two, neither the accusative marker nor plural agreement marker are obligatory in Tsafiki. In general, plural agreement does not occur with generic subjects. In (11) below the speaker is talking in general about the origin of red demons. It is clear from the context that the subject is plural but there is no plural marking anywhere in the clause, neither on the subject nor the verb. It is the beginning of the narration and he is simply introducing his subject matter.

(11)

Junbi, luban

oko loka

jun=bi lu-ba-n

oko lo-ka

3D1=L0C red-QUAL-ST spirit go.out-PF.P

junmantie. j o-n-man-ti-e BE:AUX-SIT-RP-DCL 'The red demons had gone out from there.' (LUBAN.OKO.2}

Likewise the accusative marker is not obligatory, generally always occurring with humans, less often with animates and more rarely with inanimates. In (12) nata 'shad' occurs without the accusative marker.

(12)

229
Junsi aman nata dalakiyoe junsi aman nata da-la-ki-yo-e then now shad cook-PL-DO:VCL-CNJ-DCL tieti'. ti-e-ti-e say-DCL-RP-DCL 'Now they say he said they cooked the shad.' {CCTSONPIPI.332}

Topical objects may be moved to clause initial position. In these cases the accusative suffix is necessary to avoid ambiguity, i.e. in (13) below the absence of the accusative suffix would lead to the reading that it was the snake that ate the parents rather than vice versa. The snake is highly topical in this stretch of discourse. The parents' daughter, unbeknownst to them, has taken the snake as her spouse. The parents kill and eat the snake, much to their daughter's dismay.

(13)

Wari pinikari

wari ayanlari

wari pini=ka=ri wari ayan=la=ri

well snake=ACC=FOC well mother=PL=FOC

filakinkin. fi-la-ki-n-ki-n eat-PL-DO:VCL-ST-DO:VCL-ST 'Well this snake, the parents must have just eaten it.' {TSAPINI.29}

It should be noted again that these types of clauses in actual Tsafiki discourse are fairly rare, generally only

230
4% of the clauses have full expression of both arguments of a bivalent construction.
Conjunct/disjunct marking also most often correlates with the nominative argument, but only when the source of the information is the same as the person coded as the nominative argument and there are exceptions (see Chapter Two, Section 4.3).
There are other behavioral properties that distinguish subjects from objects in certain constructions. As noted previously in Chapter Two, the subject generally controls switch reference. In (14) the suffix -to on the subordinate clauses indicates that the subject of these clauses is the same as the subject of the main clause. In (15) the suffix -sa indicates that the nominative argument of fi 'eat' is not the same as the nominative argument of ti 'say' or ere 'send.'

(82)
(15)

231

Junni, (yala) ya katson tsominka junni, (ya=la) ya katso-n tso-min=ka then (3P2=PL) 3P2 sleep-ST lie-IMPF.P=ACC

peya kato jito aman peya ka-to ji-to aman hatchet get-SR go-SR now

numika butunle

danmanti'.

numi=ka butun-le

dan-man-ti-e

penis=ACC chop-CAUSE.SUF:GEN slash-SIT-RP-DCL

'They say grabbing an ax (they) went and chopped off

the penis of the one that lay there sleeping.'

{AASALUN.112-115}

Nuka fisa tito nu=ka fi-sa ti-to 2=ACC eat-DR say-SR

erelakee. ere-la-ke-e send-PL-DO:VCL-DCL 'They sent me saying I am to eat you." (VLP.KURU.DZ.37}

However, switch-reference markers in Tsafiki, as in other languages (Stirling 1993), do not simply indicate co/disjoint reference. In the texts there are aberrant uses of the switch reference markers (see Chapter Two, Section 4.7). In particular, the different reference marker -sa can occur when the nominative arguments of both the subordinate and main clauses are the same. What this most often indicates is that despite the co-reference of the nominative arguments, the two clauses represent two separate events that occur at different times in different

232
places. For example, the context for (16) below is one in which a lazy turkey buzzard, who has taken human form, is going around claiming to be working hard on his farm when in fact he spends most of the day hanging out with his buzzard buddies. The use of the different reference marker not only indicates a temporal and spatial difference between the two events, but also has a strong connotation that it is one thing to cut down a tree, it is another thing to go around bragging about it. The implication here is that he talks more than he works.

(16)

Aman tolenasa aman to-le-na-sa now fall-CAUSE.SUF:GEN-PRG-DR

tolenayoe

tin

to-le-na-yo-e

ti-n

fall-CAUSE.SUF:GEN-PRG-CNJ-DCL say-ST

nenamanti'. nena-man-ti-e go.around.SIT-RP-DCL *They say when he cut down (a tree), he went around saying "I cut down (a tree)."

So rather than simply coding co/disjoint reference the switch reference markers more properly code continuity or sequentiality of action.

233
2.2 Relative Clauses

Tsafiki relative clauses can also be used to some extent to distinguish subjects and objects from locatives and other obliques. The imperfective participle -min can be used to form a subject relative clause. The imperfective participle -min is transparently derived from the coverb mi *of knowing' suffixed with the stative nominalizaer -n. When -min forms a relative clause it most commonly has a nominative alignment, i.e. it refers to the nominative argument of the underlying clause. It occurs with monovalent (17) and bivalent or trivalent (18) active verbs and stative verbs (19).

(17) (18)

Uyanla

mala kuchibi jituminlari

uyan=la mala kuchi-bi j i-tu-min=la=ri

strange=PL chicha drink-PURP go-NEG-IMPF.P=PLFOC

sonnalaratie. son-ra-la-ra-ti-e alive-BE.POSIT:GEN-PL-BE.POSIT:VLC-RP-DCL *Only the others that didn't go to drink chicha lived/were alive.' {VLP.SONAPURA.MC.10}

Junni wari tako kuwaminlari junni wari tako kuwa-min=la=ri then well tobacco give-IMPF.P=PL=FOC

meralaranuda. me-ra-la-ra-nu-da wait-BE.POSIT:GEN-PL-BE.POSIT:VCL-EV-DCL:GEN *They the ones who gave the tobacco (to the shaman) must have waited.' {VLP.PINIJALADO.14}

(19)

234

Junnasa

uyan junte sonala

jun-ra-sa

uyan jun=te sona=la

3D2-BE.POSIT:VCL other 3D2=LOC woman=PL

jominlari

ya tsachika duke

jo-min=la=ri

ya tsachi=ka duke

be-IMPF.P=PL=FOC 3P2 person=ACC a.lot

munatilatinutie. muna-ti-la-ti-nu-ti-e desire-SAY:GEN-PL-SAY:VCL-EV-RP-DCL "Meanwhile they say the other women that were there really desired the man.' {VLP.SUYUNPINI.MC.62}

The perfective participle only forms relative clauses with active verbs and most commonly has an absolutive alignment, i.e. it refers to the accusative argument of a bivalent clause (21) and the nominative argument of a monovalent clause (20).

(20)

Junni ente kuwenta man fiki kino junni in=te kuwenta man fiki ki-no then 3P1=L0C story one word do-INF

mukee,

parabi

jikaka

ya

mu-ki-e

para-bi

ji-ka=ka ya

desire-DO:GEN-DCL wild.pig-PURP go-PF.P=ACC 3P2

'Here, I want to say a word about another story,

about the one who went for wild pig.'

{AAKMEDI1.7}

(21)

235

Junni aman kelalari

para

junni aman kela=la=ri para

then now tiger=PL+FOC wild.pig

asuwakaka a-suwa-ka=ka cook-CAUSE.BECOME:GEN-PF.P=ACC

juntale

juntale

tin fisi tiri

jun=te=le jun=te=le ti-n fi-si tiri

3D2=LOC=LOC 3D2=LOC=LOC say-ST eat-IMM something

susu tsannin pajolajotie susu tsan=nin pa-jo-la-jo-ti-e dog SEMBL=INCL speak-BE:GEN-PL-BE:VCL-RP-DCL

titun? ti-tu-n ti-tu-n say-NEG-ST 'Didn't they say that the tigers just immediately ate the wild pig they had cooked "there there" making noise like dogs.' {VLP.KELAIKA.DO.44}

The discussion above is summarized below with elicited headless relative clauses (22).

(22) a. Imperfective/Nominative Alignment

ki-min jie ja-min jie chu-min jie

'The one who hit someone left.' 'The one who came left.' 'The one who sat (there) left.'

b. Perfective/Absolutive Alignment

ki-ka jie ja-ka jie

'The one who someone hit left.' 'The one who had come left.'

236
The alignment of imperfectivity with a nominative pattern and the alignment of a perfective with an absolutive pattern are not unusual (DeLancey 1981, 1982). The perfective is associated with terminal viewpoint or endpoint of the action, and the imperfective with onset or the inception and continuation of the action (DeLancey 1981, 1982). Hence, with imperfective aspect the viewpoint is skewed towards the agent and with perfective towards the theme. Thus the relative clause pattern in Tsafiki reveals a close relationship between initiation of the action and nominative case, and termination or endpoint of the action and accusative case. However, it does not specifically refer to a nominative or accusative argument. The above readings of the participle relative clause forms can be overridden in certain constructions. In (23) below the relative clause refers to the object despite the fact that it takes the -min suffix. Here the speaker chooses not to focus on the terminating phase of the event coded by the construction. In (24) the relative clause refers to the nominative argument despite the fact that it is suffixed with -ka. Here the final state, is important.

237

(23) (24)

Yala fimin

ano anpun joe.

ya=la fi-min

ano anpun jo-e

3P2=PL eat-IMPF.P food tasty be-DCL

'They food they eat is tasty.'

Ano fika

unila manjie.

ano fi-ka unila man=ji-e

food eat-PF.P man again=go-DCL

'The man who had eaten left again.'

So, while there is a natural correlation between the inception oriented nature of the imperfective participle and the initiating point orientation of the nominative and also the termination oriented nature of the perfective and the endpoint or focus of the action orientation of the accusative which most commonly leads to the interpretation of the imperfective as a nominative-aligned relative clause and the perfective as the accusative-aligned relative clause, these are in fact separable phenomena.

2.3 Stative Verbs

The pattern of relative clauses differs with stative verbs.. Bivalent stative verbs occur when a bivalent coverb combines with a stative generic verb. There is also a stative generic verb ta 'have' that is bivalent. It always occurs with a 'haver' as well as a 'havee'. I will refer to the semantic participant of a stative verb simply as an

238
entity and the second argument as a locative for reasons that will become clear. A stative clause does not code an activity, hence there can be no actor and undergoer. In (25) the verb ta 'have' occurs with both arguments, the entity occurs clause initially followed by the locative which is suffixed with the locative -ka. Note that this appears to be a standard, bivalent, transitive clause. However a relative clause referring to the second argument is formed with -nun, not the perfective participle -ka
(26) .

(25) (26)

Tseiton

uniri

sonaka

tse-ito-n

uni=ri

sona=ka

light-NOT.BE:GEN-ST old.man=FOC woman=ACC

tamantie. ta-man-ti-e have-SIT-RP-DCL 'They say the old blind man had a woman.' {TSEITON.1}

Ya wa machite tanunka ya wa machite ta-nun-ka 3P2 big machete have-NOM=ACC

kamankaya ka=man=ka-ka still=again=get-PF.P

itominnutieti',

ya apari.

ito-min-nu-ti-e-ti-e

ya apa=ri

NOT.BE:AUX-SIT-EV-RP-DCL-RP-DCL 3P2 father=FOC

'They say the father still hadn't grabbed the big

machete that he had again.' {CCANKULU.84}

239
The suffix -nun is also used for oblique relative clauses coding instruments (27) or locations (28).

(27) (28)

Machite, wa machite jayanun machite wa machite jaya-nun machete big machete work.physically-NOM machiteka mankaya machite=ka man-ka-ka machete=ACC again-get-PF.P jominnutieti' . j o-min-nu-ti-e-ti-e BE:AUX-SIT-EV-RP-DCL-RP-DCL 'They say he must have grabbed the machete again, the big machete that he used for working.' Kanowa tsonunte manfayoe kanowa tso-nun=te man-fa-yo-e canoe lie-NOM=LOC again-arrive.here-CONJ-DCL timanti'. ti-man-ti-e say-SIT-RP-DCL "*They say he said he arrived back where the canoe was lying.' {MALI.27}

The suffix -nun 'NOM' can also refer to the predicate in a non-verbal predicate construction (29) or to the clause as a whole (30).

(29) (30)

240

Jun neka

aman bene

jun ne=ka aman bene

3D1 foot=ACC now behind

tanjilaiyoti' ta-n-j i-la-i-yo-ti-e have-ST-go-PL-BECOME:GEN-CNJ-RP-DCL

ya ti jununka miichun. ya ti jo-nun=ka mi-i-chu-n 3P2 what be-NOM=ACC know-BECOME:GEN-IRR-ST 'He said they followed the tracks to see what it was.' {MV.AASALUN.103}

Man=nan ya seiton

jonunka

man=nan ya se-ito-n

jo-nun=ka

one=INCL 3P2 good-NOT.BE:GEN-ST be-NOM=ACC

miralaranada. mi-ra-la-ra-na-da know-BE.POSIT:GEN-PL-BE.POSIT:VCL-PRG-DCL.GEN 'But (everyone) knew that it was bad.' {MV.ACPONE.583}

Hence, although verbs such as ta 'have' obligatorily take two core arguments, the second argument is best analyzed as taking the locative rather than the accusative -ka. It follows exactly the same pattern in terms of relative clause formation as this general locative as illustrated by (31a) and (31b).

(31) a. Sona ya=ka

ji-e.

woman house=LOC go-DCL

'The woman went to the house.'

b. Sona ji-nun ya woman go-NOM house 'The house the woman went to...'

241
What is of primary interest here is that relative clause formation clearly distinguishes active from stative clauses. In particular, the 'object' of a stative verb differs from that of an active verb. This falls in with the analysis of nominative and accusative case-marking and their correlation with the initiation and termination of an event line. In a state, there is no activity and hence no initiating point, but the speaker can direct the order of attention flow from one element of the stative relationship to the other. The nominative case here does mark starting point, or the most prominent argument in terms of discourse. However there is no activity, solely a stative relationship between entities and hence the locative is used instead of the accusative
2.4 Dative-Subject Constructions
As noted by Givon (2001) a problem with the pragmatic analysis of nominative-accusative case-marking is that many languages exhibit 'dative-subject incursion.' In these constructions, the more topical participant is coded with dative rather than nominative case and the construction as a whole shows mixed grammatical relation properties. This is a problem with the pragmatic analysis of nominative-

242
accusative case, i.e. if nominative case marks topic and is oblivious to semantic participant role why would datives differ from the other semantic roles? These constructions also cause problems in an analysis in which 'subject' is seen as a primitive in that subject properties are generally split between two or more core arguments in these constructions. Under the analysis followed here, neither of these poses a problem. In fact the theory predicts that these constructions would have special properties given the correlation between nominative case and initiating point. The more topical dative participant can not be construed as the initiating point of the event, another core argument correlates with a point on the event line previous to the dative argument. The mix of grammatical properties is also not problematic. As noted above, subject is treated here as a phenomenon that only occurs in certain constructions. In these constructions starting point correlates with initiating point and grammatical properties pertaining to either category all converge on a single core argument giving birth to a subject. However, when there is a conflict, i.e. the starting point or topic and initiating point do NOT converge on the same core argument, the properties associated with starting point will converge on

243
one argument, and the properties associated with initiating point will converge on another. 2.4.1 Tsafiki Dative Subjects
Tsafiki dative subject1 constructions involve semantic predicate types that have been associated with dative constructions in other languages including: psychological states; physiological states; visual and auditory perception; and modal states of desire (Shibatani 2001). The dative constructions can only be used with a first person subject (32), or when accompanied by a verb of speech or hearsay evidential (33) and they cannot take mirative markers. There are two basic types. In one construction there is a dative-subject and an object (32) and (33) or complement clause (34) but no nominative argument.
1 Although these constructions do not have a 'subject', I continue to call these 'dative-subjects' simply because they are rather prototypical of dative subject constructions in other languages (Shibatani 2000) and I do not want to lose the typological association by renaming them something else.

244

(32) (33) (34)

Ti amali seiton, ti amali se-ito-n what very good-NOT.BE:GEN-ST

tsechi pamukee. tse=chi pa-mu-ke-e 1F=DAT anger-desire-DO:GEN-DCL 'She's really bad, she makes me angry at her.' {JERA6.13}

Mmachi karamelo mukee

tito

mma=chi karamelo mu-ke-e

ti-to

madam=DAT candy desire-DO:GEN-DCL say-SR

tito chuka... ti-to chu-ka say-SR sit-PF 'The woman had sat there saying she wanted candy...' {JERAKUWENTA1a.384}

Yachiri

uru sonabe katsono

ya=chi=ri uru sona=be katso-no

3P2=DAT=FOC pure woman=CON sleep-INF

mukee tinatieti' mu-ke-e ti-na-ti-e-ti-e desire say-PRG-RP-DCL-RP-DCL 'They say he was saying, "I want to sleep with the pure woman.'" {AASALUN.23}

The dative =chi most commonly occurs on the goal argument of the trivalent predicate kuwa 'give'. The word order varies and because the dative is the same as the possessive -chi, in (35) the reading is ambiguous between they 'gave him a woman' and 'they gave (somebody) his woman.' In the context of this story it is clear that the prior meaning is meant. The ambiguity can be resolved by a

245
change in the word order (36). This change in word order is not found with possessive constructions which rigidly adhere to the order POSSESSOR-POSSESSEE.

(35) (36)

Junni aman yachi sonaka junni aman ya=chi sona=ka then now 3P2=POSS woman=ACC kuwalakimantie. kuwa-la-ki-man-ti-e give-PL-DO:VCL-SIT-RP-DCL 'Then they say they gave him a woman/?they gave (somebody) his woman.' {WILINKI.52} Junni aman sonaka yachi junni aman sona=ka ya=chi then now woman=ACC 3P2=P0SS kuwa1a kimant ie. kuwa-la-ki-man-ti-e give-PL-DO:VCL-SIT-RP-DCL 'Then they say they gave him a woman.'

All the dative constructions have related constructions, which are based on the same coverb and have a more standard nominative-accusative pattern. The coverb mu/muna 'desire' can also occur with the generic verb i 'BECOME' to form a related, but non-dative construction. Here the 'desirer' takes nominative case and the 'desiree' takes accusative. The meaning difference between the two constructions is related to awareness or consciousness. In the dative-subject construction the 'desirer' just suddenly

246
feels an overwhelming urge, in the nominative-accusative construction the speaker is well aware and somewhat in control of his desire (37).

(37) Junni tsachi manka munainutie, junni tsachi man-ka muna-i-nu-ti-e then person one-NCL desire-BECOME:GEN-EV-HS-DCL sonalaka. sona=la=ka woman=PL=ACC 'They say there was a man who desired women.'{GA8.14}
In the dative-subject constructions the dative-subject controls plural verb agreement. In (38) the dative-subject takes the plural enclitic and the verb can take a plural agreement marker. In (39) the accusative argument is plural and the verb does not take plural marking.

(38) (39)

Chikelachi unilaka jele kilakee. chike=la=chi unila=ka jele ki-la-ki-e 1F=PL=DAT man=ACC fear DO:GEN-PL-DO:GEN-DCL 'We are afraid of the man' Chikechi unilalaka jele kee. chike=chi unila=la=ka jele ki-e 1F=DAT man=PL=ACC fear DO:GEN-DCL 'I am afraid of the men.'

So in terms of word order and plural agreement marking the dative-subject exhibits properties of the subject in more prototypical bivalent active clauses. Note that these properties

247
are both associated with topicality. Topical objects are moved to clause initial position in Tsafiki and generic subjects do not occur with plural marking. Hence it appears that the dativesubject is associated with starting point, or topic.
In the clauses that lack a nominative argument, switchreference clauses always carry the different reference suffix -sa. But note that in (34) above the complement katso-no carries the normal marker for an embedded clause with the same referent as the main clause rather than the DR -sa.

(40)

Wari tenjatusa

berun sili

wari ten-ja-tu-sa

berun sili

well heart-COME:GEN-NEG-DR hook line

nakaka

machitechi danle

na-ka=ka

machite=chi dan-le

small-NCL=ACC machete=INSTR slash-CAUSE.SUF:GEN

mankayoe

timantie.

man=ka-yo-e

ti-man-ti-e

again=get-CNJ-DCL say-SIT-RP-DCL

'They say that he said without thinking he grabbed the

little fishing line and slashed it.' {MALI.23}

In dative-subject constructions that do have a nominative argument the switch-reference marking continues to be controlled by the nominative argument. This is predicted from the role of the nominative argument in coding primarily initiating point rather than starting point or topic. All the dative-subject constructions in Tsafiki that occur with a nominative argument

248
concern body emissions.2 As always there are a variety of ways to express these types of events. The most common pattern involves a bivalent construction with the verb ki 'do' with the 'vomiter' occurring with nominative case (41). The dative construction is formed with the verb la 'come.out' (42). And there is a third form, created with the causative form of la, la-ri 'come-out:CAUSE.SUF:GEN' (43). The first two both code uncontrolled behavior with the difference being that in (41) the speaker had a sense of nausea and expected to vomit. In the dative-subject construction (42) the speaker just suddenly vomited without any premonition that the event was about to occur. (43) codes a more deliberate act.

(41) (42)

Tse katsa kiyoe. tse katsa ki-yo-e IF vomit do-CNJ-DCL 'I vomited/LIT:I did vomit.' Tsechi katsa la-e. tse=chi katsa la-e 1F=DAT vomit come.out-CNJ-DCL 'I vomited/LIT:vomit came out of me.'

2 Unfortunately, there is only a one-way check on plural marking in these constructions. A plural dativesubject does trigger plural marking on the verb, but this would also entail multiple instances of the nominative argument. The nominative arguments in all these constructions are mass nouns and hence take quantifiers such as duke 'a lot' rather than plural marking to indicate large quantities. A plural dative-subject does however trigger the plural marking on the verb.

249

(43)

Tse katsa larie. tse katsa la-ri-e IF vomit come.out-CAUSE.SUF:GEN-CNJ-DCL 'I vomited/LIT:I took vomit out.'

In (44) below the nominative-accusative version of 'vomit' occurs subordinated to a bivalent complex predicate. The nominative argument of both clauses is the same and the subordinate clause receives same reference marking.

(44)

Tse katsa kito jera mesabi. tse katsa ki-to jera mesa=bi IF vomit do-SR all table=LOC araleyoe. ara-le-yo-e scatter-CAUSE.SUF:GEN-CNJ-DCL "I vomited and spewed it all over the table."

In (45) the dative-subject form of 'vomit' occurs with an intransitive clause that shares the same nominative argument as the subordinate clause, katsa 'vomit'. Again the subordinate clause receives same reference marking.

(45)

250

Tsechi katsa lato

jera mesabi

tse=chi katsa la-to

jera mesa=bi

1F=DAT vomit come.out-SR all table=LOC

arajie ara-ji-e lF=scatter-GO:GEN-DCL "The vomit came out of me and spewed all over the table."

In contrast in (46) the nominative-accusative version of 'vomit' occurs with the intransitive version of ara 'scatter' and hence the nominative argument of the two clauses is different and the subordinate clause occurs with a different reference marker.

(46)

Tse katsa kinasa jera mesabi tse katsa ki-na-sa jera mesa=bi IF vomit do-PRG-DR all table=LOC arajie. ara-ji-e scatter-GO:GEN-DCL 'When I vomited it went all over the table.'

Finally in (47) the dative-subject version of vomit appears as the main clause and the subordinate verb fi 'eat' occurs with a different reference marker even though the eater and the vomiter are the same person.

(47)

Duke ano finasa

katsa lae.

duke ano fi-na-sa katso la-e

much food eat-PRG-DR vomit come.out-DCL

'When I ate a lot of food, vomit came out of me.'

251

There is of course the possibility of interpreting chi 'dative' as the possessive marker, i.e. 'my vomit came out.' The evidence against this is that like dative arguments and unlike possessives the word order may be changed. I was only able to elicit the construction found in (48). The context for this would be rather odd, in that the vomit is more topical here than the vomiter. It implies that perhaps you expected something else to come out. It is semantically odd, but grammatically acceptable.

(48)

Katsa tsechi lae. katsa tse=chi la-e vomit 1F=DAT come.out-DCL 'Vomit came out of me.'

The Tsafiki dative subject constructions rather cleanly illustrate the split between starting point or topic and inititating point. In the dative subject constructions the more topical argument, the dative-subject has the grammatical relational properties associated with prominence or topicality, i.e. word order and plural verb agreement. The nominative argument in a dative-subject construction retains the grammatical relational property of control of switch-reference marking. As was noted above,

252
switch-reference is somewhat of a misnomer, because although generally the markers correlate with co-reference, the markers actually more properly code action continuity. The data clearly show that in constructions in which starting point and initiating point correlate with different core arguments, nominative case will continue to be marked on the initiating, rather than the starting point.
2.5 Locative Alternations
The next construction addresses the function of accusative case-marking. As illustrated above, the second argument of a construction coding a bivalent state takes locative rather than accusative marking. This indicates that accusative marking correlates closely with the endpoint or focus of an event and not with pragmatic or purely grammatical case. As noted above Tsafiki has very few case alternations. One of the few that is allowed with some but not all combinations of undergoer and locative3 is the locative alternation. In these constructions either the location or the thing located can occur with
3 A complete study has not been done, but the occurance this alternation is somewhat dependent on the animacy or relative topicality of the entities involved and the generic verb/complex predicate utilized.

253
accusative case (49) and (50). As has been noted (DeLancey 1991a) what is of interest here is that either argument can be construed as the endpoint of the action, depending on whether the speaker chooses to focus on the change of state of Juan in (49), i.e. from unsmeared or smeared or the change of location of the achiote, from Ramon to Juan (50). In these types of constructions the case-marking can be alternated without disrupting the correlation with the event line, both arguments occur at the terminal point of the event and can be construed as the focus of the action.

(49) (50)

Ramon Fanka mu

mitee.

Ramon Fan=ka mu

mi-te-e

Ramon Juan=ACC achiote smear-CAUSE.SUF:GEN-DCL

'Ramon achiote-smeared Juan.'

Ramon muka

Fanchibi

Ramon mu=ka

Fan=chi=bi

Ramon achiote=ACC Juan=POSS=LOC

mitee. mi-te-e smear-CAUSE.SUF:GEN-DCL 'Ramon smeared the achiote on Juan.'

2.6 External Possessor Construction

The final construction examined in this section is the external possessor construction. This construction corresponds to Mithun's (1984, 1986b) Type II noun incorporation in that the

254
incorporated noun (the possessee) most commonly loses its status as a syntactic argument and another participant is permitted to occupy the spot 'vacated' by the incorporated noun. In (51) the possessor occurs as a possessor of the object of the clause. In (52) it occurs as the object of the clause while the possessee of (52) can either appear 'stripped' i.e. it can no longer take the accusative marker or it can optionally take a locative suffix.

(51) (52)

Ya lachi tenfuka bole ya la=chi tenfu=ka bo-le 3P2 1M=P0SS tooth=ACC crack-CAUSE.SUF:GEN kee. ki-e DO:GEN-DCL 'S/he cracked my tooth.' Ya laka tenfu(le) bole ya la=ka tenfu-(le) bo-le 3P2 1M=ACC tooth-(LOC) crack-CAUSE.SUF:GEN kee. ki-e DO:GEN-DCL 'S/he tooth-cracked me/S/he cracked me on the tooth.'

What is of interest here is that these constructions only occur with ATTACHED body parts. External possessor constructions do not occur if the body part is detached. (53) occurs with a detached body part, signaled by the NCL. Detached body parts always occur with NCL. This construction is fine, but the

255
corresponding external possessor construction is not allowed (54) .

(53) (54)

Ya lachi tenfukaka

bole

ya la=chi tenfu-ka=ka bo-le

3P2 1M=P0SS tooth-NCL=ACC crack-CAUSE.SUF:GEN

kee. ki-e DO:GEN-DCL 'S/he cracked my (detached) tooth.'

*Ya laka tenfuka(le)

bole

ya la=ka tenfu-ka-(le) bo-le

3P2 1M=P0SS tooth-NCL-(LOC) crack-CAUSE.SUF:GEN

kee. ki-e DO:GEN-DCL *'S/he tooth (detached)-cracked me/S/he cracked me on the tooth.'

External possessors can occur with non-body parts, but in these cases the possessor must be an immediate participant in the event and in the same location. (55) was uttered in a situation where someone had just been pick-pocketed. He arrived with his pockets turned inside out, unaware of what had happened to him. This construction can only be used if someone literally took the money off your body. If they broke into your house and stole the money only (56) is acceptable.

(55)

Ya la=ka kala tarin ke-e.

3P2 1M=ACC money steal DO:GEN-DC:

'(S/he) money-stole me.'

256

(56)

Ya la=chi kala=ka tarin ke-e 3P2 1M=P0SS money=ACC steal DO:GEN-DCL 'He stole my money.'

External possessor constructions are often said to be used when the possessor is affected by the event coded by the verb. As the Tsafiki examples show, the construction may be used to show greater affect on the possessor, but this is not a sufficient condition to trigger the construction. The possessor must also be in the same location at the same time as the original possessee.
The important point about both the locative alternations and the external possessor constructions is that either argument can be seen as the endpoint and focus of the action and directly affected by the event. During the action coded by the event both participants are in the same location. This contrasts with the dative participant of a trivalent verb such as kuwa 'give' in which the dative-shift is not allowed, the dative argument always takes the dative suffix.

2.7 Summary

In this section I have tried to illustrate the degree to which nominative and accusative case in Tsafiki directly correlate with points on the event line. Stative eventualities

257
in Tsafiki take a nominative and locative argument as shown by relative clause formation. The nominative in these constructions indicates starting point, i.e. codes the most prominent or topical argument, but there is no action hence no 'endpoint'. So bivalent stative verbs do not take an accusative argument. Tsafiki has dative-subject constructions in which the relational properties of a canonical 'subject' are shared between the dative-argument and the nominative argument. These different properties are due to the higher topicality of the dativeargument and the continued maintenance of the nominative argument as occurring at the initiating point for the coding of the event. Tsafiki only has two case-alternating constructions, the locative and the external possessor construction. In neither case is the event line disrupted by the alternation in casemarking in these constructions.
In the next section I will describe the argument structure of complex predicates.
3. Complex Predicates
Both elements of the complex predicate, as discussed in can contribute semantic participants and affect the syntactic structure of the clause. In this section it will be shown that some of the characteristics of the complex

258
predicate construction are:

a. A semantic participant of the generic verb will always receive nominative case, with actor having precedence over undergoer.
b. If both the generic verb and coverb have similar semantic participants, those participants may converge on the same syntactic argument
c. The nominative argument always correlates with the initiating point.

The valency of generic verbs can be determined when they occur as simple verbs. The valency of coverbs is somewhat more problematic, but the primary means utilized here is to consider any semantic participant that persists across various constructions to be part of the inherent valency of the coverb. This will be illustrated throughout this section. In addition, as noted in Chapter Three, the generic verb is sometimes dropped in which case the coverb occurs with a full argument structure (57).

(57)

Ichirikari kala jekenaminnutieti'.

ichirikari kala jeke-na-min-nu-ti-e-ti-e

a lot

money dry-PRG-IMPF.P-EV-RP-DCL-RP-DCL

'A lot of money was drying (there).'

(CCANKULU.49)

259
3.1 Complex Predicate Formation of Active Verbs

As mentioned above, the majority of the coverbs are derived from ideophones. In the following examples biti 'snap' and soko 'writhe' are functioning as ideophones (they are reduplicated) and both serve to give an expression of manner of movement.

(58)

Ideophones

a. Ya biti

biti

jie.

ya biti

biti

ji-e

3P2 snap:IDEO snap:IDEO go-DCL

'He went biti biti (through the brush)/He snapped

(through the brush).'

b. Ya soko

soko

jie.

ya soko

soko

ji-e

3P2 writhe:IDEO writhe:IDEO go-DCL

'He went writhing writhing.'

As was noted in Chapter Three, ideophones carry a fairly rich semantic load, being fairly specific as to trajectories and the kinds of entities which are contained in the notion of the ideophone. Tsafiki biti 'snap' can occur without any overt expression of the thing that is snapping. It is clear in (58a) that he is going through the brush even though brush is not explicitly mentioned. Only the breaking of small, relatively rigid objects can make the sound represented by the ideophone. Soko codes a manner

260
or trajectory of movement. Ideophones carry this semantic information with them when they are lexicalized as a coverb in a complex predicate construction. In (59) and (60) biti 'snap' and soko 'writhe' occur as predicating elements (coverbs). Note however that while soko 'writhe' combined with ji 'go' continues to code a monovalent, manner-ofmotion event (60), biti 'snap' combined with the same generic verb now codes a monovalent, inchoative change-ofstate (59).

(59) (60)

Naka

chide ali bitijie.

na=ka

chide ali biti-ji-e

small-NCL stick branch snap-GO:GEN-DCL

'The twig snapped.'

Pini forobi nechi sokojie pini foro=bi ne=chi soko-j i-e snake hole=L0C foot=L0C writhe-GO-DCL 'The snake slithered out of the hole.'

In these two examples it appears that the coverb is determining the nature of the semantic participant, an undergoer for biti 'snap' and an agent for soko 'writhe'. In all the configurations it occurs in, biti 'snap' contributes a single undergoer participant. This participant is present in the ideophonic use of biti 'snap' as well as the inchoative and causative (see below). Soko 'writhe' contributes a single actor participant across all

constructions. However, this does not necessarily mean the motion verb ji 'go' is inert. As has been often noted, (Levin and Rappoport 1995, inter alia) motion verbs show varying behavior in terms of unaccusative and unergative status. In the terminology used here they can code either an undergoer or actor participant, depending on the language and/or different constructions in the same language, i.e. the single participant of a motion verb can be depicted in one of two ways: as the patient of a changeof-location or as the instigator of motion. This is most clearly seen in Tsafiki in looking at the behavior of motion verbs with evidential and mirative marking. Generally, unelaborated motion and activity verbs result it odd or very funny interpretations when they occur with a first person subject and an evidential indicating the speaker received the information from deduction and not direct evidence (See Chapter Two, Section 4.3). It's interesting to note that soko follows the pattern of a motion verb with a first person subject and an evidential (61) and have an odd reading (note the English translation is also odd). But coverbs such as biti or chi 'rip' follow the pattern for a monovalent predicate with a single undergoer argument. There is nothing 'funny' or peculiar

262

about (62), it simply means the speaker was unaware that

s/he tore their fingernail.

(61) (62)

?Sokoji'nue soko-j i-ya-nu-e writhe-GO:GEN-DSJ-EV-DCL
?'I must have writhed.'

Tse tewe

chiji'nu-e

tse tewe

chi-ji-nu-e

IF fingernail rip-GO:GEN-DSJ-DCL

'I must have ripped my fingernail.'

Motion verbs contain both an actor and an undergoer as possible semantic participants, the coverb pushes the interpretation towards one or the other. In (59) and (60), the role of the semantic participant of the motion verb is affected by the single semantic participant contributed by the coverb. Figures Three and Four illustrate this notion. The Figures are meant as illustrations only and carry no formal significance. 'IP' indicates the initiating point for the coding of the event.

COVERB

Undergoer

biti 'snap'

GENERIC VERB Actor(or) Undergoer

ji 'go'

NOM/IP

chide ali

biti-ji-e

tree branch snap-GO:GEN-DCL

'The stick snapped'

Figure Three: Argument sharing of monovalent motion verb and monovalent coverb aligning with Undergoer = inchoative.

COVERB

Actor

soko 'writhe'

GENERIC VERB Actor

(or) Undergoer ji 'go'

NOM/IP pini snake 'The snake slithered'

soko-ji-e writhe-GO:GEN-DCL

Figure Four: Argument sharing of monovalent motion verb and monovalent coverb aligning with Actor = manner of motion.

The coverbs soko 'writhe' and biti *snap' can also both occur with the generic verb ki 'do'. Again there is a difference in the final valency and interpretation of the two clauses. Biti combining with ki 'do' creates a bivalent, causative change-of-state construction (63). Soko 'writhe' with ki 'do' creates a non-translational motion

264
clause (Talmy, 1985). These constructions are illustrated in Figures Five and Six.

(63) (64)

Ya naka

chide alika

ya na=ka

chide ali=ka

3P2 small=NCL tree branch=ACC

bitile

kee.

biti-le

ke-e

snap-CAUSE.SUF:GEN DO:GEN-DCL

'He snapped the twig.'

Junni kuru atito

soko kee.

junni kuru a-ti-to

soko ke-e

then guatusa scream-SAY:GEN-SR writhe DO:GEN-DCL

'Then the guatusa writhed, screaming .'

(JAKURU.84)

COVERB

Undergoer

biti 'snap'

GENERIC VERB Actor

-le ki 'do'

NOM/IP ACC

ya

chide ali=ka

3P2

stick

'He snapped the stick'

biti-le ki-e snap-SUF DO:GEN-DCL

Figure Five: Argument sharing of monovalent generic verb aligning with Actor and monovalent coverb aligning with Undergoer = causative

COVERB

Actor

265
soko 'writhe

GENERIC VERB Actor

ki 'do'

NOM/IP kuru guatusa 'The guatusa writhed

soko ki-e writhe do-dcl

Figure Six: Argument sharing of monovalent generic verb aligning with Actor and monovalent coverb aligning with actor = non-translational motion

There is an alternative analysis for these two constructions. Note that ki 'do', is depicted as coding a single actor semantic participant. At first glance it might appear that a more traditional argument would be to say ki is a bivalent verb and is simply taking the coverb as an argument, i.e. 'He did a writhe,' 'He did a snapping of the twig.' However, as attractive as the English translations are, there is no evidence that the coverb is an argument of the generic verb in these constructions. Tsafiki has a wide array of nominalizing suffixes and true embedded, complement clauses which are suffixed with the infinitive -no. The coverb is not nominalized in these constructions and there is no structural reason to analyze it differently from other coverb/generc verb combinations. From a construction grammar approach, there is no need to

266
postulate a bivalent version of ki Mo' even though it occurs in bivalent clauses such as (65). All that is needed is that ki 'do' be compatible with the bivalent, transitive construction. It codes an activity and the construction itself provides an endpoint or termination for that activity. It is also compatible with coverbs such as soko 'writhe' which does not provide an endpoint, resulting in a construction simply coding an activity.

(65)

Fan yaka

kee.

Fan ya=ka

ke-e

Juan house=ACC do-DCL

'Juan built a house.'

The verbal suffixes -le, -ri, -te, -si and -re all function like ki 'do' in creating causative verb forms with coverbs with a single actor participant. Ji 'go' contrasts with i 'become' in forming inchoative predicates. The motion verbs can all combine with coverbs coding manner-ofmotion to create different kinds of motion verbs.
In order to create a causative with soko 'writhe' another generic verb is used. Kari 'cause' across all its uses as a periphrastic causative or generic verb is always bivalent occurring with an actor and an undergoer participant. In (66) the actor participant of the generic

267
verb is coded with unmarked nominative case, the single actor participant of the coverb is the focus of the causing event and is both the actor participant of the coverb soko 'writhe' and the undergoer participant of kari 'cause' (66). It takes accusative case (see Figure Seven).

(66)

Fan jodo

nakaka

mele

kato

Fan jodo

na-ka=ka

me=le ka-to

Juan armadillo small-NCL=ACC tail=LOC get-SR

soko karie. soko kari-e writhe CAUSE:GEN-DCL 'Grabbing the little armadillo by the tail Juan made him squirm.'

COVERB

Actor

soko 'writhe'

GENERIC

Actor

Undergoer

kari 'cause'

NOM/IP

ACC

Fan

jodo=ka

soko kari-e

Juan

armadillo=ACC writhe cause-dcl

'Juan made the armadillo squirm.'

Figure Seven: Argument sharing of bivalent generic verb aligned with an actor and event and monovalent coverb aligning with actor

In cases in which a bivalent coverb combines with the monovalent ki 'do', the actor participants converge on the nominative argument slot and the coverb provides the

268
undergoer participant which converges on the accusative slot (67 and Figure Eight).

(67)

Ya tako chukee. ya tako chu-ke-e 3P2 tobacco suck-DO:GEN-DCL 'He sucked/smoked tobacco.'

COVERB

Actor

Undergoer

chu 'suck'

GENERIC

Actor

ki 'do'

NOM/IP

ACC

Ya

taco

chu-ki-e

3P2

tobacco

suck-DO:GEN-DCL

'He sucked/smoked tobacco.'

Figure Eight: Argument sharing of monovalent generic verb aligned with an actor and bivalent coverb aligning with actor and undergoer

When a bivalent coverb combines with a bivalent or trivalent generic verb the actor and undergoer participants simply converge on the same argument slots. In (68) below the bivalent coverb tuli 'push' combines with po 'put' which is generally trivalent taking a locative as well as an accusative argument. The argument structure for (68) is illustrated in Figure Nine.

269

(68)

Yari apa polenaminka

kotochi

ya=ri apa pole-na-min=ka

koto=chi

3P2=FOC father go.across-PRG-SIT=ACC slope=LOC

tulipochinayoeke tuli-po-chi-na-yo-e=ke push-PUT:GEN-INCEPT-PRG-CNJ-DCL=QT 'He pushed his father who was passing by down the slope.' {PAYA1.48}

COVERB Actor

Undergoer

tuli 'push'

GENERIC Actor

Undergoer Location po 'put'

NOW/IP ya 3P2

ACC

LOC

apa=ka

koto=chi tulipoe

father=ACC slope=LOC push-PUT:GEN-DCL

Figure Nine: Argument sharing of trivalent generic verb and a bivalent coverb

Besides ji 'go', inchoatives can be formed in Tsafiki with the generic verb i 'become', which is quite productive, occurring with positional as well as change-ofstate coverbs. As noted in Chapter Three, only ki 'do' occurs with more coverbs than i 'become'. When the generic verb i 'become' occurs with a monovalent coverb coding a single undergoer participant such as bare 'stretch' (69) the two participants simply converge on the same argument (Figure Ten).

270

(69)

Sabe

bare i-e.

rubber stretch BECOME:GEN-DCL

'The rubber stretched.'

The generic verb i 'become' can also occur with a bivalent coverb. The interpretation of this combination is somewhat puzzling and it is here where the basic structure

COVERB

Undergoer

bare 'stretch'

GENERIC VERB

Undergoer

i 'become'

NOM/IP

sabe

bare i-e

rubber

stretch BECOME:GEN-DCL

'The rubber stretched.'

Figure Ten: Argument sharing of monovalent generic verb aligning with Undergoer and a monovalent coverb aligning with Undergoer

of Tsafiki, particularly the correlation of nominative with the initiating phase of the event coded, becomes important. In this construction a bivalent coverb combines with a monovalent generic verb aligned with a single undergoer argument.4 As we have seen in the above examples, the generic verb always determines the nominative argument. Whichever argument of the generic verb is primary in terms

4 This type of construction is disallowed in Jaminjung (Schultze 2000).

271
of the event line will receive nominative case. We have also seen that similar semantic participants tend to converge on the same argument. In these constructions there is a conflict in that the undergoer participant of the generic verb receives nominative case and is co-referential with the undergoer participant of the bivalent coverb. The expectation here is that this would form a passive and morphosyntactically it looks like a passive. In (70) the 'seer' receives comitative marking and the 'seen' receives nominative case.

(70)

Ya tsabo sona ya jaatsanke tsachibe, ya tsabo sona ya jaa-tsan-ke tsachi=be 3P2 star woman 3P2 3D2-SMBL-QT person=COM kiraito kira-i-to see-BECOME:GEN-SR 'This star woman letting the Tsachi see her like this...'

However, semantically this a permissive construction. The undergoer of the event is in control here, unlike the undergoer participant found in the English passive. The star woman lets the Tsachi see her. The question is where does the sense of control or permission come from. The generic verb i 'become' always takes an undergoer argument, and in fact the essential meaning of i 'become' is a change

272
of state. The star woman is the 'seen' entity here. But recall, in Tsafiki the nominative argument is always interpreted as the argument depicted at the initiating point of the event. Here I argue that because the single semantic participant of i 'become' takes nominative case, the structure itself requires that it be interpreted as the instigator and hence the permissive reading. The structure of this construction is illustrated in Figure Eleven. Notice that the initiation point (IP) is with the nominative argument.

COVERB Actor Undergoer

kira 'see'

GENERIC VERB

Undergoes

'become'

NOM/IP

COM

tsabo sona tsachi-be kira-i-e

star woman person-COM see-BECOME:GEN-dcl

'The star woman let the Tsachi see her.'

Figure Eleven: Argument sharing of bivalent generic verb and a bivalent coverb

The actual entity that performs the action, the 'seer' in the above example takes the comitative postposition -be. The Tsafiki comitative fits the standard definition of comitatives in that a comitative argument is understood to

273
have the same semantic participant role as some other argument in the clause (Aissen 1989). Both participants may take the comitative (71). In (71) the comitative has the same role as the nominative.

(71)

Tonkibe kelabe junlamantie. tonki-be kela-be jo-n-la-man-ti-e snail-COM tiger-COM be-ST-PL-SIT-RP-DCL 'They say there was a snail and a tiger.' {SA7.2}

In other cases such as (72), only one of the semantic participants takes the comitative enclitic and in this example, the verb does not take plural marking.

(72)

Ya paluka nakaberi ya palu-ka na-ka-be=ri 3P2 two-NCL chi1d-NCL-COM-FOC jinutie. ji-nu-ti-e go-EV-RP-DCL 'She went with the children, two children.' (VLP.LUBAN1.22}

However, in (73) whereas once again only one participant takes the comitative marking the verb DOES take plural marking.

(73)

274

Ya nabe

manjanaminnan

ya na-be

man=ja-na-min=nan

3P2 child-COM again.come-PRG-IMPF.P=INCL

manj anaminnan man=j a-na-min=nan again=come-PRG-IMPF.P=INCL

aman ayanlachibi aman ayan=la=chi=bi now mother=PL-POSS-LOC

manfelaiyotie. man=fe-la-i-yo-ti-e again=arrive.there-PL-BECOME:VCL-CNJ-RP-DCL 'She said going and going she arrived with the child at her parents' house.'

In (74) both the undergoer participants take the comitative marking and fall under the scope of the accusative enclitic.

(74)

Ya kelari ya sonabe nabeka ya kela=ri ya sona-be na-be=ka 3P2 tiger=FOC 3P2 woman-COM child-COM=ACC fichike tinutie. fi-chike ti-nu-ti-e eat-DESIR say-EV-RP-DCL 'They say the tiger said he wanted to eat the women and children.' (SA8.9)

In neither its more prototypical uses, nor in the construction discussed here is it possible to form a relative clause directly from the comitative argument. For

275
example a relative clause of nalala 'the children' in (72) would require a reversal of comitative marking (75).

(75)

Yabe jimin

nalala....

ya=be ji-min na=la=la

3P2=COM go-IMPF.P child=PL=PL

'The children who went with him...'

There is however, a major difference between the comitative marker in the bivalent coverb/monovalent generic verb construction concerning plural marking. A comitative argument in this construction does not trigger plural agreement. In fact plural agreement would indicate more than one person is affected by the action (76).

(76)

Ya tsabo sona ya jaatsanke tsachi-be, ya tsabo sona ya jaa-tsan-ke tsachi-be 3P2 star woman 3P2 3D2-SMBL-QT person=COM kirailaie kira-i-la-i-e see-BECOME:GEN-PL-BECOME:GEN-dcl 'The star women let the Tsachi see them.'

Hence the comitative in this complex predicate construction differs from the canonical comitative. It does not indicate that the comitative is engaged in the activity in the same way as the nominative argument. However, both semantic participants are involved in the bringing about of the event coded in the predicate. The nominative sets the

276
stage so to speak for the action and the comitative carries it through.
The bivalent coverb/monovalent generic verb construction always indicates a reflexive relationship between the initiator of the event and the undergoer. The undergoer participant of the coverb converges on the same argument slot as the semantic undergoer participant of the generic verb. (77) was spoken in a retelling of the movie Terminator II. In the film a man/robot protects a boy by letting bullets enter directly into his back.

(77)

Terminadori naka

bala ikatusa

terminado=ri na=ka

bala ika-tu-sa

terminator=FOC child=ACC bullet crash-NEG-DR

puraie. pore-i-e cut-BECOME:GEN-DCL 'So the bullets wouldn't hit the child, the terminator cut (them) off (with his own body)'

This construction cannot be used if the terminator has used an object other than his own body to shield the boy. In that case another construction consisting of pore 'cut' and the generic verb ki 'DO:GEN' must be used (78).

(78)

Terminadori naka

bala ikatusa

terminado=ri na=ka

bala ika-tu-sa

terminator=FOC child=ACC bullet crash-NEG-DR

latachi porekee lata=chi pore-ke-e. shield=FOC cut-DO:GEN-DCL 'So the bullets wouldn't hit the child, the terminator cut (them) off with a shield.'

This construction can also be used with inanimates but here it indicates that the event occurred because of some inherent property of the undergoer as the English translation indicates (79). In Tsafiki an adverbial modifier such as English 'easy' is not needed.

(79)

Sili poraie sili pore-i-e rope cut-BECOME:GEN-DCL 'The rope cut (easily)'

In (80) below, Salun, a mythical character, is

floating down the river. He uses his rather unusually long

personal appendage as a lasso, trying to stop himself by

catching the appendage in the trees. The effort fails

however and the appendage gets cut off.

(80)

Aman atie

titie

loberto

aman a-ti-e

ti-ti-e, loberto

now scream-SAY:GEN-DCL say-RP-DCL loberto

loberto ya wari numi poraito. loberto ya wari numi pora-i-to loberto 3P2 well penis cut-BECOME:GEN-SR

278
'They say he screamed "loberto loberto loberto" when (his) penis got cut off/when it cut off.'
The reflexive reading of these constructions could simply come about because of the semantic compatibility of the undergoer argument of the generic verb and coverb. But it could be that the vowel change evident in the above examples of pore/pura is also signaling the reflexive relationship. There is a reciprocal a "RECIP' (See Chapter Two, Section 4.2) which could be related. However not all speakers exhibit the vowel change. Particularly in the common complex predicate keerei 'fall', younger speakers do not change the vowel although older speakers insist on keerai as the proper form.
One last note on the semantics of this construction, with highly 'transitive' (Hopper and Thompson 1 9 — ) verbs such as pore 'cut' the nominative argument exhibits a great deal of control. In fact the disjunct suffix cannot be used in these constructions. With other complex predciates such as keerei 'fall' it appears to have the opposite effect always coding accidental falling (81) . If one intentionally threw oneself to the ground the construction in (82) would be used with either the inclusive enclitic on the nominative argument or the reflexive pronoun (little used

279
in Tsafiki). The meaning of (82) still implies that the initation of the event started with the nominative argument due to some inherent factor, inattention, clumsiness, illness etc. that allowed the forces of gravity to go to work. It resembles the reading given when the argument of pore 'cut' is inanimate.

(81) (82)

Tse keereiyoe tse ke-ere-i-yo-e IF hit-send-BECOME:GEN-CNJ-DCL 'I fell.' Tsenan (tenkachikenan) keereyoe tse=nan (tenkachikenan) ke-ere-yo-e 1F=INCL REFLEX.PRO hit-SEND:GEN-CNJ-DCL 'I threw myself (down).'

3.2 Stative Complex Predicates

In complex predicates formed with a monovalent coverb aligned with undergoer and the bivalent stative generic verb ta 'have' the undergoer of the coverb converges on the locative argument of the generic verb (83 and Figure Twelve). Monovalent, undergoer-aligned coverbs are the only coverbs found with this generic verb. As expected a relative clause referring to the undergoer takes the nominalizer -nun (84) . The two examples below refer to

280
women who are training to be shamans, requiring that they lead a cloistered life.

(83) (84)

Yala sonaka ya=la sona=ka 3P2=PL woman=LOC

dotalarae. do-ta-la-ra-e close-HAVE:GEN-PL-BE.POSIT:VCL-DCL 'They had the women cloistered.' (MALILI.ll)

Dotanun

sonala...

do-ta-nun

sona=la

close-HAVE:GEN-NOM woman=PL

'The women they had cloistered...'

(MALILI.12)

COVERB

Undergoer

do 'close'

GENERIC

Entity

Locative

ta 'have'

NOM/IP

LOC

ya

sona=ka

do-ta-e

3P2

woman=LOC

close-HAVE:GEN-DCL

'He had the woman cloistered.'

Figure Eleven. Monovalent coverb aligned with undergoer, and bivalent stative generic verb.

The other stative generic verbs are basically monovalent but compatible with constructions containing a locative. When a bivalent coverb combines with a monovalent stative generic verb, the undergoer argument converges on the optional locative argument of the generic verb (85 and

281
Figure Twelve). Once again a relative clause referring to the locative argument takes the suffix -nun (86).

(85)
(86)

Nasi

matu

to kuwenta

na-si

matu

to kuwenta

little-GRAD old.days earth story

miralarako,

yakari

mi-ra-la-ra-ko

ya=ka=ri

know-BE.POSIT:GEN-PL-BE.POST:VCL-DUB 3P2=LOC-FOC

'They only know a little bit about these old

stories?'{CQMATU5.50}

Yala miranunka ya=la mi-ra-nun=ka 3P2=PL know-BE.POSIT.-NOM=LOC

aman kuwenta kisa Ignacio aman kuwenta ki-sa Ignacio 'Now Ignacio let's talk about what they knew.' {ICMATU1.12}

COVERB

Actor

Undergoer mi 'know'

GENERIC

Entity

Locative ra 'be in a position'

NOM/IP

LOC

ya

yaka

3P2

3P2=LOC

'He knows this.'

mirae know-BE.POSIT:GEN-DCL

Figure Twelve: Bivalent coverb and monovalent stative generic verb.

When a monovalent coverb combines with a monovalent stative generic verb the particpants of the two predicates

282
simply converge on the same argument (87 and Figure Thirteen).

(87)

Sabo barerae sabo bare-ra-e rubber stretch-BE.POSIT.DCL 'The rubber stretched.'

COVERB GENERIC

I Undergoer
Entity

bare 'stretch ra 'be in a position'

NOM/IP sabo bare-ra-e rubber stretch-BE.POSIT:GEN-DCL 'The rubber is stretched.'
Figure Thirteen: A monovalent coverb with undergoer alignment and monovalent stative generic verb.

4. Summary

In this section it was shown that the nominative and accusative argument directly correlate with points on the event line, with nominative being associated with the initiating point of the event and accusative with the terminating point. Only case-alternating constructions which don't violate this correlation are allowed, that is, locative constructions and external possessor constructions. Tsafiki has dative-subject constructions

283
which would be predicated from this analysis. In addition, bivalent stative verbs take a nominative and a locative argument rather than nominative/accusative as demonstrated by relative clause formation.
Although in terms of valency, the majority of Tsafiki complex predicates could be considered exocentric, the generic verb could be portrayed as a head in that it controls the type of schematic structure the clause as a whole will have in terms of event vs. state, inchoative, causative among others. The generic verb always controls the nominative argument. Hence whereas in Chapter Three we saw the similarities between coverbs and ideophones that to a large degree convey affecto-imagistic notions, the primary pupose of the generic verbs appears to provide a schematic representation of the event line.

284
CHAPTER V
VERB CLASS MARKERS AND AUXILIARIES
1. Introduction
In Tsafiki, all predicates, whether complex or simple, can be sorted into one of five classes depending on the verb class marker with which they co-occur in certain morphosyntactic environments. In these constructions a nonfinite verb form, which can be either simple or complex, combines with one of five verb class markers, i 'become', ki 'do', ti 'say', ra 'be in a position' and jo 'be', to form a single clause. The class marker is determined by the simple or generic verb and is invariable with no attested speaker variation. For example, in (1-5) below, the five verb class marker classes are illustrated by plural constructions. In these constructions, a simple verb (1, 4, 5) or complex predicate (2, 3) is suffixed with a plural marker followed by an obligatory verb class marker.

285

(1)

i 'become' class

Nulari inka kepobi

nu=la=ri in=ka ke-po-bi

2 =PL=FOC 3P1=ACC throw-PUT:GEN-PURP

jilainake. ji-la-i-na=ke go-PL-BECOME:VCL-PRG=QT '(He said) You guys go throw this out.' {ISANSOWE.97}

(2)

ki 'do' class

...ponelala

paito

...pone=la=la pa-i-to

shaman=PL=PL angry-BECOME:GEN-SR

yuka kilakimanti'. yuka ki-la-ki-man=ti-e evil DO:GEN-PL-DO:VCL-SIT-RP-DCL 'They say all the shamans got angry and cursed (him).' {MV.MANKAMOSO.4}

(3)

ti 'say' class

Aman ya apari

ayanbe

namaka

aman ya apa=ri

ayan=be nama=ka

now 3P2 father=FOC mother=COM daughter=ACC

otilatimanti'. o-ti-la-ti-man=ti-e call-say:GEN-PL-SAY:VCL-SIT-RP-DCL 'Now they say the father and mother called (their) daughter.' {MV.AASALUN.55}

(4)

ra 'be in a position' class

Amanato duke tsachila chulara'.

amanato duke tsachi=la chu-la-ra-e

nowadays many tsachi=PL sit-PL-BE:POSIT:VCL-DCL

'These days there are lots of Tsachila.'

(LIT:These days many Tsachi sit.'){COMATU6.53}

286

(5)

jo 'be' class

Tonki duke jolajotie.

tonki duke jo-la-jo-ti-e

snail many be-PL-BE:VCL-RP-DCL

'They say there were a lot of snails (LIT:'The

snails were many.') {SA7.10}

Moore (1991) calls the suffixes occurring after the plural marker in (1-5) auxiliaries. This term is not inaccurate. While the term 'auxiliary' is generally problematic in that it is used to cover a wide range of both conceptual and morphosyntactic properties (Heine 1993), the verb class markers have several properties generally employed to define auxiliaries, including several of the properties listed in Heine (1993:22-24):

a. They form a closed set of linguistic units. b. They are neither clearly lexical nor clearly
grammatical units. c. They also occur as main verbs. d. They express grammatical functions but exhibit,
at least to some extent, a verbal morphosyntax. e. They carry morphological information relating to
a predicate. f. They tend to occur in a fixed order and in a
fixed position in the clause. g. In the presence of an auxiliary, the main verb is
likely to be used in a nonfinite form...

However, Tsafiki verb class markers differ from 'canonical' auxiliaries in several ways. A primary

287
difference concerns their notional domains. The verb class markers in Tsafiki occur in the following types of constructions: plural, contrastive, semblative, augmentative, evidential and attemptive. While there is no exhaustive list of possible auxiliary notional domains, the verb class marker domains are outside of the tense, aspect, modality and to a lesser degree, the negation and voice domains generally associated with auxiliaries and which, in fact, are sometimes used as defining properties of auxiliaries (Heine 1993). In addition, the verb class markers are restricted in the sense that an individual verb class marker cannot occur with just any verb. Every simple/generic verb in Tsafiki occurs with one and only one of the five verb class markers (VCLs). The VCLs contrast with another set of constructions in Tsafiki in which jo 'be' and i 'become' combine with nonfinite forms to create imperfective, perfective, irrealis, negative, abilitative or permissive clauses. In these constructions, there are few combinational restrictions—the auxiliary can combine with almost any verb. For example, in (6) and (7) below the auxiliary jo 'be' occurs with the imperfective participle

288

form of a stative jo-class verb (6) and an active, Jri-class verb (7).

(6)

Junni ya wilinki nalala

jomin

jun.

junni ya wilinki na=la=la jo-min jo-n

then 3P2 whale child=PL=PL be-IMPF.P BE:AUX-ST

'Then it was the whale children.' {MALI.29}

(7)

Jaatsan tinatiya kitumin

joeke.

jaa-tsan tinatiya ki-tu-min

jo-e=ke

3D2-SMBL nothing do-NEG-IMPF.P BE:AUX-DCL=QT

'(She said) she wasn't doing anything.' {TSAB02.94}

While VCLs can be considered a type of auxiliary, I reserve the term 'auxiliary' for jo 'be' and i 'become' when they occur with nonfinite verbs forms, in that they conform more closely to 'canonical' auxiliaries, both notionally and in terms of distribution.
What both the verb class markers and auxiliaries have in common is that a nonfinite verb form combines with another verb, chosen from a limited set, to form a single clause. The nonfinite forms range in degree of nominalization from the participle and infinitive forms that can function as subjects and objects to adverbial forms that cannot. The nonfinite verb forms, like coverbs, cannot in most cases, take evidential, mirative or mood markers that are the defining features of a finite clause

289
in Tsafiki. The auxiliary or VCL carries this information. However this does not mean that the auxiliary and VCLs are 'empty' carriers of finite morphology. Following Langacker (1991), I will argue that the VCLs and auxiliaries are predicators fulfilling a particular semantic function, rather than purely grammatical markers. Both the auxiliaries and verb class markers function as verbs, verbs with highly schematic profiles, but verbs nonetheless.
Using evidence similar to what was used to analyze the structure of the generic verbs, I will argue that the verb class markers have a function similar to the generic verbs. Both the generic verbs and verb class markers provide the schematic event structure both the coverb and the nonfinite verb lack. The nonfinite verb is of course, reified or objectivized as evidenced by its behavior. Nominalized verbs can be desired, given or received much like an object—'I want to go', 'I gave him a bath', 'I got some help'. Hence, nonfinite verbs align (to varying degrees) with the static configuration associated with objects and lack a direct association with the finite, schematic event structure associated with a verb (Talmy 2000; Langacker 1987b). The difference between these structures and the

290
coverb plus generic verb structures is that the schematic profile of the verb class marker correlates with the more specific profile of the nonfinite verb and serves to 'reactivate' the nonfinite verb. Unlike the generic verbs, verb class markers do not contribute semantic participants to the clause. The profile of the VCL differs from that of the nonfinite verb form only in relation to its level of specificity. It is not different in kind, but rather is a reduced version of the schematic event profile the verb would have had were it not nominalized. Because of this, the verb class marker appears redundant or 'swallowed up' by the semantics of the nonfinite verb. In fact, the verb class marker is essential in that it provides the schematic event structure necessary to form a fully finite predicate.
The profile of the auxiliary, on the other hand, does not necessarily correlate with the profile of the nonfinite verb form and hence, in these constructions the profile of the auxiliary dominates and the nonfinite verb form remains, in essense, a subordinate clause.
I will begin by discussing the verb class markers in Section One. The auxiliary constructions will be discussed in Section Two. Both of these sections begin with a fairly

291
detailed description of the individual constructions followed by discussion. Section Three compares the two systems and offers a summary and conclusion.
2. Verb Class Markers
As noted above, every simple/generic verb in Tsafiki occurs with one and only one of the five verb class markers with no attested speaker variation. The thirty-three simple/generic verbs, as well as the verbal suffixes that function as generic verbs are listed in Table 9 (recopied from Table 7, Chapter Three) below, according to their class. The number out of 551 coverbs with which they have been found to occur is also listed. Note that the generic verbs that also function as VCLs occur with the largest number of coverbs for their individual class: i 'become' (151), ki 'do' (126), ti 'say' (44), jo 'be' (34) and ra 'be in a position (85). This would suggest that these verbs already express more general rather than specific meaning.
The schematic profile of the verb classes is fairly transparent from the meaning of the verb, but for the sake of clarity I have expanded on the definitions in (8). In

292
(8a) the X in parenthesis indicates that the profile of this verb may or may not take a complement.

TABLE 9 Tsafiki Generic Verbs and Number of Coverbs (out of 551)
with which they can co-occur

Generic Verb

Generic Verb

# of

i 'become'-class

i

ki 'do/make'-class

coverbs

i

'become'

ki 'do/make'

269

ji

'go'

257 suwa 'cause to

156

ja*

'come'

109

become'

lo

'go out/up'

48 kari 'cause'

149

la* 'come out/up'

45 ere* 'send'

50

fe

'arrive there' 50 po* 'put inside'

43

fa* 'arrive here'

34 ka 'get'

35

pati 'go down'

33 pa* 'talk'

10

pata* 'come down'

35 kira* 'see'

9

pole 'go across'

35 kuwa* 'give'

4

pola* 'come across'

43 fi 'eat'

1

wi

'go in'

35 -le 'direct cause'

76

wiya* ''come in*

37 -ri 'cause motion*

39

piya* 'lose'

33 -te 'set/place'

17

puya 'die'

5 -si 'remove'

15

-di 'get into

1 -re 'direct cause'

5

position'

4 -wo 'indirect cause'

5

-wiya 'almost'

open -miya 'associative

open

cause'

ti 'say' class

ti

'say/express'

39

ra 'be in position'

class

'be'-class

ra 'be in a

125

jo

'be'

46

position'

ito 'not be'

44 nena 'go around'

33

ta* 'have'

11

chu* 'sit'

7

tso* 'lie'

5

•Indicates the generic verb also occurs as a coverb

293
a. ki Actor does (X) b. i Undergoer changes state or location c. ti Actor says or expresses (X) d. ra Entity has X configuration and location
in space e. jo Entity is in state or location
There is some overlap in the classes. Note that the classes are not exclusive. Both ra 'be in a position' and jo 'be' can be used to code location in space. While rarely utilized in this sense, jo 'be' can be used to code location when the speaker does not wish to specify the entity's configuration. In this sense ra 'be in a position' is much more specific in meaning than jo 'be'. Jo 'be' is more commonly used to code a quality or property, laki joe 'S/he is sad', barekan joe 'S/he is tall', and class membership unila joe 'He is a man' (Stassen 1997). Note that the first four verbs in 'ra' 'be in a position' class code static configurations in space. Ra as a simple verb can only be used to refer to fruit hanging on a vine or tree, hence originally had the sense of 'hang'. The fifth verb in this class nena 'go around' (probably derived from ne 'foot' and the verb ra 'be in a position) consists of a specific configuration of movement in space, i.e. it lacks direction and a goal. Neither of the stative classes evoke

294
a temporal event line, but rather a stative relationship between various elements.
The ki 'do' class is fairly straightforward. This class contains activity verbs such as tera-ki 'dance' or jaya-ki 'work physically' as well as well as what might be called prototypical causatives. As was discussed in Chapter Four, ki 'do' only specifies an actor, but is compatible with constructions that contain a undergoer and hence can combine with other elements to form a bivalent causative construction. The ti 'say' class also contains an actor but it specifically codes verbal and nonverbal expression.
The more complicated class is i 'become'. As noted above the schematic profile of this verb denotes an undergoer participant that changes location or state. This class covers many of the notional domains often attributed to 'middle voice' (Kemmer 1993). Besides the generic verbs listed above in Table One, complex predicates involving reflexive-like constructions, certain kinds of reciprocals, facilitative, changes in position, certain body actions, emotions, cognition/- and inchoatives all occur in this class. However while translational motion verbs are all iclass verbs, non-translational verbs fall into the ki-

295
class. On the surface there appears to be a problem here in that i-class verbs require a undergoer and Iri-class verbs require an actor. It is hard to conceive of a difference in agency between the two predicates sula kino 'to swim (in place)' and sula jino 'to go swimming'. The sole difference is that in the translational motion construction the primary participant undergoes a change of location. Hence, while i-class verbs require that the nominative argument be an undergoer, they do not preclude the possibility that the undergoer is also an actor.
2.1 Morphosyntactic Properties of VCLs
The five verb class markers, i 'become', ki 'do', ti 'say', ra 'be in a position' and jo 'be', are transparently derived from generic verbs. However their morphosyntactic behavior and their ability to co-occur with generic verbs justifies their classification as a separate system. In (9) and (10) the generic verbs ra 'be in a position' and suwa 'cause to become' occur in complex predicate constructions. The generic verbs are suffixed with -la 'PLURAL' which is then followed by the appropriate verb class marker, ra 'BE.POSITION:VCL' (9) and ki 'DO:VCL' (10). Note that in

296

(9) the VCL appears to be a redundant copy of the generic verb.

(9) (10)

Wari chilari kachi wari chi=la=ri ka=chi well 1F=PL=F0C front=LOC
wiruralarayo'. wiru-ra-la-ra-yo-e stand-BE.POSITION:GEN-PL-BE.POSITION:VCL-CNJ-DCL 'Well we were standing in front' {JAKURU1.437}
Aman jera aman jera now all
asuwalakimanti' a-suwa-la-ki-man=ti-e cook-CAUSE.BECOME:GEN-PL-DO:VCL-SIT-RP-DCL 'Now they say he cooked it all.' {AAKELA.81}

Unlike the generic verbs, VCLs do not affect the semantic interpretation or argument structure of the clause. Both the plural form with a verb class marker (11) and the singular form without a verb class marker (12) of the monovalent complex predicate su ji 'run'are given below. The semantic participant roles, valency and aspect of the clause is not dependent on the presence or absence of the VCL. (The aspectual difference is due to the presence of the progressive marker -na in (11)).

297

(11)

Wari ponpopo ito

wari ponpopo i-to

well large.owl become-SR

sujilainatieti'. su-j i-la-i-na-ti-e-ti-e feet.in.air-GO:GEN-PL-BECOME:VCL-PRG-RP-DCL-RPDCL 'Then they say he said turning into large owls, they went running off.' {KELAFIMIN:241}

(12)

Junni nao timinnin pipiyabi

junni nao timinnin pipiya-bi

then son EMPH

bathe-PURP

sujinutieti'. su-j i-nu-ti-e-ti-e feet.in.air-GO:GEN-EV-RP-DCL-RP-DCL 'Then they say he said the SON ran off to bathe.' {DOBE.165}

In (13) and (14) the simple bivalent verb, fi 'eat', occurs in both plural and singular form. Again neither semantic participants roles, valency nor the aspect of the clause is affected by the presence of the verb class marker.

(13) (14)

Mimankaka, mimanka pipokaka mimanka=ka, mimanka pipoka=ka lizard=ACC lizard egg=ACC

filakiman',

matute

fi-la-ki-man=e

matu=te

eat-PL-DO:VCL-SIT-DCL old.days=LOC

tsachila jeinla. tsachi=la jein=la person=PL PRO:EMPH=PL 'The lizard, they ate the lizard's eggs, in the old days those Tsachila.' {CCMANTSA.112}

Junni wilinkiri, tsachilaka jera junni wilinki=ri tsachi=la=ka jera then whale=FOC tsachi=PL=ACC all

finatieti' fi-na-ti-e-ti-e eat-PRG-RP-DCL-RP-DCL 'Then they say he said the whale, he was eating all of the Tsachila.' {CCWILINKI.2}

The class of the predicate is always and invariably determined by the generic verb. In the following three examples (15-17) the same coverb, mi 'know', occurs with three different generic verbs followed by the plural marker and the appropriate verb class marker, which varies according to the generic verb.

299

(15) (16) (17)

Okolaberi

ti

oko=la=be=ri

ti

spirit=PL=COM=FOC what

miilaimantin? mi-i-la-i-man=ti-n know-BECOME:GEN-PL-BECOME:VCL-SIT-RP-INT 'What did they say they learned from the spirits?' {VLP.FOR2.9}

Junni tela nisi

uwan naka

tikatiya

junni tela ni-si

owa-n na=ka

tikatiya

then height what-GRAD grow-ST child=ACC whatever

mikarilakinkin? mi-kari-la-ki-n-ki-n know-CAUSE:GEN-PL-DO:VCL-ST-DO:VCL-INT 'Then at what age more or less would they teach the child something?' {MATU1.33}

Ya foro, junte foro chununka ya foro, jun=te foro chu-nun=ka 3P2 hole, 3=L0C hole sit-NOM=LOC

miralarayo'. mi-ra-la-ra-yo-e know-BE.POSITION:GEN-PL-BE.POSITION:VCL-CNJ-DCL 'The cave, we know where the cave is.' {JCPUKA7.75)

Occasionally, the verb class marker occurs by itself with a coverb. The generic verb is dropped. For example, the coverb da 'cook' can occur with the generic verb i 'become' to create a monovalent clause, da ino 'to cook' or with ki 'do' to form a bivalent clause da kino 'to cook something'. In (18) below the coverb occurs directly

300

suffixed with the augmentative morphemes. The verb class marker i 'become' indicates that this is the monovalent form. In (19) the coverb occurs directly suffixed with the plural marker, the verb class marker ki 'do' indicates that this is a bivalent clause.

(18) (19)

Du to dakachinan du to da-ka-chi=nan mound earth cook-AUG-AUG=INCL

inatie i-na-ti-e BECOME:VCL-PRG-RP-DCL 'The mountain was really erupting.' {GA7.80}

Peka

lari

kato

pe-ka

la-ri

ka-to

feces-NCL come.out-CAUSE:SUF GET:GEN-SR

jein ninbi dalakiman' . jein nin=bi da-la-ki-man=e PRO fire=LOC cook-PL-DO:VCL-SIT-DCL 'Extracting the feces (honey) they cooked it in the fire.' {ICMATU5.40}

However in the texts, the generic verb has only been found to drop in cases where the VCL is a repeater of the generic verb as in the examples above and with coverbs such as da 'cook' which, as suggested in Chapter Three is beginning to take on the properties of a generic verb. Hence, this might be best considered a case of ellipsis

301

rather than a case in which the VCL is functioning both as a generic verb and a VCL.
Finally, one of the more interesting aspects of this system is the ability for more than one verb class marker to appear in a single clause, resulting in a concordial type system, i.e. every element of the verb phrase occurs with a class marker. Clauses with two or three verb class markers are common in the texts. Clauses with four are rare and a clause with five has not been found in the texts but it is fairly straightforward to elicit. In (20), the complex predicate yuka ki 'curse', is followed by five verb class markers. The context created for this example was a situation in which a man angers the shamans and then has a long string of bad luck—his crops fail, his dog dies, his wife runs off with another man etc. but he is still alive and going strong.

(20)

Ponela yaka yuka kiyo

kinin

pone=la ya=ka yuka ki-yo

ki-nin

shaman=PL 3P2=ACC evil DO:GEN-ATT DO:VCL-CNTR

kika:

kinkilakee

ki-ka:

ki-n-ki-la-ki-e

DO:VCL-AUG DO:VLC-ST-DO:VCL-PL-DO:VCL-DCL

'The shamans must have tried to just curse him

many times.'

302

The only absolute order among the VCLs is that, as might be expected, the evidential construction always occurs in final position. There is a preference for the semblative to occur first. The placement of the plural marker varies. The plural can either occur as a suffix on the nonfinite verb form or after the VCL. When it occurs on the nonfinite predicate a single verb class marker follows the two suffixes (21).

(21)

Nulari chuninla ranake, nu-la-ri chu-nin-la ra-na-ke 2-PL-FOC sit-CNTR-PL BE.POSITION:GEN-PRG-QT '(She said) you guys just stay (here)'{KATIMOWIN.15}

Alternatively the plural marker can occur after the verb class marker (22).

(22)

Kirasi, amanhinin kira-si aman=i-nin see-IMM hug-BECOME:GEN-CNTR ilainamanti' i-la-i-na-man=ti-e BECOME:VCL-PL-BECOME:VCL-PRG-SIT-RP-DCL 'Seeing him, (the women and the rainbow man) hugged.' {MVAASUYUN.57}

The different placement of the plural marker results in a difference in meaning. In (21) the woman is speaking

303
to her children, telling them as a group to stay put while she leaves the house to investigate a strange sound. In (22) a group of women see the rainbow man, immediately desire him and they all individually hug him. Although there is some variation among, particularly older and younger speakers of Tsafiki, a single plural marker on the noun usually indicates that the group of individuals performs a single act as a whole. A single plural marker on the verb has more of a distributional sense, i.e. multiple actions.
The other three forms suffixed with -yo 'ATTEMPTIVE', -nin 'CONTRASTIVE' or -ka: 'AUGMENTATIVE' can vary with subtle differences in meaning:
(23) a. yuka kika: kiyo kee '(He) really tried to curse (him).'
yuka kiyo kika: kee '(He tried to curse (him) many times.'
b. yuka kinin kiyo kee '(He) just tried to curse (him)'
yuka kiyo kinin kee '(He) tried to just curse (him).'
c. yuka kinin kika: kee '(He)just cursed (him) many times.'
yuka kika: kinin kee '(He) really just cursed (him).

304
In the next section the individual morphosyntactic constructions in which the VCLs appear will be examined individually. The constructions can be divided into two types depending on whether the VCL occurs within the same clause as the predicate coding the event it is classifying or refers to an event coded by a predicate outside the clause.
2.2 Verb class markers within the clause
Six different constructions have been identified in which the VCLs occur within the clause. In all cases the verb class marker follows one of the following suffixes: la 'PLURAL'; -nin 'CONTRASTIVE'; -n 'STATIVE'; -min-tsan 'IMPF.P-SEMBLATIVE'; -ka 'AUGMENTATIVE'; and -yo 'ATTEMPTIVE'. The first two suffixes are also attested as suffixes on nouns.
2.2.1 -la 'Plural'
As previously noted plural marking in Tsafiki is facultative. It may appear suffixed to nouns, nominalized verbs and to the verb itself, but is never obligatory. When the plural marker appears on the verb stem, it is

305

immediately followed by a verb class marker. The following five examples illustrate this construction with both simple verbs (24-28a) and complex predicates (24-28b).

(24)

i 'become' class

a. Weyan jera piyalainatieti',

weyan jera piya-la-i-na-ti-e-ti-e

others all die-PL-BECOME:VCL-PRG-RP-DCL-RP-DCL

ya chiban tenchi. ya chiba-n ten=chi 3P2 heat-ST heart=INSTR 'They say they said the others were all dying, from the heat.' {NINSUWA.67}

b. Yachi niyetoe ya=chi niyeto-e 3P2=POSS grandchiId-DCL

tenhilainae. ten-i-la-i-na-e heart-BECOME:GEN-PL-BECOME:VCL-PRG-DCL 'They were thinking he was their grandson.' (AASALUN.65)

(25) a.

ki 'do' class Junni wari tsachilari ano mochi junni wari tsachi=la=ri ano mo=chi then well tsachi=PL=FOC food desire=INSTR

pinika filakinatieti'. pini=ka fi-la-ki-na-ti-e-ti-e snake=ACC eat-PL-DO:VCL-PRG-RP-DCL-RP-DCL 'Then they say he said the people were eating the snake because of hunger.' {CCTARA.ll}

306

b. Junni aman luban

okolari

junni aman lu-ba-n

oko=la=ri

then now red-QUAL-ST spirit=PL=FOC

layaito laya-i-to gather-BECOME:GEN-SR

tenpalakimantie. ten-pa-la-ki-man=ti-e heart-SPEAK:GEN-PL-DO:VCL-SIT-RP-DCL 'They say all the red demons got together and made plans.' {VLP.BOPI.52}

(26)

ti 'say' class

a. Junni ponelalari

yakari

j unni pone=la=la=ri ya=ka-ri

then shaman=PL=PL=FOC 3P2=ACC=FOC

munaratiyoe. muna-ra-ti-yo-e desire-BE.POSITION:GEN-NEG-CNJ-DCL

tilatinatieti' ti-la-ti-na-ti-e-ti-e say-PL-SAY:VCL-PRG-RP-DCL-RP-DCL 'They say he said that all the shamans were saying they didn't like him.' {ACKELA.13}

b. Fuda ikabi

fuda

fuda i-ka=bi

fuda

hurt BECOME:GEN-PF.P=LOC hurt

tilatinatiet'. ti-la-ti-na-ti-e-ti-e SAY:GEN-PL-SAY:VCL-PRG-RP-DCL-RP-DCL 'They say he said (the wild pigs') wounds were hurting. {CCMANTSAPONE.52}

ra 'be in a position' class Sonabe unilabe na pemanka sona=be unila=be na peman=ka woman=COM man=COM child three-NCL talaratie ta-la-ra-ti-e have-PL-BE.POSITION:VCL-RP-DCL 'They say the woman and the man had three children.' {GA7.3} Jun kiranari, tape dule jun kira-na=ri tape du=le 3D1 see-PRG=FOC weed mound=LOC wiruralaranutieti'. wiru-ra-la-ra-nu-ti-e-ti-e stand-BE.POSITION:GEN-PL-BE.POSITION:VCL-EV-RPDCL-RP-DCL 'Then they say he said that they stood in a garbage dump looking (around).' {CCTSAB01.70} jo 'be' class Fino podei-tu-min=la fi-no pode-i-tu-min=la eat-INF be.able-BECOME:GEN-NEG-IMPF.P=PL pekoro itolajotietie. pekoro ito-la-jo-ti-e-ti-e anus not.be-PL-BE:VCL-RP-DCL-RP-DCL 'They say he said (the ones) who couldn't eat didn't have an anus.' {VLP.DATSANINNAKA.16}

308
b. Junni junchi junni jun=chi then 3D1=L0C pajolajotieti' pa-j o-la-j o-ti-e-ti-e speak-BE:GEN-PL-BE:VCL-RP-DCL-RP-DCL boobo boobo boobo. boobo boobo boobo boobo boobo boobo 'Then they say he said they were making a lot of noise, "Boobo boobo boobo-"' {RL1.11}
This system is recursive in that a verb suffixed with a VCL can then become nonfinite again by the addition of a subordinate suffix after the VCL. When the plural marker occurs directly after the verb in a subordinate clause it is followed by a VCL and then the subordinating morpheme (29). However, this is rare in that the majority of subordinate clauses are not marked for plurality (30). In both examples below, the nominative argument of the finite verb is also the nominative argument in the subordinate clauses. The subordinate clauses are simply suffixed with the same reference marker -to.

309

(29) (30)

Aman yalari

wari ano mochi

aman ya=la-ri wari ano mo=chi

now 3P2=PL=FOC well food hunger=INSTR

lantoka filakito lanto=ka fi-la-ki-to clay=ACC eat-PL-DO:GEN-SR

chularatieti'. chu-la-ra-ti-e-ti-e sit-PL-BE.POSITION:GEN-RP-DCL-RP-DCL 'Now they lived eating clay because of hunger.' {CCNINSUWA.27}

Jein

yape manlasa

tito

jein

yape man=la-sa

ti-to

PRO:EMPH so.that again=come.out-DN say-SR

banbutu kito pone kito banbutu ki-to pone ki-to drum do-SR shaman do-SR

sulolainatieti1. su-lo-la-i-na-ti-e-ti-e feet.in.air-GO.UP:GEN-PL-BECOME:VCL-PRG-RP-DCLRP-DCL 'They said that telling him to come back out (of the whale) they jumped around doing the shaman ceremony and playing the drum.' {CCWILINIKI.43}

Verbs, whether complex or simple, suffixed with the plural marker are nonfinite in that they can not directly be marked with evidential or mirative markers that in

310
Tsafiki serve to individuate and locate the event coded by the predicate1.
2.2.2 -nin 'contrastive'
The suffix -nin 'contrastive' resembles the plural marker in that it can also appear on nouns or verbs. It indicates a situation that is contrary to expectations. When it occurs on nouns it generally contrasts two protagonists and their respective actions, i.e. 'He did this and HE did that'. In (32) the whole family goes to mass except for the son, who needing game for his up-coming wedding goes to the jungle to hunt instead of to mass.
1 It is possible that the plural suffix -la originally only occurred as a plural marker on nominals. Some evidence from this comes from the closely related Barbacoan language Cha'palaachi. There are two plural forms in Cha'palaachi: 1) a suffix -la which occurs with nominals and what Vittadello (1988a:67-68) calls the narrative imperfective and perfective verb forms; and 2) a prefix de- which occurs with all other verb forms. This is interesting for a couple reasons. If the Cha'palaachi perfective and imperfective forms were originally participle forms, as they are in Tsafiki, it would explain why they take what is otherwise a nominal plural marker. Also, Tsafiki has a verbal prefix pe- 'also/too' which may be related to the Cha'palaachi de. So it's possible that Tsafiki at one time had two plural markers, one associated primarily with nominals and the second with verbs. However, this remains highly speculative.

(31)

Misaka jera jika

misa=ka jera ji-ka

mass=LOC all go-PF.P

jominlanutieti',

jun ya,

jo-min-la-nu-ti-e-ti-e

jun ya,

BE:AUX-IMPF.P-PL-EV-RP-DCL-RP-DCL 3D1 3P2

ya kayannin

jelenchi

ya kayan=nin

jelen=chi

3P2 female's.brother=CNTR jungle=LOC

jika josa. ji-ka jo-sa go-PF.P BE:AUX-DR 'They had all gone to mass, (while) that one, the BROTHER had gone to the jungle.' {CCSONPURA.26}

In (32) a son and father-in-law have gone fishing. The son-in-law catches a lot of fish, smokes them, yet not only doesn't give any fish to the father-in-law, he himself doesn't eat, despite the fact they have not eaten all day.

(32)

Yanin fituti',

nisi

nakati.

ya=nin fi-tu-ti-e

ni-si

na-ka-ti

3P2=CNTR eat-NEG-RP-DCL what-GRAD small-NCL-NEG

'He (the father-in-law) said HE (the son-in-law)

didn't eat either, not even a little bit.'

{MV.AAPALUKA.23}

When -nin appears on verbs it always indicates an action that is contrary to expectations. In (33) which is a continuation of the story concerning the father and son-inlaw (above), the father catches and cooks a small bird

312

while the son-in-law is sleeping. The son-in-law awakens and asks him what he is eating. The father is not about to share the bird, given the son-in-law's niggardly behavior, so he lies and tells him he is eating fireflies. Here -nin indicates his statement contrasts with the truth.

(33)

ti-class Mololo finayoe mololo fi-na-yo-e firefly eat-PRG-CNJ-DCL

/

tinin

tinuti'.

ti-nin

ti-nu-ti-e

say-CNTR say:VCL-EV-RP-DCL

'They say he must have just said, "I'm eating

fireflies.'" {AAPALUKA.35}

The son-in-law then asks him if they are good to eat and he answers that he is only eating them out of hunger. The -nin in (34) indicates that his present condition contrasts with the normal state of affairs in which he would not eat fireflies.

313

(34)

Jri-class

ano mochi

finin kinayoe

ano mo-chi

fi-nin ki-na-yo-e

food desire-INSTR eat-CNTR DO:VCL-PRG-CNJ-DCL

titi'. ti-ti-e say-RP-DCL 'They say he said, "I'm just eating them because of hunger."' {AAPALUKA.43}

The next example concerns a Tsachi who has gone hunting wild pig. As he is chasing them, the pigs suddenly take human form and he is unable to kill them. He stops and simply stands there.

(35)

i-class Junni toteno podeituto junni tote-no pode-i-tu-to then kill-INF be.able-BECOME:GEN-NEG-SR

wiruinin

inamanti'.

wiru-i-nin

i-na-man=ti'

stand-BECOME:GEN-CNTR BECOME:VCL-PRG-SIT-RP-DCL

'Then they say because he couldn't kill them, he

just started standing there.' {AAMANKSMOSO.23}

The ra-class predicate in (36), occurs in a situation in which a woman has taken the rainbow man, a snake who can take human form, as her husband. Here the woman's mother peeks into the room where they are sleeping and discovers

314

the rainbow man in his true form—a large snake lying on top of her daughter.

(36)

ra-class

Jun mankiraponasa,

kiranari,

jun man=kira-po-na-sa,

kira-na-ri

3D1 again=see-PUT:GEN-PRG-DN see-PRG-FOC

wa pini amali, ya, sonachi butchi wa pini amali ya sona=chi butu=chi big snake very 3 woman=POSS top=LOC

nanranin

rae

nan-ra-nin

ra-e

lie.across-BE.POSITION:GEN-CNTR

rae

tieti',

wa pini.

ra-e

ti-e-ti-e

wa pini

BE.POSITION:VCL-DCL say-DCL-RP-DCL big snake

'They say she said that when she went to take a

peek, when she was looking, a great big snake,

he, was just lying on top of the woman, a big

snake.' {CCSUYUN.125-128}

In the jo-class example (37) some children have placed a wooden snake in a location where a bear takes his daily nap in order to frighten him. The placement is tricky, yet here it happens to occur in just the right place for maximum effect.

315

(37)

jo-class Aman payari yaka kirachunni aman paya=ri ya=ka kira-chu-n-ri now bear=FOC 3P2=ACC see-IRR-NOM-FOC jonin jominnutie. jo-nin jo-min-nu-ti-e be-CNTR BE:VCL-IMPF.P-EV-RP-DCL 'Now the bear was just (right there) to see it.' {NEL02.23}

The suffix -nin sometimes appears followed by a repetition of the predicate to which it is suffixed. The translation for these constructions differs from the normal translation of a -nin construction. The most common translation of a -nin clause uses the Spanish nomas which I usually translate as 'just'. The translation differs in the repetitive construction in that it is translated with two verbs, sometimes three. In (38) narration concerns a war between the Tsachila and another group, the Dobe. After discussing the large number of Tsachila killed in this war the narrator mentions that the Dobe were dying too. The original Spanish translation of the clause was the nonstandard Spanish de morir murieron tambien los dobe, which I have translated as 'as for dying, the Dobe died too' although these are also sometimes translated with a speech verb yhablando' that is non-existent in the Tsafiki,

316

i.e. the equivalent of 'Speaking of dying, the Dobe were dying too.'

(38)

Junni tsanke inari junni tsan=ke i-na-ri then SMBL=DO:VCL BECOME:VCL-PRG-FOC piyanin piyalainatieti', piya-nin piya-la-i-na-ti-e-ti-e die-CNTR die-PL-BECOME:VCL-PRG-RP-DCL-RP-DCL Doberi. Dobe-ri Dobe-FOC 'Then while all this was going on, as for dying, they died (too), the Dobe.' {CCDOBE.123}

I have found no uses of -nin plus VCL that were translated in this manner.2 The two constructions and their prototypical translations are compared below. First with pa 'speak' (39) and then ji 'go' (40).

2 I looked at one hundred and eleven occurrences of pa 'speak' and ji 'go' suffixed with -nin. There were ninetyfive occurrences of -nin plus VCL. Of these, none were translated with more than a single verb, seventy were translated with nomas and twenty-five were translated as unadorned verbs. Of the sixteen constructions that occurred with a repetition of the suffixed verb, thirteen were translated with at least two verbs, two with nomas and one as an unadorned verb. The examples were from eight narrators and four different translators.

317

(39) a. Nu panin

kede.

nu pa-nin

ke-de

2 speak-CNTR DO:VCL-IMP

'Just say it!' {PUNP0BE1.10}

b. Yaka panin

palakinamanhe.

ya=ka pa-nin

pa-la-ki-na-man=e

3P2=ACC speak-CNTR speak-PL-DO:VCL-PRG-SIT-DCL

'As for speaking of this, they spoke (of it).'

{VLPF.POR1.44}

(40) a. Pi kabi

jinin ide.

pi ka-bi ji-nin i-de

water get-PURP go-CNTR BECOME:VCL-IMP

'Just go get some water!' (MV.AASUYU.19}

b. Wale titiya jinin jinada,

inte.

wale titiya ji-nin ji-na-da

in=te

guanta something go-CNTR go-PRG-DCL.GEN 3P1=L0C

'Speaking of some guanta going around, they go

around, here.' {JAKURU2.471}

The repetitive construction, although less common than the contrastive form with the VCL, can be formed with any predicate given the appropriate context, and may well be the source construction for the -nin plus verb class marker construction.
A verb suffixed with -nin can occur as a subordinate clause without the VCL (41).

318

(42)

Aman jinin jinin aman jinasari aman ji-nin ji-nin aman ji-na-sa-ri now go-CNTR go-CNTR now go-PRG-DN-FOC

wa pako

pele animali chunutie.

wa pako

pele animali chu-nu-ti-e

big matapalo.tree NCL huge sit-EV-RP-DCL

'Now they say they were just going and going,

while they were going they came upon a huge

matapalo tree. {DONUNPE.45}

As with the predicates suffixed with the plural -la, predicates suffixed with -nin cannot occur as finite verbs without a verb class marker.

2.2.3 The VCL Evidential

The next construction is one of the various evidential constructions found in Tsafiki. As discussed previously in Chapter Three, this construction indicates that the speaker is using his general knowledge to deduce what the situation coded in the proposition must be. In the i-class construction below (42) a man has made a contract to meet a friend to go hunting. The friend goes, but behaves very strangely throughout the rest of the story. The verb is suffixed with -n, the verb class marker and the declarative general mood mark to indicate that, despite appearances,

319

the narrator deduces, and any one would deduce from his odd behavior, that this is not the friend.

(42)

i-class Junni manka tsachiri junni man=ka tsachi=ri then one-NCL tsachi=FOC jinhinada. ji-n-i-na-da go-ST-BECOME:VCL-PRG-DCL.GEN 'But another person must have gone.' {BOPI.9}

The following four examples illustrate this construction with the other four verb classes. In (43) the narrator is again deducing from his general knowledge as to what is the maximum number of wild pigs one person could possibly hunt.

(43)

ki-class Pemanka o junpaluka o manteka, peman=ka o junpalu-ka o mante-ka three-NCL or four-NCL or five-NCL manteka kinkee mante-ka ki-n-ki-e five-NCL do-ST-DO:VCL-DCL 'Three or four or five, he must have done five.' {KELATSACHI.55}

The ti-class construction in (44) is from a Tsachi version of Hansel and Gretel. The narrator is deducing that

320

the stepmother must have made the father abandon the children in the jungle.

(44)

ti-class

Junni ayannin

tanj ide

junni ayan=nin ta-n-ji-de

then mother=CNTR have-ST-go-IMP

tintida. ti-n-ti-da say-ST-SAY:VCL-DCL.GEN 'So the MOTHER must have told (him) to take (them).' {VLP.RLAPAK.6}

In the ra-class construction below (45), the mythical rainbow man is always going in and out of the hole in which he lives. He also always has a lot of guanta (a type of paca). The speaker deduces here that the guanta must come from the hole.

(45)

ra-class Jun forochi wale jun foro=chi wale 3D2 hole=LOC guanta tsonnada. tso-n-ra-da lie-ST-BE.POSITION.VCL-DCL.GEN 'There must have been a lot of guanta in the hole.' {AASUYUN.29}

And finally, the jo-class construction (46) comes from a conversation in which the speaker is asking the listener

321

to use his general knowledge to deduce the state of a woman's sanity.

(46)

jo-class Yari misu palan ti junjun? ya=ri misu pala-n ti jo-n-jo-n? 3P2=FOC head mix-ST what be-ST-BE:VCL-INT 'Could she be some kind of crazy (person)?' {JERAKUWENT3.49}

The suffix -n, as was seen in Chapter Three can be suffixed to a coverb or a simple/generic verb to form an adjective or noun. It also occurs with secondary predicates (47), which structurally, although not phonologically or semantically, resemble the evidential constructions.

(47)

Fudan tsolaratie-ti' fuda-n tso-la-ra-ti-e-ti-e hurt-ST lie-PL-BE.POSITION.VCL-RP-DCL-RP-DCL 'They say he said they lay there hurt.' {CCMANTSA.26}

In (47) above, there are two elements predicating on the subject, fudan 'hurt' and tso 'lie'. In the evidential construction discussed here the verb class marker does not add any new predication to the clause. In addition, unlike secondary predicates the nonfinite verb form and the verb class marker form a single phonological word, and the order

322

is strictly nonfinite verb-VCL, whereas in the secondary predicate construction the secondary predicate may be right-dislocated (48).

(48)

palu tominkoka topiyato palu tominko=ka to-piya-to two week=LOC earth-LOSE:GEN-SR

nenalarayoe nena-la-ra-yo-e go.around-PL-BE.POSIT:GEN-CNJ-DCL

titida

ano fitun.

ti-ti-da

ano fi-tu-n

say-RP-DCL.GEN food eat-NEG-ST

'They say he said they got lost and went around

for two weeks, without eating.' {RLAPAK.19}

2.2.4 -min-tsan 'Semblative'

The next construction is based on a clearly nominalized form. It consists of the suffix -min 'IMPERFECTIVE PARTICIPLE' followed by -tsan 'SEMBLATIVE' which can also occur on nominals and has the meaning of 'so' or 'like'. The following example (49) is taken from an on-line narration of the Chicken Story Video (Givon, 1991). A man holding a hoe is chasing a woman. It is not clear whether he really intends to hit her. Note that the English translation of this differs substantially from the Tsafiki.

323

In English there is a 'dummy' subject and the main clause contains a stative verb. The literal translation would be closer to 'He becomes like chasing her to hit her'. The English translation also has a much stronger sense of 'it's not actually happening' than the Tsafiki, i.e. 'It's as if he's chasing her to hit her (but actually he's not).' The sense in Tsafiki is neutral, i.e. 'It's as if he is chasing her to hit her (and he actually is)' or 'It's as if he is chasing her to hit her (but actually he's not)' It simply means the speaker has not yet assessed the true nature of the event.

(49)

i-class Kichun sutanjimintsan ki-chu-n su-ta-n-j i-min-tsan do-IRR-ST feet.up-have-ST-GO:GEN-IMPF.P-SMBL inae. i-na-e BECOME:VCL-PRG-DCL 'It's as if he's chasing her to hit her. {CHICOBAZ.42}

The next example (50) concerns a woman who has gone to bed with a being that she thinks is a handsome man. He is really a condor and while he appears to be tickling her, he

324

is actually eating her, which is made clear in the following clauses (not shown).

(50)

ki-class

Jo

mantiminnin

jaatsan achiba

jo

man=ti-min-nin

jaa-tsan achiba

condor again=say-IMPF.P-CNTR 3D2-SMBL tickle

pomintsannin

kinati'.

po-mintsan=nin

ki-na-ti-e

PUT:GEN-IMPF.P-SMBL=CNTR DO:VCL-PRG-RP-DCL

'They say that the condor in this way seemed to

be tickling her.' {MV.AASALUN.30-31}

In the next example (51) a group of bewitched blind men are being led down the mountain. There situation is rather hopeless. Hence their laughter is quite eery and could not be coming from a sense of true mirth.

(51)

ti-class Silibi chukarito sili=bi chu-kari-to rope=LOC grab-CAUSE:GEN-SR

mantanjanasanan

aman

man=ta-n-ja-na-sa-nan

aman

again=have-ST-go-PRG-DN-INCL now

kakarimintsanninla

tinatie'.

kakari-min-tsan=nin=la

ti-na-ti-e

laugh-IMPF.P-SMBL=CNTR=PL SAY:VCL-PRG-RP-DCL

'They say he said while he bringing them, making

them grab onto the rope, it was as if they were

just laughing.' {MV.TETOMINU2.50}

325

In (52) the narrator cannot recall exactly how many years she and her family lived in a certain community.

(52)

ra-class Nichi totiya mante wata ni=chi totiya mante wata what=LOC something five year

chumintsanla

rayoda.

chu-min-tsan=la ra-yo-da

sit-IMPF.P-SMBL=PL BE.POSITION:VCL-CNJ-DCL:GEN

'We lived in that place for like five years.'

{ETV.92}

In (53) the narrator is again watching the Chicken Story (Givon 1991) online. The scene in the video takes place in the Oregon countryside.

(53)

jo-class Junte jelen tsannin jomintsan jun=te jelen tsan=nin jo-min-tsan 3D1=L0C jungle SMBL=CNTR be-IMPF.P-SMBL joe. jo-e BE:AUX-DCL 'It is just like the jungle.' {AACHICO.116}

The semblative verb forms can also occur in subordinate clauses without the VCL. In (54), taken again from the on-line video story, the clause suffixed with tsan occurs as the complement of tenja 'imagine'.

326

(54)

Aman tikati nin karichinamintsan aman tikati nin kari-chi-na-min-tsan now something fire CAUSE:GEN-IRR-PRG-IMPF.P-SMBL tenjae. ten-ja-e think-COME:GEN-DCL 'Now I imagine that she's going to like start a fire.' {AACHICO.57}

The next clause (55) is subordinate and begins a series of clauses describing the behavior of a dung beetle that has taken human form, deceiving a Tsachi woman. Later, in the story, it will become clear that he actually is rolling in feces.

(55)

Junni yari pebi junni ya=ri pe=bi then 3P2=FOC feces=LOC

ilanpolemintsan,

peka...

ilan-pole-min-tsan

pe-ka

roll-GO.ACROSS:GEN-IMPF.P-SMBL feces-NCL

'Then as if rolling in feces, feces....'

{MOLEN.28}

2.2.5 -ka: Augmentive

The next construction, consists of a predicate suffixed with -ka: 'AUGMENTATIVE', followed by the appropriate verb class marker. When -ka: 'AUGMENTATIVE' is the final suffix on the predicate the vowel carries primary

327

stress and is elongated. The construction intensifies the process coded by the predicate. This varies depending on the semantics of the predicate. In the i-class construction below (56), a man has just escaped from inside a whale. The augmentative construction intensifies the speed of his emergence manloka: and flight mansujaka:.

(56)

Foro kesi

ina

manloka:,

foro ki-si

ina

man=lo-ka:

hole DO:GEN-IMM immediately again=go.out-AOG

manlodi

manlodi

man=lo-di

man=lo-di

again=go.out-PUN again=go.out-PUN

ina

mansujaka:

ina

man=su-ja-k£:

immediately again=feet.in.air-COME:GEN-RUG

ina

mansujaka:

ina

man=su-ja-k£:

immediately again=feet.in.air-COME:GEN-AUG

inayotie. i-na-yo-ti-e BECOME:VCL-PRG-CNJ-RP-DCL 'As soon as he made a hole he really jumped out (fast), when he got out again, when he got out again, immediately really running back (fast), he immediately really came running back (fast).' {VLP.DADAPOMIN.33}

328

The next example (57) illustrates the augmentative with a ki-class predicate, In this case the augmentative refers to the large amount of fish that was eaten.

(57)

Pitato pita-to smoke-SR fik&: kilakinayotietie. fi-ka: ki-la-ki-na-yo-ti-e-ti-e eat-AUG DO:VCL-PL-DO:VCL-PRG-CNJ-RP-DCL-RP-DCL 'He smoked it and really ate (a whole lot of fish).' {CCTSONPIPI 388-389}

In the ti-class construction below (58) the augmentative is an intensifier of the act of crying.

(58)

Junni junchi tamochi man na junni jun=chi tamo=chi man na then 3D1=L0C wall=LOC one child wareka: tinamantie. ware-kct: ti-na-man=ti-e cry-AUG say:VCL-PRG-SIT-RP-DCL 'Then there, inside the room a child was really crying.' {MV.AASUYUN.82}

The ra-class construction below (59), is similar to (57) in that it intensifies the amount of smoked shad had by the protagonist.

329

(59)

Nata pitaka

taka:

nata pita-ka ta-kct:

shad smoke-PF.P have-ADG

ratieti'. ra-ti-e-ti-e BE.POSITION:GEN-RP-DCL-RP-DCL 'He really had (a lot of) smoked shad' {CCTSONPIPI.418}

Finally, in the jo-class construction below (60), the augmentative intensifies the degree of pain arising from a sore throat.

(60)

Kudante fuda joka:

joman'

kudan=te fuda jo-ka:

j o-man=e

throat=LOC pain BE:GEN-AUG BE:VCL-SIT-DCL

'S/he really hurt in the throat.' {ICMATU8.52}

As shown in (56) above, a predicate suffixed with the augmentative can occur as a subordinate clause.
The augmentative can also appear in a slightly different construction. In (61-64) -ka-chi3 occurs in a finite clause with a verb class marker. As with the -ka augmentative suffix, -ka-chi intensifies either the action or the amount of the object, depending on the valency and semantics of the verb.
3 The source of the -chi and its relationship to the other -chi suffixes, (dative/location and instrumental) is unknown.

330

(61) (62) (63)
(64)

i 'become' class Yari kupara ikachinan ya=ri kupara i-ka-chi=nan 3P2=FOC fever BECOME: GEN-AUG-AtJG=INCL

iman'. i-man=e BECOME:VCL-SIT-D 'He got a really high fever.' {JAKURU5.1564}

ki 'do' class

Luban

kirakachinan

lu-ba-n

kira-ka-chi=nan

red-QUAL-ST see-AUG-AUG-INCL

kinayoeke. ki-na-yo-e-ke DO:VCL-PRG-CNJ-DCL-QT '(She said) she was really menstruating a lot (LIT: 'She really saw red.') {TSAB01.223}

ti 'say' class

Junsiri

paito

jun-si-ri pa-i-to

3D1-GRAD-F0C angry-BECOME:GEN-SR

atikachinan a-ti-ka-chi=nan scream-SAY:GEN-AUG-AUG=INCL

tilatinutieti'. ti-la-ti-nu-ti-e-ti-e SAY:VCL-PL-SAY:VCL-EV-RP-DCL-RP-DCL 'They say he said at this, getting angry they were really screaming a lot.' {CCANKU3.98}

jo 'be' class

Wari lu jok&chinan

joe

titun.

wari lu jo-ka-chi=nan jo-e

ti-tu-n

well red BE:GEN-AUG-AUG BE:VCL-DCL say-NEG-INT

'Didn't they say he was really embarrassed?'

{JERAKUWENTA1A.165}

331

The nonfinite augmentative form can also occur as a subordinate clause without the VCL as in (65) and (66).

(65)

Mololo jakachinan, mololo j a-ka-chi=nan firefly come-AUG-AUG-INCL

(66)

mololo jak£chinan mololo ja-ka-chi=nan firefly come-AUG-AUG=INCL

ninbi futu nin=bi futu fire=LOC dense

inainati'. i-na-i-na-ti-e BECOME:GEN-PRG-BECOME:GEN-PRG-RP-DCL 'More and more fireflies were coming, more and more were coming and swarming into the fire. {MV.AAPALUKA.44-45}

Jera punpu fikorochi

ma

ika

jera punpu fikoro=chi ma

i-ka

all butterfly mouth=LOC in.mouth BECOME:GEN-PF.P

jomanti',

katsokachinan.

jo-man=ti-e

katso-k&-chi=nan

BE:AUX-SIT-RP-DCL sleep-AUG-AUG=INCL

'All the butterflies entered into his mouth, he was

sleeping so soundly.' {MV.AASALUN.106-107}

Again, the augmentative construction cannot, by itself, be directly marked for evidential, mirative and mood distinctions.

332
2.2.6 -yo 'Attemptive' Construction
The final construction is somewhat rare in the texts. It has only been found in the speech of older speakers and not all the younger speakers recognize the construction. The -yo 'attemptive' construction follows the familiar pattern—a predicate suffixed by -yo, followed by a verb class marker. The construction indicates that the protagonist tries but does not succeed in accomplishing his task. Note the structure of the English translations for the five examples below, differ substantially from the Tsafiki. In English 'try' is the main verb. This is not so in Tsafiki and a more literal but decidedly awkward translation for (67) would be 'they say some of the woman became attempt-running to tell them'. Example (68) concerns a battle between the Tsachila and the Dobe, in which the Tsachil initially were loosing ground. In (69) a woman is trying to warn her husband of an impending disaster, but he doesn't listen.

333

(67) (68) (69)

i 'become' class

Man weyan sonalari

mera kuwabi

man weyan sona=la=ri mera kuwa-bi

one other woman=PL=FOC hear GIVE:GEN-PURP

sujiyola su-ji-yo-la feet.in.air-GO:GEN-ATT-PL

inutieti'. i-nu-ti-e-ti-e BECOME:VCL-EV-RP-DCL-RP-DCL 'They say she said some of the other women tried to run to tell them.' {ANKULU.246}

ki 'do' class

Junni laya ito

kinin

junni laya i-to

ki-nin

then gather BECOME:GEN-SR hit-CNTR

keyo

kilakinatieti'.

ke-yo

ki-la-ki-na-ti-e-ti-e

DO:VCL-ATT DO:VCL-PL-DO:VCL-PRG-RP-DCL-RP-DCL

'Then they say he said gathering together they

just tried to fight.' {CCDOBE.39}

ti 'say' class Jun sonari tsantiyo j un sona=ri tsan=ti-yo 3D1 woman=FOC SMBL=say-ATT

tieti'. ti-e-ti-e SAY:VCL-DCL-RP-DCL 'They say the woman tried to tell him.' {VLP.WILINKI2A.110}

Examples of this construction with the ra-class and jo-class were not found in the texts. However, given the

334

right context, examples were easy to elicit from older speakers, (70) and (71).

(70)

ra 'be in a position' class

a. Zavala wirurayo

rae.

Zavala wiru-ra-yo

ra-e

Zavala stand BE.POSIT:GEN-ATT BE.POSIT.VCL-DCL

Zavala tried to stand.'

b. Juntonan winan joto

juntonan winan jo-to

but

drunk BE:GEN-SR

keeraie. ke-ere-a-i-e throw-send-RV-BECOME.GEN-DCL 'But being drunk he fell down.'

(71)

jo 'be' class

a. Zavala sen

joyo joe.

Zavala se-n jo-yo jo-e

Zavala good-ST be-ATT BE:VCL-DCL

'Zavala tries to be good.'

b. Juntonan yukan joto podeitue.

juntonan yuka-n jo-to pode-i-tu-e

but

evil-ST be-SR be.able-BECOME.GEN-NEG-DCL

'But being a devil he can't do it.'

As subordinate clauses, these constructions, have only been found to occur with the verb class marker and are subordinated (72) or nominalized (73) by the same set of morphemes as a complex predicate or simple verb.

335

(72) (73)

Keyo kinasanan ke-yo ki-na-sa-nan hit-ATT DO:VCL-PRG-DN-INCL

numa toteminla numa to-te-min-la already kill-CAUSE:SUF-IMPF.P-PL

jotieti'. jo-ti-e-ti-e BE:AUX-RP-DCL-RP-DCL 'They say he said they (the Tsachila) were trying to fight but they (the Dobe) were killing them.' {CCDOBE.40}

Mansujayo

inamin

man=su-j a-yo

i-na-min

again=feet.in.air-come-ATT BECOME:VCL-PRG-IMPF.P

jera piyakala

jotieti'.

jera piya-ka=la jo-ti-e-ti-e

all die-PF.P=PL BE:AUX-RP-DCL-RP-DCL

'They say he said the ones who were trying to run

back all died.' {CCSONPURA.105}

2.3 Verb Class Markers as Referential Devices

The verb class markers in the five constructions discussed above form a tight bond with the verb they classify. The verb and the VCL occur juxtaposed with no intervening material and in two cases, the plural construction and the evidential, the VCL occurs as a suffix. In contrast, when the VCL is functioning as a referring element or proverb, it can refer to a predicate

336
coding an event outside the clause in which the VCL occurs. The VCLs can occur as proverbs either in the main clause or in a subordinate clause and can refer both anaphorically and cataphorically to another verb. They, in turn, can refer to a predicate occurring in a main clause, a subordinate clause or even either the auxiliary OR participle in an auxiliary construction. As will be briefly described below, the proverbs in concordance with switch reference markers and the evidential/mirative markers can be used to track reference. An area of further research on VCLs functioning as proverbs is their role in discourse. They appear to be used as backgrounding and foregrounding devices, but a full study remains to be done.
The existence of a predicate that can be generally used to refer to another, more specified event is not unusual. In English the most prominent is 'do', i.e. 'He did it.' 'Did he do it?'. But note that 'do' can refer to just about any type of active verb regardless of valency, or perfective/imperfective aspect, as in 'He did it' used to mean 'He went'. Tsafiki is discriminating in which VCL can be used with which verb, and as will be shown below, the proverb can easily take referring objects, as well as

337
oblique phrases in circumstances in which this does not occur with the proverb 'do' in English.
The verb class markers functioning as proverbs often occur prefixed with the ubiquitous tsan= 'SEMBLATIVE'. In the following sentence, a young girl has been sent to the river to fetch water. She returns without the water claiming that she is afraid because there is a strange man standing there. Her mother goes to the river, sees nothing and returns believing that her daughter is simply lazy. Tsanhinae, the complement of the speech verb in both (74b) and (74c.) refers to the main clause manjanin inan 'came back again' in (74a). Note that the translation of this into English is problematic in that the pi itonsiri 'without water' is a secondary predicate subordinated to the proverb, resulting in the literal translation 'she was becoming without water' which is decidedly awkward in English, or 'she did it without water', which is acceptable but with a different reading, i.e. it has the connotation that she did something which normally requires water, 'washing' for example, without water (using a dry wipe). In Tsafiki however, the VCL i 'become' clearly refers to the

338

motion event and is often translated into Spanish with the appropriate motion verb.

(74)

i-class

a. Junni yari wari, pi iton,

junni ya=ri wari pi ito-n

then 3D2=FOC well water not.be-ST

manjanm

man.

man=j a-nin

i-na-n

again=come-CNTR BECOME:VCL-PRG-ST

'Then she just came back again without water.'

{MV.AA.SUYUN.10-11}

b. Wari, mannan

pi itonsiri

wari man=nan pi ito-n=si=ri

well again=INCL water not.be-ST=GRAD=FOC

lanchi

tsanhinae

lan=chi tsan=i-na-e

lazy=INSTR SMBL=BECOME:VCL-PRG-DCL

timantie,

wari ayanri.

ti-man=ti-e wari ayan=ri

say-SIT-RP-DCL well mother=F0C

'They say the mother said that it was because of

laziness she was (coming back) without water.'

{MV.AA.SUYUN.12-14}

c. Lanchi

tsanhinae

tito

lan=chi tsan=i-na-e

ti-to

lazy=INSTR SMBL=BECOME:VCL-PRG-DCL say-SR

asota kito

sueremantie,

asota ki-to

su-ere-man=ti-e

whip DO:GEN-SR feet.in.air-SEND:GEN-SIT-RP-DCL

pi kabi jinin ide pi ka-bi ji-nin i-de water get-LOC go-CNTR BECOME:VCL-IMP

tito. ti-to say-SR 'They say saying she (the daughter) was doing this out of laziness she (the mother) whipped her and sent her running saying, "Just go get the water!'" {MV.AA.SUYUN.14-18}

The next example (75) concerns a mother who has returned from the dead to care for her children. The verb in the main clause of (75b), tsankinatie, refers to the coverb in the purpose clause ilichun 'to mash' in (75a).

(75)

Jci-class

a. Junbi ilichun

chudinin

jun=bi ili-chu-n chu-di-nin

3D1=L0C mash-IRR-ST sit-INCH:SUF-CNTR

itieti'. i-ti-e-ti-e BECOME:VCL-HS-DCL-HS-DCL 'They say he said she just sat down there to mash (platano).'

340

b. Numa, junsi

tsankinatie.

numa jo-n-si tsan=ki-na-ti-e

already be-ST-GRAD SMBL=D0:GEN-PRG-HS-DCL

'They say she was already just doing it (mashing

the platano).' {CCSONAPI.69}

In the following, ki-class example two men have unearthed the body of a dead woman. They are frightened because, although she has been dead for over a year, she shows no signs of decomposition. They quickly rebury the body. The verb class marker in the subordinate clause, tsankide (77b) refers to the reburying of the body coded by the main clause mankepolakiyoe in (76a)

(76)

fri-class

a. Junni ten jatusa

to=ka

fo fo

junni ten ja-tu-sa

to=ka

fo fo

then heart COME:GEN-NEG-DN earth=ACC IDEO IDEO

mankepolakiyoe man=ke-po-la-ki-yo-e again=hit-PUT:GEN-PL-DO:VCL-CNJ-DCL

titie. ti-ti-e say-RP-DCL 'Then he said without thinking they threw the dirt back in, plop! plop!' {AAMALI.127}

341

b. tsankide

mannan manjato

tsan=ki-de

mannan man=ja-to

SMBL=DO:VCL-ASSOC.MOT again again=come-SR

polelaimantie pole-la-i-man=ti-e go.across-PL-BECOME:VCL-SIT-RP-DCL 'They say doing this they came back again.' {AAMALI.128}

In (77) a detached head is jlamping around trying to bite the unfortunate protagonist. The subordinate clause tsanhinasanan in (77b) refers to the event coded by sulonin inatie, the main clause in (77a). Tsanhinasanan is marked with the different reference marker -sa and the inclusive nan to indicate that the action the conjunction refers to is performed by a different actor than in the main verb.

(77)

i-class

a. Jalichun sulonin

jali-chu-n su-lo-nin

bite-IRR-ST feet.in.air-GO.UP:GEN-CNTR

inatie. i-na-ti-e BECOME:VCL-PRG-RP-DCL 'They say it (the head) was just jumping around to bite him.' {AAPALUKA.163}

342

b. Wari tsanhinasanan

aman,

wari tsan=i-na-sa-nan

aman

well SMBL=BECOME:VCL-PRG-DN-INCL now

manjayotie. man=ja-yo-ti-e again=come-CNJ-RP-DCL 'Now while it was doing this, he said he returned.'

In the next, ra-class example, the subordinate clause tsanraminnan (78b) refers to the complement of the speech verb chuyoe 'he sat' in (78a).

(78)

ra-class

a. Tenka

kato chuyoe

titi'

ten-ka ka-to chu-yo-e ti-ti-e

heart-NCL get-SR sit-CNJ-DCL say-RP-DCL

'They say he said he sat there thinking'

{MV.AAPALUKA.74-76}

b. Yanan tsanraminnan ya=nan tsan=ra—min—nan 3P2=INCL SMBL=BE.POSITION:GEN-IMPF.P-INCL

tsodiyoe

titi',

tso-di-yo-e

ti-ti-e

lie-INCH:SUF-CNJ-DCL say-RP-DCL

katsochun. katso-chu-n sleep-IRR-ST 'They say he said that the one who was (sitting) there himself lay down, to sleep.' (MV.AAPALUKA.77-78}

343

The verb class marker often refers to a predicate several clauses removed from the referring clause. Rachi 'to stand' in (79d), occurs five clauses removed from the participle, wiruramin 'be standing', it refers to in (80a). Note that ra 'be in a position' can only occur as a simple verb when it refers to fruit hanging on a branch or vine. It can only be used with humans, animals or other inanimates when modified by a positional coverb such as wiru 'stand'. However, as a proverb, ra can be used with a human participant if it references a complex predicate containing the expected positional coverb.
This example comes from the story of the rainbow man. He is dangerous to humans, who must not touch him lest they be burned.

(79)

ra-class

a. Ya dechiri

wiruramin

ya de=chi=ri

wiru-ra-min

3P2 border=LOC=FOC stand-BE.POSITION:GEN-IMPF.P

jotieti'. jo-ti-e-ti-e BE:AUX-HS-DCL-HS-DCL 'They say he said he was standing at the edge (of the patio).' {CCSUYUN.101}

344

b. Junni ya, jade

tito,

junni ya ja-de ti-to

then 3P2 come-IMP say-SR

chutechila

tinutie

chu-te-chi-la

ti-nu-ti-e

sit-CAUSE:SUF-INGR-PL say-EV-RP-DCL

tsachilari. tsachi=la=ri people=PL=FOC 'They said saying "Come on" the people wanted to sit him down (with them).' {CCSUYUN.102-105}

c. Jun jatuchi

tinutieti'.

jun ja-tu-chi

ti-nu-ti-e-ti-e

3D1 come-NEG-INGR say-EV-HS-DCL-HS-DCL

'They say he said he said he didn't want to

come.' {CCSUYUN.106}

d. Yari loba

tanyoe

ya=ri lo-ba ta-n-yo-e

3D2=FOC hot-QUAL have-ST-CNGR-DCL

loba

tan

tsachiyoe.

lo-ba ta-n tsachi-yo-e

hot-QUAL have-ST person-CNGR-DCL

Junteri

rachi

tinayoe

jun=te=ri ra-chi

ti-na-yo-e

3Dl=LOC=FOC BE.POSIT:VCL-INGR say-CNGR-DCL

tinatieti'. ti-na-ti-e-ti-e say-PRG-HS-DCL-HS-DCL 'They say he said "I want be (standing) here, I am very hot. I am a very hot man."' {CCSUYUN.107109}

The referential function of the VCL proverb can be fairly complicated with both the VCL and same or different

345
reference markers contributing to the reading of the referring clause. These markers, along with the mirative and evidential suffixes, are the primary means for tracking reference in Tsafiki. In (80a), tsanhinanunka refers to the subordinate clause futu inasanan 'while they were swarming' which occurs in sentence initial position. Tsanhinunka is nominalized with -nun and is the complement of the cognition verb tenhiyoti' 'he thought'. In (80c), the subordinate clause tsanhinasanan can refer to either tenhiyoti' 'he thought', the main clause of the previous sentence (80b) or to futu inasanan 'they were swarming in (80a). Speakers tell me it can refer to both and can be translated as 'while this was happening'. It is marked with the switch reference marker -sa to indicate that it has a different nominative argument than the following ra-class verb, tsoti' 'he slept.' The subordinate clause tsanhinaminnan in (80d) could again refer to either tenhiyoti' 'he thought' in (80b) or futu inasanan 'while they were swarming in (80a). However, the verb is nominalized and suffixed with -nan 'INCL' which in this case indicates that it has the same nominative argument as the following verb. The nominative argument of this verb

346

janati' 'were coming' is the fireflies, hence tsaninaminnan (80d) refers to futu inasanan 'while they were swarming' (80a). Finally in (80e) tsannasanan refers to the main clause tsoti' 'He lay' in (80c). I have provided subscript letters to facilitate the reading of these examples.

(80) a. Ninbi futu inasanan

warin

nin=bi futu i-na-sa=nanj

wari-n

fire=LOC mass BECOME:GEN-PRG-DN=INCL well-ST

aman tenhiyoti' aman ten-i-yo-ti-e now heart-BECOME:GEN-CNJ-RP-DCL

niyaito

tsanhinanunka.

niya-i-to

tsan=i-na-nun=kai

how-BECOME:VCL-SR SMBL=BECOME:VCL-PRG-OBL=ACC

'While they were swarming in the fire they say he

thought about why this was happening (why they

were swarming in the fire).' {MV.AAPALUKA.85-88}

b. Seiton

kenan janaeke

se-ito-n

ke-nan ja-na-e=ke

good-NOT.BE:GEN-ST do-INCL come-PRG-DCL=QT

wari, tenhiyoti'

wari.

wari ten-i-yo-ti-e-j

wari

well heart-BECOME:GEN-CNJ-RP-DCL well

'They say he thought they were coming to do

wrong.' {MV.AAPALUKA.89-91}

347

c. Wari tsanhinasanan, wari tsan=i-na-sa=narti.i well SMBL=BECOME:VCL-PRG-DN=INCL

wari innin katson tsoti*

wari.

wari in-nin katso-n tso-ti-e wari

well 3-CNTR sleep-ST lie-RP-DCL well

'He said that while all this was happening, he

(the son-in-law) lay sleeping.' {MV.AAPALUKA.92-

93)

d. Wari aman tsanhinaminnan wari aman tsan=i-na-min=nanj well now do=BECOME:VLC-PRG-IMPF.P=INCL

jele jelen amalila janati' jele jele-n amali=la ja-na-ti-e fear fear-ST very=PL come-PRG-ST-DCL

wa mololo amalila tsan jele jelen tsan. wa mololo amali=la tsan jele jele-n tsan big firefly very=PL so fear fear-ST so 'Well now he said as they were swarming, great big ones were coming, really big fireflies, enormous ones.' {MV.AAPALUKA.94-9 6}

e. Tsannasanan

aman,

tsan=ra-sa=nanic

aman

SMBL=BE.POSITION:VCL-DN-INCL now

tsannasanan

aman jeen,

wan

tsan=ra-sa=nanic

now PRO:EMPH wari

SMBL=BE.POSITion:VCL-DN-INCL now EMPH,

well

kirasanan jati'. kira-sa=nan ja-ti-e see-DN=INCL come-RP-DCL 'They say now while he (the son-i:n-law was sleeping, while he was sleeping and while he (the father-in-law) was looking it came.' {MV.AAPALUKA.97-98}

348

The verb class markers can also be used cataphorically to refer to an event that is usually coded by a verb in the following clause. The VCL usually occurs with ora 'good'. The construction is used for dramatic effect much like English 'Then he did it. He stole the money/just left.'
Example (81) comes from the firefly story. Here, a huge firefly swoops down from the sky and snips off the son-in-law's head. The story has been building towards this climax and the cataphoric construction is used for dramatic effect. Note that the VCL occurs with a real object that renders an awkward translation in English.

(81) a. Juntele

patisi

wari

jun=te=le pati-si

wari

3D1=L0C=L0C go.down-IMM WELL

kudan silika orakimantie. kudan sili=ka ora-ki-man=ti-e neck NCL=ACC good-DO:VCL-SIT-RP-DCL 'They say it (the firefly) went down there and immediately let him have it on the neck.' (LIT:'...did his neck good.' {MV.AAPALUKA.124}

b. Butunle

ka-man=ti-e.

butun-le

ka-man=ti-e

snip-CAUSE:SUF get-SIT-RP-DCL

'They say it snipped off (his head).'

{MV.AAPALUKA.125}

349

The following i-class example (82) occurs in a story where a nutria befriends a man. The man has gone to the jungle to die when suddenly the nutria, in human form, appears. The nutria is a main character in the story and has a pivotal role in saving the man's life. Note that once again the referring phrase contains an instrumental phrase kanowachi 'with/by means of a canoe' although the clause itself does not contain a motion verb.

(82) a. Lake kanowachi tsachi lake kanowa=chi tsachi yellow canoe=INSTR person

orainin

inutieti.'

ora-i-nin

i-nu-ti-e-ti-e

good-BECOME:VCL-CNTR BECOME:VCL-EV-RP-DCL-RP-DCL

'Then they say he said a person (arrived) by

means of a yellow canoe.' {CCTSONPIPI.305}

b. Pelechi nechi pele=chi ne=chi below=L0C foot=L0C

lananutieti'. la-na-nu-ti-e-ti-e arrive.here-PRG-EV-RP-DCL-RP-DCL 'They say he said he arrived from downriver.' {CCTSONPIPI.306}

The next example concerns a personal narrative about hunting wild pigs. They have been walking for some time,

350
without sighting any wild pigs when suddenly they hear them scream (83).
(83) a. Aman junbi oratinin aman jun=bi ora-ti-nin now 3D1=L0C good-say:VCL-CNTR ti'. ti-e say:VCL-DCL 'Then there they did it.' {AAMEDI2.30}
b. Wau:: ati'. wau:: a-ti-e IDEO scream-say:GEN-DCL 'They screamed "wau::"' {AAMEDI2.31}
The ra-class construction below, concerns a young woman who has been ordered by the star woman to carry food to her brothers, the condors. The young woman has been warned to simply leave the food and return, she is not to investigate anything she hears or finds on the condors' land. She is disobedient and goes to look and finds a group of animals. In (84a) oran rae 'they were there' refers to chue 'were sitting' in (84b).
(84) a. Junbi aman dekeloka jun=bi aman de-kelo=ka 3D1=L0C now border-close=LOC oran rae ora-n ra-e qood-ST BE.POSITION:VCL-DCL

351

titida. ti-ti-da say-RP-DCL.GEN 'They say he said now close to the edge (of the finca) there they were.' {Malilib 48}

b. Itsan waka

pelela itsante aman

in=tsan wa-ka

pele=la in=tsan=te aman

3Pl=so plant-PF.P trunk=PL 3Pl=so=L0C now

ti animali nalala

tiya chue

ti animali na=la=la tiya chu-e

what many child=PL=PL kind sit-DCL

titida. ti-ti-da say-RP-DCL:GEN 'They say she said where they had planted trees, all kinds of little animals were sitting.' {Malilib 49}

As mentioned above the VCL can refer to either the participle or the auxiliary in auxiliary constructions depending on which aspect of the event the speaker chooses to profile. In (85) below, taken from the same nutria story as (82) above, the man has returned to his home but continues to meet with the nutria who brings him fish. Here I have translated ora jotieti' (85a) as 'It was a sure thing.' It refers to the auxiliary joyotieti', which occurs with the imperfective participle tulaimin to render 'was always encountering' in (85b). What is being emphasized

352

here is the habitual nature of the action. This is particularly important in that later, this habitual pattern will be disrupted by the man's violation of the contract he has made with the nutria.

(85) a. Pibi

jinasa orajotieti'.

pi=bi . ji-na-sa ora-j o-ti-e-ti-e

water=LOC go-PRG-DN good-BE:VCL-RP-DCL-RP-DCL

'They say he said when he went to the river it

was a sure thing (LIT:it was good).'

{CCTSONPIPI.394}

b. Tulale

tulale

tulale

tula-le

tula-le

tula-le

unite-CAUSE:SUF unite-CAUSE:SUF unite-CAUSE:SUF

tulaimin

joyotieti'

tula-i-min

j o-yo-ti-e-ti-e

unite-BECOME:GEN-IMPF.P BE:AUX-CNJ-RP-DCL-RP-DCL

yari, jun biyaali tsachika. ya=ri jun biyaali tsachi=ka 3P2=FOC 3D1 nutria tsachi=ACC 'They say he said, meeting, meeting, meeting, he would meet with the nutria man.' {CCTSONPIPI.395}

In (85) above the VCL refers to jo, the auxiliary, rather than the imperfective participle tulaimin 'meet'. But the VCL can refer to the participle verb form rather than the auxiliary. In (86) below orakinin kinutietif 'had already done it' refers to the perfective participle, tulipuka 'had pushed', rather than the auxiliary jo. The

353

story concerns a jealous frog woman who pushes her rival, the clay woman into the river where she dissolves. In (87a) the emphasis is on the action whereas in (86b) the emphasis is on the final result.

(86) a. Numa orakinin

kinutieti'.

numa ora-ki-nin

ki-nu-ti-e-ti-e

already good-DO:VCL-CNTR DO:VCL-EV-RP-DCL-RP-DCL

'Then she had already done it.' {CCTSONPIPI.202}

b. Tulipuka

jun

pibi.

tuli-pu-ka

jo-n

pi=bi

push-PUT:GEN-PF BE:AUX-ST water=LOC

'She had pushed her in the water.'

{CCTSONPIPI.203}

In the next example ora ie in (87a.) refers to the resultative clause pititaluuu jera ikari 'until (she) was in pieces' in (87b.)

(87) a. Jun payilabinan oraie jun payila=bi=nan ora-i-e 3D1 pot=LOC=INCL good-BECOME:VCL-DCL

titida. ti-ti-da say-RP-GEN.DCL 'Then they say he said it happened in the very same pot.' {VLP.RLAPAK.87}

b. Pititaluuu

jera ikari

piti=talu

jera i-kari

piece=concentration all BECOME:GEN-CAUSE:RESULT

asuwalakiyoe

354

a-suwa-la-ki-yo-e cook-CAUSE.BECOME:GEN-PL-DO:VCL-CNGR-DCL titida. ti-ti-da say-RP-DCL:GEN 'They say he said they cooked her to pieces.' {VLP.RLAPAK.88} The verb class markers also occur with the question word niya 'how'. Niya can be nominalized with the stative nominalizer -n to occur as a question word with nouns, generally with the meaning of 'how many?' The following examples concern a question about how many days one would usually take to hunt wild pigs (88) and how many couples the priest would marry when he came down from Quito once every couple years in the old days (89).

(88) (89)

Niyan maka, kiminla

jonan?

niya-n ma=ka ki-min=la

jo-na-n

how-ST day=LOC DO:VCL-IMPF.P=PL BE:AUX-PRG-INT

'How many days would you do this (go hunting)?'

{JAKURU.65}

Junni pansile Patele manne manne. junni pansile Patele man=ne man=ne then maybe priest one-NCL one-NCL

jakate

niyanka, pareja

ja-ka-te niya-n-ka, pareja

come-PF-LOC how-ST-NCL pair

tsankasalailainin? tsan=kasala-i-la-i-n-i-n

355

SMBL=marry-BECOME:GEN-PL-BECOME:VCL-STBECOME:VCL-INT 'When the priest came down a single time, how many couples would marry?' {MATU1.23}

When niya occurs with a verb class marker it most often carries the sense of how or why something happens or occurs. It can occur with a verb coding the same action to which the question phrase refers (90). The narrator is questioning how or why red demons come to be.

(90)

i-class

Niya ito

puyaka menaka

niya i-to

puya-ka mena-ka

how BECOME:VCL-SR die-PF bury-PF

itonbiri

luban

oko

ito-n-bi-ri

lu-ba-n

oko

NOT.BE:AUX-ST-LOC-FOC red-QUAL-ST spirit

lolaiman

j unhun

lo-la-i-man

jo-n-jo-n

go.up-PL-BECOME:VCL-SIT BE:AUX-ST-BE:VCL-INT

'How do the red demons come from the unburied

dead?' {VLP.LUBAN.0K02.23}

In the next example niyaito 'how did (you) get up there' does not refer to another clause but rather concerns how a man ended up stuck in a giant tree. Salun, a mythical character, calls out to the man in the tree from below. The VCL i 'become' in niyaito, refers to an i-class motion verb

356

that is not present in this stretch of the narration. The predicate coding the event of going up the tree occurred fifty-six clauses before (91). Note that tsanrayunke refers to chu 'sit', present in the previous clause (not shown).

(91)

i-class Junni niyaito junni niya-i-to then how-BECOME:VCL-SR

tsanrayunke? tsan=ra-yo-n-ke SMBL=BE.POSITION:VCL-CNJ-INT-QT

otimantie,

tobi

nechi.

o-ti-man=ti-e

to=bi

ne=chi

call-say:GEN-SIT-RP-DCL earth=LOC foot=LOC

'Then they say he called from below, "How did you

get up there?"' {MV.AASALUN.214-215}

The next clause also concerns a man stuck in a tree. This time he cannot descend because of a detached head that is jumping around trying to bite him. Here is trying to reclaim a blanket that is lying on the ground. Niyakito refers to the fci-class verb ka 'get' in kano 'to get' present in the same clause.

357

(92)

ki-class

Aman ayunananchi

tse=bi aman

aman ayuna=nan=chi

tse=bi aman

now tomorrow=INCL=LOC light=LOC now

niyakito

jali kano joinke

niya-ki-to jali ka-no jo-i-n-ke

how-DO:VCL-SR blanket get-INF BE:AUX-DISJ-QT

'Now the next day at dawn (he thought) 'How am I

going to get the blanket?"' {MV.AAPALUKA.149}

Niya often occurs simply suffixed with -ke 'do' to inquire about the manner in which something was done (93).

(93)

Jri-class

Niyake

menalakimantin?

niya-ke mena-la-ki-man=ti-n

how-DO:VCL bury-PL-DO:VCL-SIT-RP-INT

'How did they say they buried the dead?

{VLP.ECPONE.12}

The next example, concerning a ti-class verb comes from a text in which a woman has discovered that a red demon has taken the form of her husband. She is whispering to her children, telling them to leave the house when the red demon overhears her.

(94)

ti-class Junni aman yari niyatiyun junni aman ya=ri niya-ti-yo-n then now 3P2=FOC how-say:VCL-CNJ-INT

tinuda ti-nu-da

ya ilusun luban ya ilusun lu-ba-n

oko. oko

358

say-EV-DCL:GEN 3 spirit red-QUAL-ST spirit 'Then the red demon said, "Why are you talking?"' {VLP.ILUSUN.50}
Niyajonan 'Why is it' in (95) questions the situation. A group of hunters had left for the day leaving behind a companion who was to prepare the smoking racks and campsite for their return. He is bewitched and instead does nothing.

(95)

jo-class

Niyajonan

nuri te

kitiyun?

niya-jo-nan

nu=ri te

ki-ti-yo-n

how-BE:VCL-INCL 2=F0C firewood do-NEG-CNJ-INT

'Why is it that you didn't gather firewood?'

{KAWERE2.41}

While niya occurs the most frequently with i 'beome' and ki 'do', and somewhat less frequently with jo 'be' and ti 'say', it is rare with ra 'be.position'. However examples with ra 'be.position' are easy to elicit (96).

(96)

ra-class Nu ayuna nunchi niyarano nu ayuna nun=chi niya-ra-no 2 tomorrow which=LOC how-BE.POSITION:VCL-INF joyun? jo-yo-n BE:AUX-CNJ-INT 'Where do you have to be tomorrow?'

359
2.4 Discussion
As shown above the verbs that occur with the verb class markers are nonfinite forms. My contention here is that as nonfinte forms the verbs have lost the ability to evoke a schematic event structure. The function of the verb class marker is to provide a skeletal framework to 'reactivate' the schematic event structure the verb would have were it not in a nonfinite form. As has been shown by numerous examples this system is semantically based. The semantics of the nonfinite verb form and the verb class marker must be compatible. In particular, the initating point for the verb class marker and the initiating point for the verb must be the same. For example, the initiating point for a monovalent verb coding a change of state or location is with the undergoer that consequently receives nominative case-marking. The initiating point for a monovalent activity, causative or speech/expression verb begins with the actor, coded by nominative case-marking. These initating points correlate with the initiating points for the VCL's (Figure Fourteenen). Because the profile of the nonfinite verb is more specific than the schematic

360

profile of the VCL it appears to be "swallowed up (Langacker 1991b) by the nonfinite verb.

CAUSE
t
IP here Activity/Causative Actor =NOM £i-class ti-class

> ACT

> STATE

t

IP here Change of State/Location Undergoe r=N0M i-class

Figure Fourteen: Initiating Point and coding of nominative with active verbs

The two stative VCL's are similar in that they specify a schematic stative profile for the stative verb that is in nonfinite form. The entity located in space or attributed with a quality, property or a class membership receives nominative case-marking.
This process is recursive, resulting in the concordial type constructions in which the VCLs appear to be redundant.
Once the schematic profile of the VCL is associated with the profile of a specific verb, it follows that the VCL can then refer to the more specific profile of the verb, resulting in the referring, proverb functions of the VCL.

361
In the next section, we will examine, the auxiliaries whose profiles do not necessarily correlate with the profile of the nonfinite verb. Here it will be shown that the schematic event profile proved by the verb class marker has a dominant role over that of the nonfinite verb, in particular controlling case-marking.
3. Auxiliaries
In the constructions discussed so far a VCL occurs with a nonfinite verb form. However VCL's cannot occur with all forms of nonfinite verbs. VCL's do not occur with perfective or imperfective participles, infinitive verb forms or one of the negative forms. Regardless of the class of the verb, the participle, infinitive and negative forms occur with jo 'be' to form a perfective, imperfective, irrealis or 'global' negative form and the participle forms occur with i 'become' to form abilitative or permissive clauses.
3.1 Participle and infinitive forms
The participle and infinitive forms are highly nominalized and can take on nominal functions. As discussed

362

in Chapter Four, Section 1.2, one of the primary functions of the participle forms is to form relative clauses. To briefly recap that discussion, the imperfective participle -min is transparently derived from the coverb mi 'of knowing' suffixed with the stative nominalizaer -n. When min forms a relative clause it has a nominative alignment, i.e. it refers to the nominative argument of the underlying clause. It occurs with monovalent and bivalent active verbs and stative verbs. The perfective participle only forms relative clauses with active verbs and has an absolutive alignment, i.e. it refers to the accusative argument of a bivalent clause and the nominative argument of a monovalent clause. The elicited headless relative clauses below (98) summarize the discussion found in Chapter Four, Section 1.2.

(98) a. Imperfective/Nominative Alignment

kimin jie jamin jie chumin jie

'The one who hit someone left.' 'The one who came left.' 'The one who sat (there) left.'

b. Perfective/Absolutive Alignment

kika jie jaka jie

'The one who someone hit left. r 'The one who had come left.'

363

The infinitive is formed by the verbal stem followed by the suffix -no. The infinitive form most often occurs as the complement of another verb (98) and (99). It can also occur as the subject of a clause (100).

(98)
(99) (100)

Jano

podeitiyoe

ja-no pode-i-ti-yo-e

come-INF be.able-BECOME:GEN-NEG-CNJ-DCL

timanti'. ti-man=ti-e say-SIT-RP-DCL 'They say she said she couldn't come.' {MV.AASUYUN.30}

Mareno miitonyoeke. mare-INF mi-ito-n-yo-e=ke swim-INF know-NOT.BE:GEN-ST-CNJ-DCL=QT '(He said) he didn't know how to swim.' {CCMANTSA.136}

Junni yarin,

manka tsachi piyano kelo

junni ya=ri-n man=ka tsachi piya-no kelo

then 3P2=FOC=ST one-NCL person die-INF close

inannan

tsanke, kipimanhe.

i-na-nan

tsan=ke kipi-man=e

become-PRG-INCL SMBL=DO:VCL dream-SIT-DCL

'Then it is this, when a person's death is close

in this way, there is this dream.'

{MV.ACPONE.133}

As mentioned previously there is a natural correlation between the often-noted association of imperfective aspect with the initiating point of an action and perfective with

364
the termination of an action. The infinitive form is neutral in this respect and simply refers to the event as a whole. The natural correlations that occur with imperfective and perfective particiles will once again play a prominent role in the following discussion.

3.2 The auxiliary jo 'be'

3.2.1 The auxiliary jo 'be' and the imperfective participle

When the imperfective participle occurs with the auxiliary jo 'be' it can indicate habitual aspect and can occur with a verb from any one of the five classes as shown in the examples below (101-105).

(101)

Jri-class Tsachila tikatiya ya tsachi=la tikatiya ya people=PL whatever 3P2

fimin

jotieti'.

fi-min

jo-ti-e-ti-e

eat-IMPF.P BE:AUX-RP-DCL-RP-DCL

'They say he said he (the tiger) eats everybody.'

{AC.KELA.33}

365

(102) (103) (104) (105)

i-class

Junni juntorin aman, titi

fino kato

junni junto-ri-n aman, titi

fi-no ka-to

then but-FOC-ST now something eat-INF get-SR

kirabi jiminla

jo'.

kira=bi ji-min-la jo-e

see=LOC go-IMPF.P-PL BE:AUX-DCL

'Then but now, grabbing something to eat they

would go to visit.' {ICMATU1.21-22}

ti-class

Mulunkasiri

fichi timin

mulu-n=ka=si=ri

fi-chi ti-min

fat-ST=ACC=GRAD=FOC eat-INGR say-IMPF.P

jotie. jo-ti-e BE:AUX-RP-DCL 'They say she (the mother of the flood) only liked to eat the fat ones.' {MMPAIYAMMA.56}

ra-class Paluka sona tato ya junchi palu-ka sona ta-to ya jun=chi two-NCL woman have-SR 3P2 3D1=L0C

nenamin

j umant i',

nena-min

jo-man=ti-e

go.around-IMPF.P BE:AUX-SIT-RP-DCL

paluka sonaberi. palu-ka sona=be=ri two-NCL woman=COM=FOC 'They say having two women he went around, with the two women.' {MALI.7}

jo-class

Weyanteri

itomin

jotie.

weyan=te=ri ito-min

jo-ti-e

other=LOC=FOC not.be-IMPF.P BE:AUX-RP-DCL

'They say sometimes she wasn't there.'

{CC.TSAPARA.38}

366

This construction can also be used for simple imperfective aspect. As with other nominal constructions the copula may be dropped and the nominal form can directly take verbal morphology (106) and (107). The following three clauses indicate imperfective but not habitual actions. This construction can indicate repeated action with a punctual verb (108).

(106) (107) (108)

Chikila jinasa wepanato kirato chike=la ji-na-sa wepana-to kira-to 1F=PL go-PRG-DN startle-SR see-SR

wiruraminhe. wiru-ra-min-e stand-BE.POSITION:GEN-IMPF.P-DCL 'While we were going he was standing (there) looking around startled.' {PILABAN.33}

...nosale

naka

...nosa-le

na-ka

...quiet-CAUSE:SUF small-NCL

asuwato

finaminnuti'.

a-suwa-to

fi-na-min-nu-ti-e

cook-CAUSE.BECOME:GEN-SR eat-PRG-IMPF.P-EV-RP-DCL

'...they say quietly cooking the little (bird) he

was eating it.' [AAPALUKA.28-29}

Jabi jabi jabinan j aa=bi j aa=bi j aa=bi=nan 3D2=LOC 3D2=LOC 3D2=LOC=INCL

mankeeraimin man=ke-ere-a-i-min again=hit-send-RFLX-BECOME:GEN-IMPF.P

367
jotie. jo-ti-e BE:AUX-RP-DCL 'He said it (a detached head) kept falling far, there, there, there.' {AAPALUKA.156}
The imperfective construction retains the structure of a relative clause, i.e. (106) can literally be translated as 'He was the one that was standing (there)...' But when these constructions occur as the main clause they are rarely translated into Spanish as relative clauses but rather, as habitual or imperfective clauses. This coupled with the fact that as nominals, the copula auxiliary can be dropped is leading to the reanalysis of -min as a verbal, imperfective suffix.
3.2.2 The auxiliary jo and the perfective participle
The perfective participle occurs with jo 'be' to code perfective aspect. These clauses are usually translated as the Spanish perfective or as simple past. The perfective participle occurs with jo 'be' regardless of the class of the verb (109-113).

368

(109) (110) (111) (112)

ki-class

Junto ya ponelala

larika

junto ya pone=la=la la-ri-ka

but 3D2 shaman=PL=PL come.out-CAUS:SUF-PF.P

jotie,

ya Salunkari.

jo-ti-e

ya Salun=ka=ri

BE:AUX-RP-DCL 3D2 Salun=LOC=FOC

'But they say the shamans had already brought him

out, this Salun (a mythical character).'

{MV.AASALUN.7}

i-class

Weyan postoteri

telenkachi

weyan posto=te=ri telen-ka=chi

other place=LOC=FOC crawl-PF=INSTR

jinaka

jumanti' .

ji-na-ka jo-man=ti-e

go-PRG-PF.P BE:AUX-SIT-RP-DCL

'They say in other places he had gone crawling'

{MANKA.MOS0.20}

ti-class

Mmachi kufichun,

kasa

mma=chi ku-fi-chu-n

ka-sa

madam=DAT breast-EAT:GEN-IRR-ST get-DN

tika

jomanyo'.

ti-ka

j o-man=yo-e

say-PF.P BE:AUX-SIT-CONGR-DCL

'I had told her to buy (the chicken) to feed to

the woman.' {JERAKUWENTA.331}

ra-class Kito chuka jun? ki-to chu-ka jo-n DO:VCL sit-PF BE:AUX-INT 'He had been sitting (there) writing?' {JERKUWENTA4.88}

369

(113)

ti-class

Fuda joka

jun?

fuda jo-ka

jo-n

hurt BE:GEN-PF.P BE:AUX-INT

'Had it hurt?'

As with the imperfective construction the auxiliary may be dropped (114). However, this is less common with the perfective construction than with the imperfective. This could be leading to a reanalysis of -ka 'PF,P' as a verbal perfective suffix.

(114)

Nu yachi pesilika nu ya=chi pe-sili=ka 2 3=DAT feces-NCL=LOC tanjakae ta-n-ja-ka-e have-ST-COME:GEN-PF.P-DCL 'You have taken his entrails.' {VLP.Marial.21}

3.2.3 The auxiliary jo 'be' and the infinitive

As discussed in Chapter Two, when the infinitive form occurs with the auxiliary verb jo 'be', it codes irrealis, most often functioning as a deontic future, i.e. the person has an obligation concerning the carrying out of the action or with a stative verb there is a connotation that this must be. The auxiliary jo is used despite the class of the

370

verb (115-116). I have given a more literal translation for these following the free translation. For the active clauses the English literal translation has much the same sense as the Tsafiki, i.e. 'I am to sleep with my aunt' carries a strong deontic sense.

(115) (116)

i-class Junni mankubenan katsono joyoe junni manku=be=nan katso-no jo-yo-e then aunt=COM-INCL sleep-INF BE:AUX-CNGR-DCL

titi'. ti-ti-e say-RP-DCL 'Then they say he said "I have to sleep with (my) aunt." (LIT: "I am to sleep with my aunt") {MV.AASALUN.25}

ki-class

Aman junbi patito

atarayachi chuli

aman jun=bi pati-to ataraya=chi chuli

now 3D1=L0C go.down-SR net=INSTR type.of-fish

kano joe. ka-no jo-e get-INF BE:AUX-DCL 'Now going down there one has to get chuli with a net.' (LIT: 'One is to get chuli with a net.') {BOPI.15}

371

(117) (118)
(119)

ti-class Junni ya kuwachunnin junni ya kuwa-chu-n-nin then 3P2 give-IRR-ST-CNTR

kuwanae

tinola

jo'.

kuwa-na-e ti-no=la jo-e

give-PRG-DCL say-INF=PL BE:AUX-DCL

'If they were going to give (their daughter in

marriage) they would have to say (to the

potential bridegroom) that they would give

(her).' (LIT:'They are to say...') {ICMATU1.20}

ra-class

Uyanla o moti

tano

jo',

uyan=la o mo-ti ta-no jo-e

other=PL or who-what have-INF BE.-AUX-DCL

inte Aurelio o Primitivo in=te Aurelio o Primitivo 3P1=L0C Aurelio or Primitivo

talarachunnan ta-la-ra-chu-n-nan have-PL-BE.POSITION:VCL-IRR-ST-INCL

tsan kuchuka. tsan kuchu=ka SMBL yucca=LOC 'The others or someone should have it, here Aurelio or Primitivo would have yucca like this.' (LIT: 'The others or someone are to have it..') {KASAMA.MATE.22}

jo-class

ya, duke seiton

kipi jono joe

ya duke se-ito-n

kipi jo-no jo-e

3D2 much good-NOT.BE:GEN-ST dream be-INF BE:AUX-DCL

'This would be a really bad dream (in terms of what

it foretells).' (LIT: 'This is to be a very bad

dream.'){MV.ACPONE.135}

372
3.2.4 The auxiliary jo 'be' and the negative
In addition to the constructions above, there is a negative construction in which the auxiliary jo 'be' is used despite the class of the verb. This construction differs from the more common negative in that, the negative suffix -tu occurs before the nominalizing suffixes rather than after the VCL. There is a difference in meaning between the two different placements of the negative suffix, roughly equal in the difference in meaning between 'no smoking' and 'don't smoke (right now)'. 'No smoking' negates the very possibility of smoking while 'Don't smoke' can refer to the negation of a singular, specific act.
In the following example (120), both forms are represented. The example comes from a story in which a red demon has killed and then taken on the form of a Tsachi man. The demon than takes the man's liver and gives it to the man's wife, telling her to cook it for dinner. As it is cooking, the liver begins to speak and admonishes the children not to eat it. The first negative clause filakitula jona, contains two plural markers, with the negative occurring before the second plural suffix. As is the case with nouns in Tsafiki two plural

373

markers gives a collective reading. In the second clause filakituna, a negation of a specific act, the negative occurs in the more conmon position following the plural marker and VCL and negates a singular, specific act.

(120)

Ya jakeri apayoe

apayoe

ya jake=ri apa-yo-e

apa-yo-e

3P2 liver=FOC father-CNJ-DCL father-CNJ-DCL

apayoe

filakitula

jona

apa-yo-e

fi-la-ki-tu-la jo-na

father-CNJ-DCL eat-PL-VCL-NEG-PL BE.-AUX-IMP

filakituna

tinae

fi-la-ki-tu-na

ti-na-e

eat-PL-DO:GEN-NEG-IMP say-PRG-DCL

titida. ti-ti-da say-RP-DCL 'And then they say he said the liver was saying, "I'm your father! I'm your father! I'm your father! One is not to eat (fathers). Don't eat (me).'

What is interesting here is when the negative marker appears before the nominalizing morphology it has 'global' scope. The event as a whole is negated. When the negative marker occurs after the verb class marker or after a finite verb stem it tends to negate a specific act. This would support the idea that the nonfinite verb forms lack a schematic event structure. The participants of a nominalized

374

verb are not associated with a specific event line, hence the event as a whole is negated rather than a specific act or the endpoint of an action.
The auxiliary jo 'be' occurs with the nonfinite negative clause despite the class of the verb. In (121a) jo 'be' occurs with the infinitive form of the i-class verb piya 'get lost/die' and the negative plural form of thefci-classverb kira 'see' in (121b). The example comes from a story in which sonpura, an evil spirit, has taken the form of a horse. If one so much as glances at the sonpura, one will die. Compare this with (122), also containing the verb kira 'see', in which a father is ordering his children not to take aim with a weapon until the father comes back.

(121) a.

Kiratutorin

piyatuno jotieti'.

kira-tu-to-ri-n piya-tu-no jo-ti-e-ti-e

see-NEG-SR-FOC-ST die-NEG-INF BE:AUX-RP-DCL-RP-DCL

'They say he said that if one didn't look (at the

sonpura) one would not die.'

b. Jun Sancristanbe ya pateleberi jun Sancristan=be ya patele=be=ri 3D1 Sancristan=COM 3P2 priest=COM=FOC

kiratula jonutieti',

yalarin.

kira-tu-la jo-nu-ti-e-ti-e ya=la=ri=n

'They say he said that Sancristan and the priest

must have (never) looked (at the sonpura)'

{CCSONPURA.505}

375

(122)

Nati

tuto kiralakitunake

na-ti

tuto kira-la-ki-tu-na=ke

little-NEG aim SEE:GEN-PL-DO:VLC-NEG-IMP=QT

tinuti'. ti-nu-ti-e say-EV-RP-DCL 'They say he said "Don't aim it even a little bit.'" {SALUN.175}

The next three examples concern ki-class verbs. In (123) the rainbow man is telling the people never to bother him. He is dangerous. In (124) a man still has said nothing to his wife concerning the sale of his soul to the devil despite the fact that the devil is coming in a few hours to collect. This example has a strong connotation that he doesn't intend to speak. Example (125) concerns a group of hunters who have walked all day without eating anything.

(123)

Jri-class

Lakari

layan pasuwatula

la=ka=ri layan pa-suwa-tu-la

1M=ACC=F0C a.lot angry-CAUSE.BECOME:GEN-NEG-PL

jona, . yari duke loba tan

jo-na

ya=ri duke loba ta-n

BE:AUX-IMP 3P2=FOC much heat HAVE:GEN-ST

tsachiyoe

tinutie.

tsachi-yo-e ti-nu-ti-e

person-CNJ-DCL say-EV-RP-DCL

'They say he said, "(You) are not to bother me

much. I am a very hot man."' {SUYUNPI.71}

376

(124) (125)

Kapatunin

jotie

ka-pa-tu-nin

jo-ti-e

still-say-NEG-CNTR BE:AUX-RP-DCL

'They say he still said nothing.

Man malon

ano

man ma-lo-n

ano

one day-go.out-ST food

fitun

jolajoyo'

fi-tu-n

jo-la-jo-yo-e

food eat-NEG-ST BE:AUX-PL-BE:VCL-CNJ-DCL

'All day we ate nothing.' (AAMEDI2.142}

The next examples contain i-class verbs. (126) comes from a story in which a father and his children have been running most of the night to escape some evil spirits. They run until the children are exhausted and simply cannot go on. In (127) the narrator is talking about a rather stern teacher in the local school. In (128) the narrators are discussing the qualities of a spirit or soul that is important in Tsachi cosmology.

(126)

i-class

Sujanaminnan

wari nalala

su-j a-min-nan

wari na-la-la

feet.in.air-IMPF.P-INCL well small-PL-PL

podeitula

jotie

pode-i-tu-la

jo-ti-e

be.able-BECOME:GEN-NEG-PL BE:AUX-RP-DCL

'They say they ran until the children were unable

(to run anymore) {VLP.LUBAN0K01.56}

377

(127) (128)

Yaberi tensaituno

joko.

ya=be=ri tensa-i-tu-no

jo-ko

3=C0M=F0C play-BECOME:GEN-NEG-INF BE:AUX-DUB

'One shouldn't play around with her. No?'

{JERAKUWENTA.278}

0 ya mowin

itoto

sona kano

o ya mowin

ito-to sona ka-no

or 3 spirit.mowin not.be-SR woman get-INF

podeitun

junhun?

pode-i-tu-n

jo-n-jo-n

be.able-BECOME:GEN-NEG-ST BE:AUX-ST-BE:AUX-ST

'Or not having this spirit, one wouldnt be able

to obtain a woman?' [JCPUKA6.il}

Example (129) occurs in a context in which a tiger, who has been locked up under the earth is begging to be released claiming he won't bother anyone. The shamans refuse to release him. After listing several reasons why he is not to be trusted, they express their desire to have nothing to do with him.

(129)

ti-class Junni junto munatitula junni junto muna-ti-tu-la then but desire-SAY:GEN-NEG-PL

jotieti',

kelaka

jo-ti-e-ti-e

kela=ka

BE:AUX-RP-DCL-RP-DCL tiger=ACC

'They say they said that because of this they

didn't want (anything to do with) him, the

tiger.' {ACKELA.49}

378

Example (131) comes from a narrative about how the Tsachila lived before colonialization. Note that as with the imperfective and perfective forms the auxiliary jo 'be' has been dropped in this example. The jo-class example (131) is elicited.

(130) (131)

ra-class

Junni, matuteri,

man postori

junni matu=te=ri

man posto=ri

then old.days=LOC=FOC one place=FOC

chutulamanti'

tsachila

chu-tu-la-man=ti-e tsachi=la

sit-NEG-PL-SIT-RP-DCL person=PL

'Well, in the old days the Tsachila never lived

in just one place.' {VLP.CCLUBAN0K02.2}

jo-class

Naka

pajotula

joe

na=ka

pa-jo-tu-la

jo-e

child=ACC anger-BE:AUX-NEG-PL BE:AUX-DCL

'One is never to be angry at a child.'

3.2.5 The auxiliary jo 'be' and relative clauses

In Chapter Four it was shown that the stative verbs in the jo 'be' and ra 'class' can combine with bivalent coverbs. Because these verbs do not code events or change over time they do not evoke an event line but rather a stative relationship. Recall that bivalent complex predicates formed with a stative generic verb form relative

379

clauses with -min and -nun, correlating with the actor and undergoer, rather than the -min and -ka with which they occur in active clauses. Nun can also be used to form adjunct relative clauses referring to locations, instruments or the event itself rather than one of the participants. To summarize the discussion in Chapter Four, in the elicited clauses below the coverb pa 'anger' first occurs as a simple clause with an active generic verb i 'become' in (132a) and a stative generic verb jo 'be' in (133a). Notice that these two clauses appear to have an identical structure. But the relative clause forms in (132b-c) and (133b-c) reveal that the -ka in (133a) is the locative rather than the accusative -ka. A relative clause referring to a locative is given in (134).

(132) a.

Sona unilaka paie. sona unila=ka pa-i-e man woman=ACC anger-BECOME:GEN-DCL 'The woman became angry at the man'

b. Paimin

jie.

pa-i-min

ji-e

anger-BECOME:GEN-IMPF.P go-DCL

'The one who became angry (at someone/thing)

left.'

380

c. Paika

jie.

pa-i-ka

ji-e

anger-BECOME:GEN-PF.P go-DCL

'The one someone became angry at left.'

(133) a. b.

Sona unilaka pajoe.

sona unila=ka pa-jo-e

woman man=LOC anger-BE:GEN-DCL

'The woman is angry at the man.'

Paj omin

j ie.

pa-jo-min

ji-e

anger-BE:GEN-IMPF.P go-DCL

'The one who was angry (at someone/thing) left.'

c. Pajonun

jie.

pa-jo-nun

ji-e

anger-BE:GEN-NOM go-DCL

'The one someone was angry at left.'

(134)

Kanowa tsonunte manfayoe kanowa tso-nun=te man=fa-yo-e canoe lie-NOM=LOC again=arrive.here-CNJ-DCL

timanti'. ti-man=ti-e say-SIT-RP-DCL 'They say he said he arrived back where the canoe was lying.' {MALI.27}

This same pattern occurs with relative clauses formed with the auxiliary jo 'be' and an infinitive verb form, the relative clause which refers to the undergoer of the nonfinite verb is formed with -nun not -ka. In (135a-b) the relative clauses of the simple verb fi 'eat' follow the expected pattern, -min and -ka. In (136a-b) the relative clauses follow the expected pattern for a stative verb,

381

-min and -nun.

(135) a. Fi-min

ji-e.

eat-IMPF.P go-DCL

'The one who ate left.'

b. Fika

anpun joe.

fi-ka anpun jo-e

eat-PF.P tasty be-DCL

'What he ate was tasty.'

(136) a.

Fino jominka

tanjade.

fi-no jo-min=ka

ta-n-ja-de

eat-INF BE:AUX-IMPF.P=ACC have-ST-come-IMP

'Bring the one who has to eat.'

b. Fino jonunka

tanjade.

fi-no jo-nun=ka

ta-n-ji-de

eat-INF BE:AUX-NOM=ACC have-ST-go-IMP

'Bring what he is to eat.'

In the following two text examples concerning jo 'be' auxiliary constructions (137-138), the relative clauses align with the nominative argument as in (136a).

(137)

Junni kasalechiri

ya mankachi nao

junni kasa=le=chi=ri ya man=ka=chi nao

then first=LOC=LOC=FOC 3 one-NCL=POSS son

kano jominnutieti'. ka-no jo-min-nu-ti-e-ti-e get-INF BE:AUX-IMPF.P-EV-RP-DCL-RP-DCL 'They say he said at first it was another man's son who should have gotten (her).' {URUS0NA.11}

382

(138)

Pakara ketobi

lari

kano

pakara ke-to-bi

la-ri

ka-no

pay DO:GEN-SR-LOC come.out-CAUSE:SUF GET:GEN

j omin

j unhun.

j o-min

jo-n-jo-n

BE:AUX-IMPF.P BE:AUX-ST-BE:VCL-INT

'When you paid wouldn't you have been the one to

take it out?' {JERAKUWENTA4.363}

The following three text examples the relative clauses refer to the undergoer participant of the nonfinite verb, but are formed with -nun, rather than -ka.

(139) (140)

Titiya nasi

kano jonunka

titiya na-si

ka-no jo-nun=ka

thing little-GRAD get-INF BE:AUX-NOM=ACC

pakara kinkito... pakara ki-n-ki-to... pay DO:GEN-ST-DO:VCL-SR '...we would have paid for the little things we had to buy.' {Punpube1.40}

Junbi pone miika

jonunka

jun=bi pone mi-i-ka

jo-nun=ka

3D2=LOC shaman know-BECOME:GEN-PF.P BE:AUX=ACC

titi, ya pone mikarikake titi, ya pone mi-kari-ka=ke thing 3D2 shaman know-CAUSE:GEN-PF.P-DCL=QT '(He said) there the shaman had taught him the things that the shaman had learned.' {VLP.DZB.240}

(141)
(142)

Jera pade,

ya mirachun

jera pa-de

ya mi-ra-chu-n

all speak-IMP 3D2 know-BE.POSITION:GEN-IRR-ST

tika

tika

fimin

jomin

ti=ka ti=ka fi-min

jo-min

what=ACC what=ACC eat-IMPF.P BE:AUX-IMPF.P

j onunka j o-nun=ka BE:AUX-NOM=ACC 'Tell it all, to know what what they used to eat.' {JAKURU5.595-597}

Temas jera temas mirachunae temas jera temas mi-ra-chu-na-e topics all topics know-BE:GEN-IRR-PRG-DCL

jun temabi ti punto pano

jonunka

jun tema=bi ti punto pa-no

jo-nun=ka

3D1 topic=LOC what point speak-INF BE:AUX-NOM=ACC

'Topics, you will know the topic well, and on

this topic, what point you have to make.'

{PUNPUBE.573)

3.3 Discussion

The relative clause constructions based on the auxiliary jo 'be' indicate that the profile of the stative verb remains dominant. A bivalent nonfinite form contains an actor and undergoer, but there is no active event line with which they can be associated. The stative auxiliary evokes a stative temporal contour containing an entity and location. The actor and undergoer of the nonfinite verb

384

therefore align with the entity and locative semantic participants of the stative verb (Figure Fifteen). Basically the pattern is Tsafiki is that the schematic profile of the final predicating element will dominate.

NONFINITE V: Actor

Undergoer fimin 'eat'

STATIVE AUX: Entity Locative jo 'be'

ya

watsa=ka fi-min

jo-e

3

fish=LOC eat-IMPF.P BE:AUX-DCL

'He eats fish.'

Figure Fifteen: Argument Sharing of bivalent nonfinite verb aligned with actor and undergoer, and stative auxiliary aligned with entity and location.

3.4 The Auxiliary i 'become'

The verb i 'become' when occurring as a simple or generic verb takes an undergoer participant. As was shown in Chapter Four when i 'become' occurs as a generic verb with a bivalent coverb it results in a permissive construction. When i 'become' occurs as an auxiliary, it has much the same effect ranging from a reflexive 'abilitative' reading with the imperfective participle to a permissive reading with the perfective participle similar to the i 'become' plus bivalent

385

coverb constructions discussed previously. I will begin by describing the auxiliary i 'become' with -min 'IMPF.P.

3.4.1 The auxiliary i 'become' and -min 'IMPF.P'

The auxiliary i 'become' occasionally occurs with the imperfective participle, (less than thirty examples in the texts), all occurring with either ki 'do' or i 'become' class verbs. The interpretation of these clauses is in general abilitative, the subject is able to carry out some action or put himself in some state4. The first example again concerns the rainbow man. He refuses to come near and then leaves without letting himself come closer (143).

(143)

Wari nasi wari na-si well small-GRAD

jatumin

ide

ja-tu-min

i-de

come-NEG-IMPF.P BECOME:AUX-ASSOC.MOT

jinin imantie. ji-nin i-man=ti-e go-CNTR BECOME:VCL-SIT-RP-DCL 'Well they say he just left without letting himself come closer.' {AASUYUN.40}

4 The sense of ability is most commonly coded with a Spanish borrowing pode-i 'be able to'. Pode is transparently borrowed from the Spanish poder 'be able to' which is then combined with the Tsafiki generic verb i 'become'.

386

Example (144) is from a personal narrative in which a family was only able to visit another group of people for a couple of days.

(144)

Tsachilabe yalari

palu ma

tsachi=la=be ya=la=ri palu day

person=PL=COM 3P2=PL=F0C two day

piyamin

ilaiyotie.

piya-min i-la-i-yo-ti-e

lose-IMPF.P BECOME:AUX-PL-BECOME:VCL-CNJ-RP-DCL

'They said they were only able to spend two days

with the other Tsachila.' {GA7.75}

The next example is also from a personal narrative in which a family is murdered by outsiders. After this the other people in the community were unable to sleep in their houses due to fear and instead camped in the jungle every night until the fear passed (145).

(145)

Jun tsachila aman junka totenun

merato

jun tsachi=la aman jun=ka tote-nun

mera-to

3D1 person=PL now 3=ACC kill-NOM.OBL hear-SR

wari yaka

katsotumin

ikala

wari ya=ka

katso-tu-min

i-ka=la

well house=LOC sleep-NEG-IMPF.P BECOME-PF=PL

jomin' . jo-min-e BE:AUX-IMPF.P-DCL 'When the other people heard about the murder they were unable to sleep in (their) houses.' {CCANKU3.10}

387

The next example is from a traditional story in which a woman aided by the star woman suddenly gains incredible weaving ability. Here the other people are asking her, what happened? How is she able to weave like this?

(146)

Nu niyaito?

tsankari sita

nu niya-i-to

tsan=ka-ri sita

2 how-BECOME:VCL-SR so=ACC-FOC weave

kimin

ika

joyunke

ki-min

i-ka

jo-yo-n=ke

DO:GEN-IMPF.P BECOME:AUX-PF BE:AUX-CNJ-INT=QT

'What happened to you? How are you able to weave

these things?' {CCTSAB02.72}

The next example has a reflexive reading. The narrator is discussing the fact that the Tsachila have lost their wedding traditions, including the practice of laying the couple down together while community members advise them. She is saying the young people no longer put themselves in this position.

(147)

Amanarin

wari potumin

amana=ri-n

wari po-tu-min

nowadays-FOC-ST well put-NEG-IMPF.P

ikala

jo'

i-ka=la

jo-e

BECOME:AUX-PF=PL BE:AUX-DCL

'Nowadays they won't put themselves (in this

position)' {SONATSOREPOKA.177}

388

In the texts only examples containing i 'become' or ki 'do' class verbs have been found. However, speakers readily accept elicited examples formed with verbs from the other three classes. When given constructions formed with -min and i 'beome', speakers gave contexts in which someone who had been bedridden for a while was finally able to stand or that one was speaking of a baby who had just learned to stand (148).

(148)

Na wiruramin

ie.

na wiru-ra-min

i-e

child stand-BE.POSIT:GEN-IMPF.P BECOME:AUX-DCL

'The baby can stand.'

(149) was given a similar context to (148). In this case the context is a baby who has just learned to say pa, a typical baby-talk version of apa 'father'.

(149)

Na pa timin

ie.

na pa ti-min

i-e

child pa say-IMPF.P BECOME:AUX-DCL

'The baby can say "pa"'.

The next jo-class example was given a context in which someone becomes angry in a situation that generally would not irritate them.

389

(150)

Pajomin

iyoe.

pa-jo-min

i-yo-e

angry-BE:GEN-IMPF.P BECOME:AUX-CNJ-DCL

'I was able to be angry/I found myself angry.'

3.4.2 The Auxiliary i 'become' and the perfective

The next construction consists of the perfective participle with the auxiliary i 'become'. This construction is very similar to constructions in which i 'become' occurs as a generic verb with a bivalent coverb. They code a permissive construction. The undergoer appears with nominative case, a non-obligatory,actor can appear with adjunct, comitative case-marking, the verb is in participle form and there is an auxiliary, i 'become' (151). In below the clause is semantically odd without the negative marker it that it could only mean the rabbit let the tiger eat him, which leads to an evaluation of the rabbit as misu palan 'mixed up head' or 'crazy.'

(151)

Tsanke

konori

kelabe

tsan=ke

kono=ri kela=be

SMBL=DO:VCL rabbit=FOC tiger=COM

fika

itumantie

fi-ka i-tu-man=ti-e

eat-PF.P BECOME:AUX-NEG-SIT-RP-DCL

'So they say doing this the rabbit did not let

the tiger eat him.' {KELA.66}

390

The next clause (152) is similar to (151). A young woman is offering herself to the king. It is followed by an elicitated example in which the auxiliary i 'become' is replaced by the auxiliary jo 'be' (153). Note the difference in word order and case-marking between the two clauses. In (153) the actor takes the expected nominative case-marking and the undergoer takes the accusative.

(152) (153)

Yari miya=be=nan ya=ri miya=be=nan 3P2=FOC king=COM=INCL

kaya

inoyoe

ka-ka i-no-yo-e

get-PF.P BECOME:AUX-INF-CNJ-DCL

'She would have to let the king himself take

her.' {MIYA2.12}

Miyanan yaka kaya

jonoyoe

miya=nan ya=ka ka-ka jo-no-yo-e

king=INCL 3=ACC get-PF.P BE:AUX-INF-CNJ-DCL

'The king himself would have to take her.'

So while these clauses look, morphosyntactically, like passives the undergoer is actually the initiator of the event although not the one who actually carries out the action. In an alternative construction, both arguments may occur with the comitative -be, in which case a reciprocal reading is given to the clause (154).

391

(154)

Ya unilabe sonabe munatito ya unila=be sona=be muna-ti-to 3P2 man=COM woman=COM desire-SAY:GEN-SR

taka

ino

ya uyan tobi nechi

ta-ka

i-no

ya uyan to=bi ne=chi

have-PF. P BECOME :AUX-INF 3 other earth foot=LOC

kosa itoe

tie.

kosa ito-e

ti-e

thing not.be-DCL say-DCL

'They say that for a man and woman to have each

other, desiring one another, is not something

from another world.' {PUNPUBE1.293}

The following example contains the same verb ta 'have' but in this case the subject ya '3D2' occurs without the comitative marker and while elided in this clause the 'taker', the shaman to whom she is offering herself, would take the comitative -be if it were present. I have added the participant that was given in the elicitated version of this clause in parenthesis. Note that the nominative argument of the purpose clause suffixed with -chike is always co-referent with the nominative argument of the main verb. The woman is clearly the nominative argument or subject of both clauses.

392

(155)

Junni ya sonari wari junni ya sona=ri wari then 3 woman=FOC well

manseichikeri ya

(ponebe)

man=se-i-chike=FOC

(pone=be)

again=good-BECOME:GEN-DESIR=FOC (shaman=COM)

taka

inaeke

tin.

ta-ka

i-na-e=ke

ti-n

have-PF.P BECOME:AUX-PRG-DCL=QT say-ST

'Then this woman well, she just said because she

wanted to be cured, she would let the shaman take

her.' {BOPIN.29}

In the next two examples the same verb occurs, first with the reciprocal reading and then with the permissive reading. In the texts, due to ellipsis of core arguments the reading of these clauses can sometimes only be deduced from the context. In (156) the wife of the rainbow man is telling her relatives that they will not see each other again because the shamans are locking her and her husband beneath the earth. No arguments are present, but given the context, the sense is reciprocal. Example (157) in contrast, contains the same verb and both arguments with explicit case-marking indicating that this is the permissive construction.

393

(156) (157)

Aman numa totiya mankiraka aman numa totiya man=kira-ka now already something again=see-PF.P ituchunae i-tu-chu-na-e BECOME:AUX-NEG-IRR-PRG-DCL 'They would never see each other again.' {Suyunpi.85} Ya tsabo sona ya jaatsanke ya tsabo sona ya jaa-tsan=ke 3P2 star woman 3P2 PRO-SMBL=DO:VCL tsachibe kiraka ito... tsachi=be kira-ka i-to person=COM see-PF.P BECOME:AUX-SR 'The star woman appearing like this to the people...'(LIT: '...letting the people see her in this way...') {TSABO.127}

With non-motion, i-class verbs the reading is often reflexive or abilitative. (158) is taken from the Tsachi version of Hansel and Gretel. The witch has asked the children to get in the boiling pot.

394

(158)

Junni tsachiri waranamin junni tsachi=ri wara-na-min then people=FOC boil-PRG-IMPF.P chibanbiri chi-ba-n=bi=ri hot-QUAL-ST=LOC=FOC wiruika imannkan? wiru-i-ka i-man=nka-n stand-BECOME:GEN-PF.P BECOME:AUX-SIT-SPEC-INT 'But how would the people be able to stand themselves in the hot, boiling (water)?' {VLP.RLAPAK.71}

The next example has a reflexive reading. (159) comes from a text about shamanism. When the shaman feels himself going into a vision he will sometimes wake himself up.

(159)

Mannan junsi wa manjinayoe mannan jun=si wa man=ji-na-yo-e again 3=GRAD large again=go-PRG-CNJ-DCL

tenjasaleri

weyante

ten-ja-sa=le=ri

weyan=te

think-COME:GEN-DN-LOC-FOC other=LOC

mansonhika

imin

man=son-i-ka

i-min

again=live-BECOME:GEN-PF.P BECOME:AUX-IMPF.P

jo' jo-e BE:AUX-DCL 'Then when he senses that he is going again, sometimes he will wake himself up.' {JCPUKA5.62}

395

There is also an abilitative sense with ra-class verbs. In the following example a grandson has asked the grandparents the names of the Tsachila who had built a path or road to Quito in the early part of the century. The grandparents feel they have no way of knowing this:

(160)

Miraka

ichinan

mi-ra-ka

i-chi-na-n

know-BE.POSITION:GEN-PF.P BECOME:AOX-IRR-PRG-INT

nao? nao son 'How could we come to know this, son?' {ICMATU4.43}

The following elicited example contains the perfective participle form of the stative verb jo 'be'. The connotation here is that the speaker finds himself angry, without intention or really even knowing why.

(161)

Pa joka

ie

pa jo-ka

i-e

angry BE:GEN-PF.P BECOME:AUX-DCL

'I found myself angry.'

The next, fairly complicated, example taken again from Hansel and Gretal, the children are telling the witch they don't know why they aren't fattening up. There are three i-

396

become auxiliary plus perfective participle clauses in this example.

(162)

Niyara

karitiya ano

niya-ra

kari-tiya ano

how-BE.POSIT:VCL CAUSE-thing food

finatotiya fi-na-to-tiya eat-PRG-SR-thing

itsan

joka ika

ie

in-tsan jo-ka i-ka

i-e

3P1-SMBL BE-PF.P BECOME:AUX-PF.P BECOME:AUX-DCL

kirade muluika kira-de mulu-i-ka see-IMP fat-BECOME:GEN-PF.P

itue

titida

i-tu-e

ti-ti-da

BECOME:AUX-NEG-DCL say-RP-DCL.GEN

'They they say they said that they found

themselves like this but they didn't know what

was causing this condition, they were eating.

Look! they weren't able to get fat.'

{VLP.RLPAK.55A}

With an i-class motion verb, the construction results in a loss of actorivity on the part of the subject. As noted in Chapter Four a motion verb is somewhat ambiguous between the coding of an actor or undergoer semantic participant. When a motion verb combines with a monovalent coverb aligned with undergoer it forces the reading of a

397

undergoer onto the subject. When it combines with an actor aligned coverb it maintains a sense of agentivity. The same effect is seen in the construction with the perfective participle form of the motion verb and the auxiliary i 'become.' (But note this does not happen with the VCL i 'become'). I'll begin with an elicited example where the case-marking is clear. (163) was originally translated with the a Spanish passive of the verb llevar 'take', although the Tsafiki verb used here is NOT the bivalent tanji 'take' but rather the monovalent ji 'go'. The presence of the auxiliary i 'become' leads to the interpretation that the first person subject was not responsible for the actual action, although they did 'allow' or initiate the action.

(163)

La Fanbe futbol kirabi jika ie la Fan=be futbol kira=bi ji-ka i-e 1M Juan=COM soccer see=LOC go-PF.P BECOME:AUX-DCL 'I was taken by Juan to watch soccer.' or 'I let myself go with Juan to watch soccer.'

In the next example three sisters are plotting how they can make themselves servants of the king.

398

(164)

Niyaito

miyachi ano dato kuwabi

niya-i-to

miya=chi ano da-to kuwa-bi

how-BECOME:VLC-SR king=DAT food cook-SR give-PURP

jika ino

junanke,

ji-ka i-no

jo-na-n=ke

go-PF.P BECOME:AUX-INF BE:AUX-PRG-INT-QT

jun puchuka

pefichun

jun puchu=ka

pe-fi-chu-n

3D1 leftovers=ACC also-eat-IRR-ST

'How would they be able to go cook for the king

so they could eat the leftovers?' or 'How could

they get themselves taken to cook for the king so

they could eat the leftovers.' {VLP.MIYA.9}

The next example is again from Hansel and Gretel. The children lost for days come upon the witch's house. Their arrival at the house is not intentional.

(165)

Jun kiranari mma tsankiran chununbi jun kira-na=ri mma tsan=kira-n chu-nun=bi 3D1 see-PRG=FOC madam SMBL=see-ST sit-NOM.OBL=LOC

faka

ie

titida

fa-ka

i-e

ti-ti-da

arrive-PF.P BECOME:AUX-DCL say-RP-DCL.GEN

'Now they said they said looking they found

themselves arriving at (the place) where what

appeared to be an old woman lived.' {vlp.rlapak.21}

The analysis of these clauses is quite similar to the analysis of a monovalent generic verb aligned with a undergoer combining with a bivalent coverb. The profile of the auxiliary is dominant and it will control which

399

argument receives nominative case-marking. The perfective participle, unlike the imperfective participle is associated with a terminal viewpoint. Although in a simple clause the actor continues to receive nominal case-marking, it is already backgrounded to some extend by the nature of the perfective. Hence the undergoer participant of the auxiliary i 'become' aligns with the undergoer rather than actor participant of the nonfinite clause. As always in Tsafiki, the nominative argument correlates with the initiating point (IP) for the coding of the event. This is illustrated in Figure Sixteen.

NONFINITE V Actor AUXILIARY

IUndergoer ka-ka 'get'
Undergoer i 'become'

NOM

IP

miya=be sona * ka-ka i-e

king=COM woman

get-PR.P BECOME:AUX-DCL

'The woman let the king take her.'

Figure Sixteen: bivalent nonfinite verb aligned with actor and undergoer combined with monovalent auxiliary aligned with undergoer

400

With motion verbs, in which the primary participant can be construed as either an actor or a undergoer that changes location, the auxiliary i skews the reading to the undergoer. Another actorive participant can be added as an adjunct. The sense of 'let' comes from the correlation between the nominative argument and the initiating point. This is illustrated in Figure Sixteen.

NONFINITE V. Actor

Undergoer

ji 'go'

AUXILIARY

Undergoer

i 'become'

NOM/IP

Juan=be

la

ji-ka i-e

Juan=C0M 1M

go-PF.P BECOME:AUX-DCL

'I let myself go with Juan.'

Figure Sixteen: nonfinite motion verb combined with monovalent auxiliary aligned with undergoer

4. Summary

In this chapter I have shown that while auxiliaries and VCLs share many similar properties, including that of providing the primary schematic event profile for the clause in which they participate, there is a crucial

401
difference in that the schematic profile of the VCL correlates with that of the nonfinite verb.
One of the more interesting aspects of the VCL system is its secondary function as a classificatory system. Because the VCL must match the profile of the verb with which it co-occurs it also functions to semantically classify the predicate. In Chapter Six the classificatory functions of both the coverbs and the VCLs will be discussed.

402
CHAPTER SIX
GENERIC VERBS AND VERB CLASS MARKERS AS CLASSIFYING CONSTRUCTIONS
1. INTRODUCTION
In the preceding Chapters, the function of the generic verbs, verb class markers, and auxiliaries has been found to be that of providing a schematic profile for the predicate. This profile consists minimally, in all cases, of first, defining whether the evidentuality described by the predicate is a state, event or speech act and second, in the case of a state determining that the case-marking pattern will be that of Nominative plus Locative, and in the case of an event determining whether the initiating point for the event will be with an Undergoer or Actor. The profile of a state is further determined as to whether it codes a configuration, either literally or metaphorically in space, or attributes a quality or class membership to the nominative argument. The generic verbs, besides contributing the above information, also contribute semantic participants, and contain more detailed

information about the type of event, including motion and path, type of causation (direct indirect etc.) and specific positions. The generic verbs and verb class markers have a similar function—providing a schematic profile—but they classify different types of elements. The generic verbs classify the coverbs. As was shown in Chapter Three the coverbs, which overlap to some degree with ideophones, are rich in semantic information and can contribute semantic participants to the clause hence affecting the valency, but lack the schematic information necessary to form a finite predicate. The verb class markers occur with non-finite verb forms. These forms most often consist of either a complete complex predicate or simple verb and therefore have all the information necessary to form a finite predicate, but because the form is non-finite, these elements are not associated with an activated schematic profile. An active schematic profile is provided by the verb class markers. As a secondary effect of their function, both the generic verbs and the verb class markers, function as classifiers. Not all coverbs and nonfinite forms are compatible with the schematic profile provided by every generic verb or verb class marker, hence the coverbs and non-finite predicates can be classified

404
according to what set of generic verbs or what verb class marker they can co-occur with in certain constructions.
In this Chapter, the generic verbs and verb class marker systems are compared and contrasted both to one another and to other, more well known systems, such as nominal classification systems. I will first simply look at the overall structure of the two classes.
2. Structure of the Classifying Systems
One of the more striking aspects, in comparing the Tsafiki classifying systems with nominal systems, is simply the degree of similarity between the morphosyntactic structure of the verbal classifiers and nominal classifying systems. There are, of course, a large number of different kinds of nominal classifying systems, but the systems are usually divided into two categories, noun class/gender systems and classifier systems. Noun class/gender systems are characterized by agreement with constituents outside the noun phrase, by a higher degree of grammaticalization evident in a closed system of a small number of classes and each noun usually only belongs to one and only one class (Zubin 1992; Hockett 1958; Corbett 1991; Craig 1986, 2000, 2001; Dixon 1968, 1982 inter alia). In contrast,

405
classifiers are characterized as comprised of a large, semi-open set, all members may not be exhaustibly listable. They often also occur as free forms or roots and not all nouns can occur with a classifier and some nouns can occur with more than one. Craig (2000) using the criteria outlined by Dixon (1982, 1986) summarizes the distinction in the following Table:

TABLE 10: Gender vs. classifier systems

Noun class/gender systems 1. classify all nouns 2. into a smallish number of
classes 3. of a closed system 4. fused with other
grammatical categories (Def, Nb, Case) 5. can be marked on noun 6. realized in agreement pattern 7. N uniquely assigned to a class with no speaker variation 8. no variation in register

Classifiers systems do not classify all nouns into largish number of an open system independent constituents
not marked on noun marked once N possibly assigned to various classes at speaker's will formal/informal uses

While not all the criteria above is relevant to the Tsafiki verb classifiers, a similar chart can be made comparing the two systems, which reveals similarities on

the one hand between the verb class markers and gender systems and noun classifiers and the generic verbs on the other hand.

TABLE 11: Verb Class Markers vs. Generic Verbs

Verb Class Markers 1. classify all verb 2. into a smallish number of
classes (five) 3. of a closed system 4. fused with other
grammatical categories (PL, SMBL, ATTEMPT ETC.) 5. can be marked on verb 6. realized in Agreement pattern 7. V uniquely assigned to a class with no speaker variation 8. no variation in register

Generic Verbs do not classify all predicates (generic verbs are generally not classified) into largish number of an semi-open system independent constituents
can be marked on verb marked once V possibly assigned to various classes at speaker's will

Criteria five, does not apply in that both the generic verbs and verb class markers can form a single phonological word with the element they classify. Criteria eight requires a complete discourse study, i.e. the generic verbs, as simple verbs make up almost 44% of the predicates in narrations. This is probably due to the fact that they can be used to refer to the same event as a complex

407
predicate, i.e. su-ji 'run' can also simply be coded with ji 'go', 'He ran/He went.' A discourse study determining what determines the use of a complex predicate as opposed to a simple verb remains to be done.
Otherwise, the generic verbs exhibit a remarkable similarity to noun class/gender systems. They form a small, closed class of five members; every predicate, whether complex or simple is classified and belongs to one and only one class; the classifiers occur with other grammatical morphemes, semblative, plural, attemptive, contrastive, augmentative and evidential, and there is no attested speaker variation. The verb classifiers also show an 'agreement' pattern, similar to gender systems, compare the Swahili (Givon 2000:427) example (1) with the elicited example from Tsafiki (2).

(1)

Wa-le wa-toto wa-angu wa-dogo wa-li-wo-kufa...

the child my

small they-PAST-REL-died

'the small children of mine who died...'

(2)

Ponela yaka yuka kiyo

kinin

pone=la ya=ka yuka ki-yo

ki-nin

shaman=PL 3=ACC evil DO:GEN-ATT DO:VCL-CNTR

kika:

kinkilakee.

ki-ka:

ki-n-ki-la-ki-e

DO:VCL-AUG DO:VLC-ST-DO:VCL-PL-DO:VCL-DCL

'The shamans must have tried to just curse him

many times.'

408
While as opposed to gender systems, noun and numeral classifier systems exhibit an enormous degree of variation among the various systems making it difficult to speak of them in general terms (Craig 2000; 2001; 2002), the generic verbs show a great deal of similarity to certain types of nominal classifier systems, particularly numeral classifying systems. They consist of more open class than the verb class markers, (some of the coverbs can function as simple verbs indicating they may be moving into that class). They occur independently in the sense that they are in free distribution with other inflectional morphology; they only occur once (in a generic verb function) and the speaker can choose to a certain degree which generic verb to use, as long as its schematic profile is compatible with the semantics of the coverb. In addition, as in some noun classifying systems the generic verbs can serve a double function, i.e. they may classify or they themselves may be classified (Craig 1986, 2001). This is true of the Tsafiki nominal classification system. Some nouns such as sili 'rope' and japisu 'leaf' can either serve as classifiers (often with japisu taking a reduced form ja 'leaf') or themselves be classified (3).

409

(3) a.

Simple Verb kira 'see'

ta-kira touch-see 'feel' CLASSIFIER

kira-po see-put 'peek' CLASSIFIED

b.

Simple Noun japisu 'leaf'

palu-ja (pisu) mu two-NCL:leaf achiote 'two achiote leaves'

palu-ja (pisu) japisu two-NCL:leaf leaf 'two leaves'

And as in many numeral classifying systems such as Japanese (Downing 1986) or in Tsafiki itself, the specific generic verb chosen affects the semantic interpretation:

(4) Tsafiki Generic Verb

wiru-i-e

'he stood up'

wiru-kari-e

'he stood it up'

wiru-ra-e

'he is standing.'

(5) Tsafiki numeral classifier palu-ka ano 'two balls of cooked platano' palu-de ano 'two (individual) platanos (bananas).' palu-ja ano 'two platano leaves'

(6) ume i-ppon ume i-kko ume iti-rin

'one plum branch or tree' 'one plum' 'one plum blossom'

410
3. Functional Similarities
In terms of function, there are of course obvious differences between nominal classifying and verbal classifying systems, one refers to objects and the other to evidentualities. However, in terms of discourse, there are some similarities. In many languages with classifying systems, such as Akatek (Zavala 2000) Thai and Vietnamese (Hundius and Kolver 1983) and Hmong (Bisang 1993) among others, classifiers occur as high topicality markers. They tend to occur with definite, specific nouns, whereas generic nouns do not occur with classifiers. In Tsafiki the verb class markers, for the most part, only occur in finite clauses. The non-finite forms they classify, can appear without the verb class marker in subordinate, backgrounded clauses. Rijkoff (1990) draws some interesting parallels between tense/aspect and demonstratives. He points out both are deictic, one having to do with the temporal dimension, the other with the spatial. Hence, a finite clause, coded with tense/aspect and evidentiality (which is also inherently deictic, coding the speaker's relationship to the eventuality coded by the predicate) can be considered definite, in that the eventuality is located within a

411
certain temporal, discourse space. Now in many languages that have classifiers (Zavala 2000, Rijkoff 1990) nouns are transnumeral, i.e. they are not inherently singular or plural and to be counted or referred to as specific entities require the use of a nominal classifier. In Tsafiki, the non-finite verb forms must first be classified as a type of event (with a verb class marker) before they can be coded with finite verb morphology. Hence, in one sense classified nouns and classified predicates are similar in that each needs to be classified before it can take definite morphemes or finite verb morphology to refer to definite or prominent (foregrounded as opposed to backgrounded clause) phenomena. Rijkoff (1990:180) points out that "...it appears that indefiniteness and nontensedeness are quite similar, in that in both cases it is indicated that we are dealing with an entity whose existence is underdetermined.'
Trying to draw parallels between the coverbs and nouns in languages that require noun classifiers is a bit trickier. But besides being transnumeral, Rijkoff (1990) suggests that what he calls "concept nouns" designate properties that are unmarked in terms of shape or structure. A concept noun refers to a spatial entity with a

412
certain property, say 'grapiness', which can refer to any property essentially characterized by 'grapiness'—one or more individual grapes, grape juice, bunches of grapes etc. Such a concept noun cannot be counted, measured or referred to as a specific, definite object unless it is classified. I have suggested in this study that the coverbs, like ideophones are high on the affecto-imagistic scale, directly referring to specific sensory modalities and rich in texture, but unstructured in terms of a specific event profile. We know, that there must be a conceptual interface between direct sensory experience and language. I have suggested in this study that the coverbs exist on a layer intermediate between the sensory modalities and the more analytic generic verbs. The coverbs express concepts more closely associated with immediate sensory experience, and hence lack analytic structure. Whether "concept nouns" are also high on the affecto-imagistic scale, i.e. contain a rich array of sensory information but lack structural information and what if any parallels can be drawn between "concept nouns" and coverbs, I leave as an open question here.

413

IF 1M 2 3P1 3P2 3D1 3D2 ACC ATT AUG AUX CER COM CNJ CNTR DAT DCL DCL:GEN DISJ DR DUB EMPH EV FOC GEN GR HIST.HAB IMP IMPF.P INCL INF INGR INSTR

APPENDIX A LIST OF ABBREVIATIONS Affix Clitic 1st person masculine 1st person feminine 2nd person 3rd person proximate one 3rd person proximate two 3rd person distal one 3rd preson distal one Accusative Attemptive Augmentative Auxiliary Comitative Conjunct Contrastive Dative Declarative Declarative:General Disjunct Different Reference Dubative Emphatic Evidential, inferred from physical evidence Focus Generic Grade Historic habitual Imperative Imperfective participle Inclusive Infinitive Ingressive Instrument

414

INT LOC NCL NEG NOM PF.P PL POSIT POSS PRG PRO PURP QT QUAL RP SIT SMBL SPEC SR ST SUF VCL

Interrogative Locative Noun classifier Negative Nominative Perfective Participle Plural Position Posssesive Progressive Proform Purpose Quotative Quality Reportative Situational Semblative Speculative Same Referent Stative Suffix Verb class marker

415
BIBLIOGRAPHY
Ackerman, Farrel and Gert Webelhuth. 1998. A Theory of Predicates. Stanford, California: CSLI Publications.
Aguavil, Ramon and Fernando Aviles (Translators). 1982. Matu To Cuenta. Miscelanea Antropologica Ecuatoriana, No. 2, Ano 2:56-101.
Aguavil, Ramon and Fernando Aviles (Translators). 1983. Yo Imin Tsachi: 50 Leyendas de los Indios Colorados. Guayaquil, Ecuador, Museo Antropologico y Pinacoteca Banco Central de Ecuador.
Aissen, Judith. 1979. Possessor ascension in Tzotzil. Papers in Mayan Linguistics, ed. by Laura Martin, 89108. Columbia, Missouri: Lucas Brothers.
Aissen, Judith. 1983. Indirect object advancement in Tzotzil. Studies in Relational Grammar 1, ed. by David M. Perlmutter, 272-302. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Aissen, Judith. 1994. Tzotzil auxiliaries. Linguistics 32: 657-90.
Akatsuka, Noriko. 1985. Conditionals and the epistemic scale. Language 61:625-639.
Aksu-Kog, Ayhan & Dan Slobin. 1986. A psychological account of the development and use of evidentials in Turkish. Evidentiality: The Linguistic Coding of Epistemology, ed. by Chafe and Nichols, 159-167. Norwood, N.J.:Ablex.
Allan, K. 1977. Classifiers. Language. 53:285-310.

416
Allen, Barbara J.; Donna B. Gardiner; Donald G. Frantz, and David M. Perlmutter. 1990. Verb agreement, possessor ascension and multistratal representation in Southern Tiwa. Studies in Relational Grammar 3, ed. by Paul M. Postal and Brian D. Joseph, 321-383. Chicago: The University of Chicago Press.
Alsina, Alex. 1997. CAusatives in Bantu and Romance. Complex Predicates, ed. by Joan Bresnan and Peter Sells, 203-246. Stanford: CSLI Publications.
Alsina, Alex, Joan Bresnan, and Peter Sells (eds.). 1997. Complex Predicates. Stanford, California: CSLI Publications.
Alsina, Alex, and Sam Mchombo. 1990. The syntax of applicatives in Chichewa: Problems for a theta theoretic asymmetry. Natural Languages and Linguistic Theory. 8: 493-506.
Alsina, Alex, and Sam Mchombo. 1993. Object asymmetries and the Chichew±a applicative construction. Theoretical aspects of Bantu grammar, ed. by Sam Mchombo, 17-45. Stanford: Center for the Study of Language and Information Publications.
Anderson, Stephen R. 1985. Typological distinctions in word formation. Language typology and syntactic description: grammatical categories and the lexicon, ed. by T. Shopen, vol. 3, 3-56. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Anderson, Stephen R. and Edward L. Keenan. 1985. Deixis. Language Typology and Syntactic Description, Vol. Ill, ed. by Timothy Shopen, 259-308. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Andrews, Avery D. and Christopher D. Mannin. Complex Predicates and Information Spreading in LFG. Stanford: CSLI.

417
Austin, Peter. 1997. Causatives and applicatives in Australian aboriginal languages. The dative and related phenomena, ed. by Kazuto Matsumura and Tooru Hayasi, 165-225. Tokyo: Hituzi Syobo.
Baker, Mark C. 1988a. Incorporation. A theory of grammatical function changing. Chicago: The University of Chicago press.
Baker, Mark C. 1996. The polysynthesis parameter. New York: Oxford University Press.
Bisang, Walter. 1995. Verb serialization and converbsdifferences and similarities. In Converbs in CrossLinguistic Perspective: Structure and meaning of adverbial verb forms — adverbial participles, gerunds, ed. by Martin Haspelmath and Ekkerhard Konig, 137-188. Berlin: Mouton de Gruyter.
Bisang, W. 1996. Classifiers, quantifiers and class nouns in Hmong. Studies in Language 20-3:519-587.
Blake, Barry J. 1990. Relational Grammar. London: Routledge.
Blake, Barry J. 1994. Case. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Bresnan, Joan W., and L. Moshi 1990. Object asymmetries in comparative Bantu syntax. Linguistic Inquiry 21: 147185.
Brinton, Daniel. 1891. The American Race. New York. Bruce, L. 1988. Serialization: From syntax to lexicon.
Studies in Language 12:19-49. Butt, Miriam. 1995. The Structure of Complex Predicates in
Urdu. Stanford, California: CSLI Publications. Butt, Miriam. 1997. Complex predicates in Urdu. Complex
Predicates, ed. by Joan Bresnan and Peter Sells, 10714 9. Stanford: CSLI Publications.

418
Butt, Miram and Wilhelm Geuder. 1998. The Projection of Arguments: Lexical and Compositional Factors. Stanford, California: CSLI Publications.
Bybee, Joan L. 1985. Morphology. A study of the relation between meaning and form. Amsterdam: John Benjamins.
Bybee, Joan L., Revere D. Perkins, and Willian Pagliuca. 1994. The evolution of grammar: Tense, aspect and modality in the languages of the world. Chicago: The University of Chicago Press.
Bybee, Joan L.; William Pagliuca; and Revere D. Perkins. 1991. Back to the future. Approaches to grammaticalization, ed. by Elizabeth C. Traugott and Bernd Heine, vol. II, 17-58. Amsterdam: John Benjamins.
Canelos, Heriberto. 1989. Santo de los colorados, de aldea a urbe de crecimiento caotico. El Comercio. Quito: Lunes 3 de Julio:B-4.
Chafe, Wallace & Joanna Nichols Jeds.K 1986. Evidentiality: The Linguistic Coding of Epistemology. JAdvances in Discourse Processes 20.)_ Norwood, N.J.:Ablex.
Chappell, Hilary, and William McGregor (eds.) 1996. The grammar of inalienability: a typological perspective on body-part terms and part-whole relations. Berlin: Mouton de Gruyter.
Chappell, Hilary. 1999. The double unaccusative construction in Sinitic languages. External possession, ed. by Doris Payne and Immanuel Barshi, 195-228. Amsterdam: John Benjamins.
Corbett, Greville G. 1991. Gender. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Corbett, Greville G. and Norman M. Frasier. 2000. Gender assignment: a typology and a model. Systems of Nominal Classification, ed. by Gunter Senft, 293-325. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

419
Craig, Colette G. 1986a. Jacaltec noun classifiers. Lingua 70: 241-284.
Craig, Colette G. 1986b. Jacaltec noun classifiers: A study in language and culture. Noun Classes and Categorization, ed. by Colette Craig, 263-294. Amsterdam: John Benjamins Publishing Company.
Craig, Colette. 1992. Classifiers in a functional perspective. Layered Structure and Reference in a Functional Perspective. Papers from the Functional Grammer Conference, Copenhagen, 1990, 277-301. Amsterdam: John Benjamins.
Croft, William. 1991. Syntactic Categories and Grammatical Relations. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Croft, William. 2001, Radical Construction Grammar, Syntactic Theory in Typological Perspective. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Comrie, Bernard. 1976. Aspect. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Comrie, Bernard. 1981. Language universals and linguistic typology. Oxford: Basil Blackwell.
Comrie, Bernard. 1985a. Causative verb formation and other verb-deriving morphology. Language typology and syntactic description: Grammatical categories and the lexicon, ed. by Timothy Shopen, vol. Ill, 309-348. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Comrie, Bernard. 1985b. Tense. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Comrie, Bernard. 1989. Language universals and linguistic typology (2nd edition). Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Curnow, Timothy Jowan. 1997. A grammar of Awa Pit (Cuaiquer): An indigenous language of southwestern Colombia. Unpublished dissertation. Australian National University.

420
Curnow, Timothy Jowan. 1998. Why Paez is not a Barbacoan language: The nonexistence of "Moguex" and the use of early sources. IJAL vol.64:4.
Curnow, Timothy Jowan. 1998. The Barbacoan languages of Colombia and Ecuador. Anthropological Linguistics. 40:3.
Curnow, Timothy Jowan. 2000. Why 'first/non-first person' is not grammaticalized mirativity. Proceedings of ALS22k, the 2000 Conference of the Australian Linguistic Society.
Davis, Daniel W. and John S. Wimbish. 1993. The Linguist's Shoebox. Washaw: Summer Institute of Linguistics.
Dahl, Osten. 1994. Aspect. The Encyclopedia of Language and Linguistics, ed. by R. E. Asher and J. M. Y. Simpson, 240-247. Oxford: Pergamon.
Denny, J. P. 1976. What are noun classifiers good for? Papers From the Twelfth Regional Meeting of the Chicago Linguistic Society, 122-123.
DeLancey, Scott. 1980. Deictic categories in the TibetoBurman verb. Ph.D. dissertation, Indiana University.
DeLancey, Scott. 1981a. An interpretation of split ergativity and related patterns. Language 51: 626-57.
DeLancey, Scott. 1982. Aspect, Transitivity and Viewpoint. Tense-Aspect: Between Semantics and Pragmatics, ed. by Paul J. Hopper. Amsterdam: John Benjamins Publishing Company.
DeLancey, Scott. 1985. Lhasa Tibetan evidentials and the semantics of causation. Proceedings of the Eleventh Annual Meeting of the Berkeley Linguistics Society, ed, by Mary Niepokuj et al., 65-72.
DeLancey, Scott. 1986a. Evidentiality and volitionality in Tibetan. Evidentiality: The Linguistic Coding of Epistemology, ed. by Chafe and Nichols, 203-213. Norwood, N.J.:Ablex.

421
DeLancey, Scott. 1986b. Toward a history of Thai classifier systems. Noun Classes and Categorization, ed. by Colette Craig, 437-452. Amsterdam: John Benjamins Publishing Company.
DeLancey, Scott. 1990a. A note on evidentiality in Hare. International Journal of American Linguistics 56: 152158.
DeLancey, Scott. 1990b. Crosslinguistic evidence for the structure of the agent prototype. Papers and Reports on Child Language Development 29. The Board of Trustees of the Leland Stanford Junior University.
DeLancey, Scott. 1990c. Ergativity and the cognitive model of event structure in Lhasa Tibetan. Cognitive Linguistics 1:289-321.
DeLancey, Scott. 1991a. Event construal and case assignment. Proceedings of the seventeenth annual meeting of the Berkeley Linguistics Society, 338-353. Berkeley: University of California.
DeLancey, Scott 1992. The historical status of the conjunct/disjunct pattern in Tibeto-Burman. Acta Linguistica Havniensia 25: 39-62.
DeLancey, Scott. 1993. Grammaticalization and Linguistic Theory. Proceedings of the 1993 Mid-America Linguistics Conference, ed. by Jule Gomez de Garcia and David Rood. Boulder Colorado: University of Colorado Department of Linguistcs.
DeLancey, Scott. 1997. Mirativity: The grammatical marking of unexpected information. Linguistic Typology 1:33-52. Berlin: Mouton de Gruyter.
DeLancey, Scott. 1999 The Mirative and Evidentiality. To appear: Journal of Pragmatics.
Demuth, Katherine. 2000. Bantu noun class systems: loanword and acquisition evidence of semantic productivity. Systems of Nominal Classification, ed. by Gunter Senft, 270-292. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

422
Diffloth, Gerard. 1972. Notes on Expressive Meaning. Papers From the Eighth Regional Meeting:Chicago Linguistic Society, ed. by Paul M. Peranteau, Judith N. Levi and Gloria C. Phares, 440-446. Chicago: Chicago Linguistic Society.
Dik, Simon C. 1997. The Theory of Functional Grammar, Part 1: The Structure of the Clause. Berlin: Mouton de Gruyter.
Dixon, R.M.W. 1968. Noun classes. Lingua 21:104-125. Dixon, R.M.W. (ed.). 1976. Grammatical Categories in
Australian Languages. New Jersey:Humananities Press Inc. Dixon, R.M.W. 1979. Ergativity. Language 55: 59-138. Dixon, R.M.W. 1982a. Noun classes. Where Have All the Adjectives Gone: and other essays on Semantics and Syntax, 159-183. Dixon, R.M.W. 1982b. Noun classifiers and noun classes. Where Have All the Adjectives Gone? and other essays on Semantics and Syntax, 211-233. The Hague: Mouton. Dixon, R.M.W. 1986. Noun classes and noun classification in typological perspective. Noun Classification and Categorization, ed. by Colette Craig, 105-112. Amsterdam: John Benjamins. Dixon, R.M.W. 1994. Ergativity. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. Dixon, R.M.W. 2000. A typology of causatives: Form, syntax and meaning. Changing valency. Case studies in transitivity, ed. by R.M.W. Dixon and A. Y. Aikhenvald, 30-83. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. Dowty, David R. 1991. Thematic proto-roles and argument selection. Language 67: 547-619.

423
Dryer, Matthew S. 1986. Primary objects, secondary objects, and antidative. Language 62: 808-45.
Dryer, Matthew S. 1991. SVO languages and the OV:VO typology. Journal of Linguistics 27: 443-482.
Dryer, Matthew S. 1992. The Greenbergian word order correlations. Language 68: 81-138.
Dryer, Matthew S. 1997. On the six-way word order typology. Studies in Language 21: 69-103.
DuBois, John W. 1985. Competing motivations. Iconicity in Syntax, ed. by John Haiman, 343-365. Amsterdam: John Benjamins Publishing Company.
DuBois, John A. 1987. The discourse basis of ergativity. Language 63: 805-855.
Durie, Mark. 1988. Verb serialization and "verbal prepositions" in Oceanic languages. Oceanic Linguistics 27: 1-23.
Durie, Mark. 1997. Grammatical structures in verb serialization. Complex Predicates, ed. by Alex Alsina, Joan Bresnan, and Peter Sells, 289-354. Stanford: Center for the Study of Language and Information Publications.
Evans, Nick. 1996. The syntax and semantics of body part incorporation in Mayali. The Grammar of Inalienability, ed. by Hillary Chappell and William McGregor, 65-109. Berlin: Mouton de Gruyter.
Evans, Nick. 1997. Role or Cast? Noun incorporation and complex predicates in Mayali. Complex Predicates, ed. by Alex Alsina, Joan Bresnan, and Peter Sells, 397430. Stanford: Center for the Study of Language and Information Publications.
Fillmore, Charles J. 1967. The grammar of hitting and breaking. Readings in English Transformational Grammar, ed. by R. Jacobs and P. Rosenbaum, 120-133. Waltham, MA: Ginn.

424
Fillmore, Charles J. 1968a. Lexical entries for verbs. Foundations of Language 4: 373-393.
Fillmore, Charles J. 1968b. The case for case. Universals in Linguistics Theory, ed. by Emmon Bach and Robert T. Harms, 1-88. New York: Holt, Rinehart, and Winston.
Foley, William A., and Mike Olson. 1985. Clausehood and verb serialization. Grammar inside and outside the clause: Some approaches to theory from the field, ed. by J. Nichols and A. C. Woodbury, 17-67. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Foley, William A., and Robert D. Van Valin, Jr. 1984. Functional Syntax and Universal Grammar. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Foley, William A., and Robert D. Van Valin, Jr.. 1985. Information packaging in the clause. Language typology and syntactic description: Clause structure, ed. by T. Shopen, vol. I, 282-364. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Gerdts, Donna B. 1998. Incorporation. The handbook of morphology, ed. by Andrew Spencer and Arnold M. Zwicky, 84-100. Oxford: Blackwell.
Givon, T. 1976. Topic pronoun and grammatical agreement. Subject and Topic, 149-188, ed. by C. N. Li. New York: Academic Press.
Givon, Talmy. 1991a. Serial verbs and the mental reality of 'event'. Grammatical vs. cognitive packaging. Approaches to Grammaticalization, ed. by B. Heine and E. Traugott, vol. I, 81-127. Amsterdam: John Benjamins.
Givon, Talmy. 1991b. Some substantive issues concerning verb serialization: Grammatical vs. cognitive packaging. Serial verbs: Grammatical, comparative, and cognitive approaches, ed. by Claire Lefebvre, 137-184. Amsterdam: John Benjamins.
Givon, T. 1991c. The Chicken Story Video. Undistributed video. Eugene, Oregon: University of Oregon.

425
Givon, T. 2001a. Syntax. Vol. I. Amsterdam: John Benjamins Publishing Company.
Givon, T. 2001b. Syntax. Vol. II. Amsterdam: John Benjamins Publishing Company.
Goldberg, Adele. 1995. Constructions, A Construction Grammar Approach to Argument Structure. 1995. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Goldberg, Adele E. 1997. Making one's way through the data. Complex Predicates, ed. by Joan Bresnan and Peter Sells, 151-174. Stanford: CSLI Publications.
Greenberg, Joseph H. 1960. The general classification of Central and South American Indian languages. Men and Cultures: Selected Papers of the 5th International Congress of Anthropological and Ethnological Sciences.
Greenberg, Joseph H. 1963. Some universals of grammar with particular reference to the order of meaningful elements. Universals of Language, ed. by Joseph Greenberg, 73-113. Cambridge: MIT Press.
Greenberg, Joseph H. 1983. Some iconic relationships among place, time, and discourse deixis. Iconicity in Syntax, ed. by John Haiman, 271-288. Amsterdam: John Benjamins Publishing Company.
Greenberg, Joseph H. 1987. Language in the Americas. Stanford: Stanford University Press.
Grinevald, Colette. 2000. A morphosyntactic typology of classifiers. Systems of Nominal Classification, ed. by Gunter Senft, 50-92. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Grinevald, Colette. 2001. Linguistics of Classifiers. Encyclopedia of the Social and Behavioral Sciences, ed. by Smelser, Neil J. and Paul B. Bates. Amsterdam: Oxford: Elsevier.

426
Grinevald, Colette. 2002. Making sense of nominal classification systems: Noun classifiers and the grammaticalization variable. New Reflections on Grammaticalization, ed. by U s e Wischer and Gabriele Diewald, 259-276. Amsterdam: John Benjamins Publishing Company.
Haiman, J. (ed.). 1985. Iconicity in Syntax. Proceedings of a Symposium at Stanford, 1983. Amsterdam: John Bejamins Publishing Company.
Haiman, J. and P. Munro (eds.). 1983a. Switch-reference and Universal Grammar. Proceedings of a Sumposium at Winnipeg, 1981. Typological Studies in language. Amsterdam: John Bejamins Publishing Company.
Hale, Austin _U.980J_. Person markers: Finite conjunct and disjunct verb forms in Newari. Papers in South-East Asian Linguistics, ed. by R. TRail, 7:95-106, Canberra: Australian National University.
Hargreaves, David _(JL991]_. The concept of intentional action in the grammar of Kathmandu Newari. Ph.D. dissertation, University of Oregon.
Haspelmath, Martin. 1993. More on the typology of inchoative/causative verb alternations. Causatives and Transitivity, ed. by B. Comrie and M. Polinsky, 87111. Amsterdam: John Benjamins.
Haspelmath, Martin. 1999. External possession in a European areal perspective. External possession, ed. by D. Payne and I. Barshi, 109-135. Amsterdam: John Benjamins.
Heine, Bernd. 1993. Auxiliaries: Cognitive forces and grammaticalization. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Heine, Bernd. 2002. On the role of context in grammaticalization. New Reflections on Grammaticalization, ed. by U s e Wischer and Gabriele Diewald. Amsterdam: John Bejamins Publishing Company.

427
Heine, Bernd; Ulrike Claudi; and Friederike Hunnemeyer. 1991. Grammaticalization: A conceptual framework. Chicago: The University of Chicago Press.
Hinton, Leanne, Johanna Nichols and John J. Ohala (eds.). 1994. Sound Symbolism. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Hopper, Paul J., and Sandra A. Thompson. 1980. Transitivity in grammar and discourse. Language 59: 251-299.
Jacobsen, William 1964. A grammar of the Washo language. Ph.D. dissertation, University of California at Berkeley.
Jesperson, Otto. 1924. The Philosophy of Grammar. London: George Allen and Unwin.
Jijon and Caamano, Jacinto. 1941. El Ecuador Interandino o Occidental antes de la Conquista Castellana Vol. 2:119-288. Quito:
Kaufman, Terrence. 1990. Language history in South America: What we know and how to know more. Amazonian Linguistics: Studies in Lowland South American Languages, ed. by Doris Payne, 13-74. Austin: University of Texas Press.
Keenan, Edward L. 1985a. Passive in the world's languages. Language typology and syntactic description, ed. by T. Shopen, vol I, 243-281. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Keenan, Edward L. 1985b. Relative Clauses. Language Typology and Syntactic Description: Complex constructions, ed. by T. Shopen, vol. II, 141-170. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Kemmer, Suzanne. 1993. The Middle Voice. Amsterdam: John Benjamins Publishing Company.
Kita, Sotaro. 1997. Two-dimensional semantic analysis of Japanese mimetics. Linguistics 35:379-415.

428
Klaiman, M. H. 1991. Grammatical Voice. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Ko, Kyounghee. 1989. The integrated/New Knowledge Markers in Korean. Master's Thesis, Eugene: University of Oregon.
Koch, Harold. 1984. The category of 'associated motion' in Kaytej. Language in Central Australia 1: 23-34.
Lakoff, Robin. 1971. Passive Resistance. Papers From the Seventh Regional Meeting of the Chicago Linguistic Society. Chicago: Chicago Linguistic Society.
Langacker, Ronald W. 1987a. Nouns and verbs. Language, Vol 63, No.1:53-94.
Langacker, Ronald W. 1987b. Foundations of Cognitive Grammar. Volume I. Theoretical Prerequisites. Stanford: Stanford University Press.
Langacker, Ronald W. 1991a. Foundations of Cognitive Grammar. Volume II. Descriptive Application. Stanford: Stanford University Press.
Langacker, Ronald W. 1991b. Concept, Image and Symbol, The Cognitive Basis of Grammar. Berlin: Mounton de Gruyter.
Lee, Ho Sang. 1985. Consciously-known but unassimilated information: A pragmatic analysis of the epistemic modal -kun in Korean. Proceedings of the First Pacific Linguistics Conference, 183-210. Eugene: Department of Linguistics, University of Oregon.
Lee, Ho Sang. 1993. Cognitive constraints on expressing newly perceived information, with reference to epistemic modal suffixes in Korean. Cognitive Linguistics 4.135-167.
Lehmann, Christian. 2002. New reflections on grammaticalization and lexicalization. New Reflections on Grammaticalization, ed. by Else Wischer and Gabriele Diewald, 1-18. Amsterdam: John Benjamins Publishing Company.

429
Levin, Beth. 1993. English verb classes and alternations. A preliminary investigation. Chicago: Chicago University Press.
Levin, Beth and M. Rappaport Hovav. 1995. Unaccusativity at the syntax-lexical semantic interface. Cambridge: The MIT Press.
Li, Charles N. (ed.). 1976. Subject and Topic. New York: Academic Press.
Li, Charles N. and Sandra A. Thompson. 1976. Subject and topic: a new typology of language. Subject and Topic, ed. by Charles Li, 457-490. New York: Academic Press.
Lord, Carol. 1993. Historical Change in Serial Verb Constructions. Amsterdam: John Benjamins.
Lucy, John A. 1992a. Grammatical Categories and Cognition. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Lucy, John a. 1992b. Language Diversity and Thought. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Lucy, John A. 2000. Systems of nominal classification: a concluding discussion. Systems of Nominal Classification, ed. by Gunter Senft, 326-342. Cambridge: Camgridge University Press.
Mithun, Marianne. 1984. The evolution of noun incorporation. Language 60: 847-894.

430
Mithun, Marianne. 1986a. Noun Classes and Categorization, ed. by Colette Craig, 379-397. Amsterdam: John Benjamins.
Mithun, Marianne. 1986b. On the nature of noun incorporation. Language 62:32-37.
Mithun, Marianne. 1989. The subtle significance of the locus of morphologization. International Journal of American Linguistics 55: 265-82.
Mithun, Marianne. 1991. Active/agentive case marking and its motivations. Language 67: 510-46.
Mithun, Marianne. 1994. Word-formation: Incorporation. In The Encyclopedia of Language and Linguistics, ed. by R.E. Asher and J.M.Y. Simpson, vol. 9, 5024-5026.
Mithun, Marianne. 1995. Multiple reflections of inalienability in Mohawk. The Grammar of Inalienability, ed. by Hilary Chappell and William McGregor, 633-649. Berlin: Mouton de Gruyter.
Mithun, Marianne. 1997. Lexical affixes and morphological typology. Essays on Language Function and Language Type: Dedicated to T. Givon, ed. by Joan Bybee, John Haiman, and Sandra A. Thompson, 357-371. Amsterdam: John Benjamins.
Mithun, Marianne. 1999. The Languages of Native North America. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Mithun, Marianne. 2000. Valency-changing derivation in Central Alaskan Yup'ik. Changing valency: Case studies in transitivity, ed. by R.M.W. Dixon and A.Y. Aikhenvald, 84-114. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

431

Mithun, Marianne and Wallace Chafe. 1999. What are S, A, and 0? Studies in Language 23:3:569-596.

Mix, Robert. 1992. Evidentiality in Tsafiki. Eugene, Oregon: Unpublished MS.

Mohanan, Tara. 1994. Argument Structure in Hindi. Stanford: CSLI Publications.

Mohanan, Tara. 1997. Multidimensionality of Representation: Noun-Verb Complex Predicates in Hindi. Complex Predicates, ed. by Joan Bresnan and Peter Sells, 431472. Stanford: CSLI Publications.

Moore, Bruce. 1962. Correspondences in South Barbacoan Chibcha. Studies in Ecuadorian Indian Languages I. Mexico: Instituto Lingiiistico Verano.

Moore, Bruce R. 1966. Diccionario: Catellano-Colorado; Colorado-Castellano. Quito, Ecuador: Insituto Lingiiistico de Verano.

Moore, Bruce. 1975. El sistema fonitico del idioma Colorado. Estudios fonologicos de lenguas vernaculas del Ecuador. Quito: Instituto Lingiiistico Verano.

Moore, Bruce. 1979a. Cuadernos Etnolingiiistico 5: El Cambio Cultural Entre Los Colorados de Santo Domingo. Quito: Instituto Lingiiistico Verano.

Moore, Bruce. 1979b. Cuadernos Etnolingiiisticos 4: Metdo

Para Aprender El Idioma Colorado: Gramatica

Pedagogica.

. Instituto Lingiiistico Verano.

Moore, Bruce. 1991. Patrones Gramticales del Colorados (Chibcha), ed. by Steve H. Levinsohn. Quito: Instituto Lingiiistico Verano.

Nedjalkov, Vladimir P. (ed.). 1988. Typology of Resultative Constructions. Amsterdam: John Benjamins Publishing Company.

Nichols, J. and A. Woodbury (eds.). Grammar Inside and Outside the Clause: Some Approaches to Theory from the Field. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

432
Nicolas, Edith. 2000. The semantics of verbal classification in Bardi ^Western Australia^. Australian Journal of Linguistics 20: 157-177.
Noonan, Michael. 1985. Complementation. Language Typology and Syntactic Description II, Complex Constructions, ed. by Timothy Shopen. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Nuckolls, Janis B. 1996. Sounds Like Life, Sound-Sumbolic Grammar, Performance and Cognition in Pastaza Quechua. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Nuckolls, Janis B. 2001. Ideophones in Pastaza Quechua.
Payne, Doris L. 1997. The Massai external possessor construction. Essays on language function and language type: dedicated to T. Givon, ed. by Joan Bybee, John Haiman, and Sandra A. Thompson, 395-422. Amsterdam: John Benjamins.
Payne, Doris L. and Immanuel Barshi. 1999. External possession: What, where, how, and why. External Possession, ed. by D. Payne and I. Barshi, 3-29. Amsterdam: John Benjamins.
Perlmutter, David (ed.) 1983. Studies in Relational Grammar 1. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Perlmutter, David and Paul Postal. 1983. The relational succession law. Studies in, Relatione! Grammar 1, ed. by David Perlmutter, 30-80. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Rijkhoff, J. 1990. Toward a unified analysis of terms and predications. Layers and Levels of Representation in Language Theory: A Functional View, ed. by Jan Nuyts, A. Machtelt Boldestein and Co Vet, 165-192. Amsterdam: John Benjamins Publishing Company.

433
Rivet, Paul and Beuchat. 1907. Contribution a 1''etude del langues Colorado et Cayapa (Republique de l'fiquatuer). Journal de la Societe des Americanistes de Paris N.J. Vol. IV. Paris.
Rojas Curiuex, T. 1994. Expression of the category of grammatical time in the Nasa Yuwe (Paez language) predicate. Estructuras Sintacticas de la Predicacionfi Lenguas Amerindias de Colombina, compliled by Jon Landaburu, 567-600. Bogota, Colombia: Universidad de Los Andes.
Rojas Curiuex, Tulio Enrique. 1998. La lengua paez, Una vision de su gramatica. Colombia: Ministerio de Cultura.
Sanches, Mary. 1973. Numeral classifiers and plural marking: An implicational universal. Working Papers on Linguistic Universals, No. 11, 1-22. Stanford: Stanford University.
Sands, Kristina. 1995. Nominal Classification in Australia. Anthropological Linguistics. 37:247-346.
Saussure, Ferdinand. 1972 [1916]. Course in General Linguistics, translated by Roy Harris. La Salle, Illinois: Open Court.
Schiiltze-Berndt, Eva. 2000. Simple and Complex Verbs in Jaminjung: A study of event categorisation in an Australian language. PhD dissertation. Nijmegen, Katholieke Universiteit Nijmegen.
Sciiltze-Berndt, Eva. 2001. Ideophone-like characteristics of uninflected predicates in Jaminjung (Australia).
Schiiltze-Berndt, Eva and Nikolaus P. Himmelman. 2001. Depictive secondary predicates in cross-linguistic perspective. Unpublished ms. Sprachwissenschaftliches Institut, Ruhr-Universitat Bochum.

434
Senft, Gunter (ed.). 2000A. Systems of Nominal Classification. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Senft, Gunter. 2000B. What do we really know about nominal classification systems? Systems of Nominal Classification, ed. by Gunter Senft, 11-49. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Shibatani, Masayoshi. 1996. Applicatives and benfactives: A cognitive account. Grammatical Constructions, Their Form and Meaning, ed. by Masayoshi Shibatani and Sandra Thompson, 157-194. Oxford: Clarendon Press.
Shibatani, Masayoshi. 1996. Applicatives and benefactives: A cognitive account. Grammatical Constructions, ed. by M. Shibatani and S. A. Thompson, 157-194. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Shibatani, Masayoshi. 2001. Non-canonical constructions in Japanese. Non-canonical Marking of Subjects and Objects, ed. by Alexandra Y. Aikhenvald, R.M.W. Dixon and Masayuki Onishi, 307-354. Amsterdam: John Benjamins Publishing Company.
Silvestein, Michael. 1976. Hierarchy of features and ergativity. Grammatical Categories in Australian languages, ed. by R.M.W. Dixon, 112-71. Canberra: Australia Institute of Aboriginal Studies.
Slater, Keith. 1996. Evidentiality in Minhe Monguor and the conjunct/disjunct system: Language contact on the Inner Asian frontier. Unpublished MS, Department of Linguistics, University of California at Santa Barbara.
Slobin, Dan & Ayhan Aksu (1982). Tense, aspect, and modality in the use of the Turkish evidential. TenseAspect: Between Semantics and Pragmatics ed. by Paul Hopper, 185-200. Amsterdam: Benjamins.
Slobin, Dan I. 1997. Mind, code, and text. Essays on Language Function and Language Type: Dedicated to T. Givon, ed. by Joan Bybee, John Haiman, and Sandra A. Thompson, 437-467. Amsterdam: John Benjamins.

435
Stirling, Lesley. 1993. Switch-Reference and Discourse Representation. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Sweetser, Eve E. 1990. From Etyjology to Pragmatics. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Talmy, Leonard. 1985. Lexicalization patterns: Semantic structure in lexical form. Language Typology and Syntactic Description: Grammatical Categories and the Lexicon, ed. by T. Shopen, vol. Ill , 57-149. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Talmy, Leonard. 2000a. Toward a Cognitive Semantics, Volume I, Concept Structuring Systems. Cambridge, Massachusetts: The MIT Press.
Talmy, Leonard. 2000b. Toward a Cognitive Semantics, Volume II, Typology and Process in Concept Structuring. Cambridge, Masschusetts: The MIT Press.
Taylor, John R. 1989. Linguistic Categorization. Oxford: Clarendon Press.
Thompson, Sandra A. and Robert E. Longacre. 1985. Adverbial Clauses. Language Typology and Syntactic Description II, Complex Constructions, ed. by Timothy Shopen. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Tovar, Antonio and Consuelo Larrucca de Tovar. 1984. CatSlogo de las lenguas de America del Sur. Nueva Edicion. Madrid: Gredos.
Trivino Garzon, L. 1994. Towards a typology of the predicate of the simple sentence in the guambiano language. Estructuras Sintacticas de la Predicacionfi Lenguas Amerindias de Colombina, compliled by Jon Landaburu, 601-618. Bogota, Colombia: Universidad de Los Andes
Van Valin, Robert D., Jr. and David P. Wilkins. 1996. The case for 'effector' case roles, agents and agency revisited. Grammatical Constructions, ed. by Shibatani and Thompson. Oxford: Oxford University Press.

436
Van Valin, Robert D., Jr. and Randy J. LaPolla. 1997. Syntax. Structure, meaning and function. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Vasquez de Ruiz, Beatriz. 1988. La predicacion en Guambiano. Bogota Colcienceias and Universidad de los Andes.
Vasquezde Ruiz, Beatriz. 1994. The Compound Sentence in Guambiano. Estructuras Sintacticas de la Predicacion^ Lenguas Amerindias de Colombina, compliled by Jon Landaburu, 619-638. Bogota, Colombia: Universidad de Los Andes
Vendler, Zeno. 1957{1967}. Linguistics in Philosophy. Ithaca: Cornell University Press.
Ventura i Oiler, Montserrat. 1995. En el camino: Los Tsachila en el complejo etico de la selva occidental del Ecuador. Primer Encuentro de Investigadores de la Costa Ecuatoriana En Europa. Quito, Ecuador: AbyaYala.
Ventura i Oiler, Montserrat. 1997. En la Actualidad. Etnografias Minimas del Ecuador, ed. by Jose E. Juncosa. Serie Pueblos del Ecuador No. 14. Quito, Ecuador.
Vittadello, P. Alberto. 1988a. Cha'palaachi, El Idioma Cayapa, Tomo 1. Guayaquil Ecuador: Museos del Banco Central del Ecuador.
Vittadello, P. Alberto. 1988b. Cha'palaachi, El Idioma Cayapa, Tomo 2. Guayaquil Ecuador: Museos del Banco Central del Ecuador.
Voeltz, F.K. Erhard, and Christa Kilian-Hatz. Ideophones. Amsterdam: John Bejamins Publishing Company.
Watters, David (1998). The Kham language of west-central Nepal. Ph.D. dissertation. Eugene, Oregon. University of Oregon.

437
Wilkins, David P. 1991. The semantics, pragmatics and diachronic development of 'associated motion' in Mparntwe Arrernte. Buffalo Papers in Linguistics 1: 207-257.
Wilkins, David P. 2000. Ants, ancestors and medicine: a semantic and pragmatic account of classifier constructions in Arrernte (Central Australia). Systems of Nominal Classification, ed. by Gunter Senft, 147216. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Wilson, Stephen. 1999. Coverbs and Complex Predicates in Wagiman. Stanford: CSLI Publications.
Zavala, Roberto. 1999. External possessor in Oluta Popoluca (Mixean): Applicatives and incorporation of relational terms. External possessor, noun incorporation and related constructions, ed. by D. Payne and I. Barshi, 339-372. Amsterdam: John Benjamins.
Zavala, Roberto. 2000a. Inversion and Other Topics in the Grammar of Olutec (Mixean). PhD Dissertation. University of Oregon.
Zavala, Roberto. 2000b. Multiple classifier systems in Akatek (Mayan). Systems of Nominal Classification, ed. by Gunter Senft., 114-146. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

