Portuguese influence on Kulina1
Stefan Dienst
1. Beginnings of Portuguese settlement in northern Brazil
The arrival of the Portuguese in South America dates back more than five hundred years, but the direct influence of the Portuguese language on the indigenous languages of the Amazonian hinterland began only much later. The first Portuguese ship reached the Brazilian coast in 1500 and the colonisation of the country began in 1532. But it was only at the beginning of the 17th century, after driving the French out of the area, that the Portuguese started to settle on the coast of northern Brazil.
2. Nheengatu2
The mostly male Portuguese settlers in northern Brazil intermarried with the local Tupinambás, speakers of a language of the Tupi-Guarani branch of the Tupian language family. The children resulting from those relationships learned the language of their indigenous mothers as their first language. In Brazil, this language, a form of Tupinambá influenced by Portuguese, is today called língua geral amazônica ‘Amazonian General Language’ or nheengatu. It was the predominant language of the Neobrazilian society in northern Brazil until it was outlawed and the use of Portuguese prescribed in 1757. The language has since been in constant decline, but it is still spoken in the border area of Brazil, Colombia and Venezuela, with speakers living in all three countries. The language is known as yeral in Colombia and Venezuela.
3. Exploration of the Amazon and Catholic mission
The first Portuguese expedition up the Amazon river started in 1637. From then on the Catholic church carried out missionary work in the Amazonian hinterland, always following the major rivers as the only possible travel routes. The language the priests taught the indigenous people who settled in

288 Stefan Dienst
their missions was Nheengatu. With speakers of different languages settling in one mission, that could lead to the demise of the indigenous languages and the result were Nheengatu-speaking communities far away from the coastal homeland of the language.
Many of the people who continued to live in their traditional ethnic communities also acquired some knowledge of Nheengatu and for them it became the language used for contacts with the Neobrazilian society. Nheengatu retained this function (to an ever decreasing extent) until the beginning of the 20th century.
4. The spread of Portuguese
Nheengatu is now forgotten in most places where it was once spoken, replaced by Brazil’s national language, Portuguese. Most of the languages whose speakers came into contact with the Portuguese or with Neobrazilians centuries ago are also long gone and little or nothing can be said about the influence Portuguese may have had on them before they were replaced by it or before their speakers fell victim to genocide or contagious diseases.
Even in remote areas of Brazil, where numerous indigenous languages are still spoken, many are seriously endangered or moribund. But there are also others, like Kulina, which are still in much better shape.
5. Kulina3
Kulina belongs to the Arawan language family of south-western Amazonia (Figure 1). The major Kulina groups are found on the Purus river in Peru and Brazil (in the state of Acre) and on the Juruá river in Brazil (in the south of the state of Amazonas). All other languages of the Arawan family are or were spoken in Brazil, in the state of Amazonas.
The Kulinas in Acre are unique among the indigenous peoples of that state in their degree of language preservation. Many of the older Kulina men and a few older women know Portuguese well enough to talk about issues which are relevant for everyday life in the jungle, but surprisingly younger men often have a more limited command of Portuguese than their fathers. Most women and all children are monolingual in Kulina.
The present state of Acre was settled by Brazilian rubber tappers at the end of the 19th century, when it was a part of Bolivia. Due to the demands of the Brazilian settlers, Brazil pressured Bolivia into ceding the area, which became a part of Brazil in 1903.

Portuguese influence on Kulina 289
Arawan

Madihá

Madi Sorowahá Paumari †Arawá

Kulina

Western Jamamadi

Deni

Eastern Jamamadi

Banawá

Jarawara

Figure 1. The Arawan language family

5.1. Spanish influence
It is not known when the Kulinas first came into contact with non-indigenous people on the Peruvian side of their territory. But there is some linguistic evidence that it was before they had contact with Brazilians. While the Kulinas living in Peru have various Spanish loans in their dialect, only two words of Spanish origin are used in the Brazilian varieties, matshito ‘machete’ and kotshiro ‘knife’ from cuchillo. These metal tools are among the Western products which have had the deepest impact on the daily lives of the Kulinas and they must have been among the first they obtained. That just their names are of Spanish origin indicates that the first Western influence came from the Peruvian/Bolivian side but lasted only a short time before Brazilian influence became dominant.
5.2. Nheengatu influence
It is difficult to tell when members of the ethnic group whose language is discussed here first came into contact with Europeans or Neobrazilians since in the history of Amazonia the same ethnonym has often been used for unrelated groups and in many cases it is not possible to identify groups named in early sources. An indigenous people named ‘Curina’, living on the Amazon river, was mentioned as early as the seventeenth century (de

290 Stefan Dienst

Figueroa et al. 1660–1684 [1986]: 73), but this was probably an unrelated group. The name ‘Curina, Culina, Culino, etc.’ then travelled along the Amazon and up the Juruá river, a tributary of the Amazon, where it was used for new ethnic groups the explorers encountered. The first account of ‘Culinos’ who can clearly be identified as Kulinas of the Arawan language family is from the British explorer William Chandless, who travelled up the Juruá river in 1867 (Chandless 1869).
Even if the first contact of the Kulinas with non-indigenous Brazilians was as late as the 19th century, it was still at a time when Nheengatu was used as a lingua franca (although it was already in decline). For this reason, the first words that entered the Kulina language due to contact with Brazilians came from Nheengatu, not from Portuguese. The following Nheengatu loans are found in Kulina.

Kulina
dzara kari(w)a modobi mokawa nana warowa

‘non-indigenous person’ (obs.) ‘non-indigenous person’ ‘peanut’ ‘shotgun’ ‘pineapple’ ‘mirror’

Nheengatu (Stradelli 1929)

iára caryua mandubí mucáua naná uaruá

‘owner, master’ ‘master’ ‘peanut’ ‘shotgun’ ‘pineapple’ ‘mirror’

The more conservative form kariwa for ‘non-indigenous person’ is used in the Juruá dialect of Kulina. In the Purus dialect, the /w/ has been dropped and the word has the form karia. The words modobi, nana and warowa are used in the Purus dialect of Kulina, but not in the Juruá dialect.

5.3. Portuguese influence
There is no Nheengatu influence on Kulina any longer and in Brazil there is no Spanish influence any more, either. The influence of Portuguese, however, continues and can be expected to have an increasingly greater impact in the future. But at present, it is rather modest.
Although the Kulinas are in constant contact with health workers, government officials, missionaries and researchers from other parts of Brazil and from abroad, the variety of Portuguese that influences their language the most is the one spoken by their non-indigenous neighbours, i.e. the Popular Brazilian Portuguese of rural Acre and southern Amazonas state.

Portuguese influence on Kulina 291

5.3.1. Vocabulary

Portuguese influence is most noticeable in the Kulina vocabulary. The words discussed in this section are used by monolingual Kulina-speakers and can be considered established lexemes whose form has been adapted to the phonology of the language. Loans which have not (yet) been fully adapted to Kulina phonology are discussed in the following section.

NOUNS
Unsurprisingly, a lot of nouns relating to Western culture have been borrowed, although Kulina neologisms are also frequent, e.g. wawahina ‘syringe’, derived by reduplication from the verb wahina ‘to harpoon, to skewer’ and kokoro ‘fish-hook’, formed in the same way from the verb koro ‘to throw’.
The following is a list of Portuguese loans for non-traditional items.

Kulina
dzinero haidzo itsada kahaniro katsatsa keneko koidze maratsia noparina panera pereko raraidza tahapa tsao

Portuguese
dinheiro rádio enxada carneiro cachaça caneco colher melancia lamparina panela prego laranja tarrafa sal

‘money’ ‘radio’ ‘hoe’ ‘sheep’ ‘sugar-cane brandy’ ‘mug’ ‘spoon’ ‘watermelon’ ‘oil lamp’ ‘metal cooking pot’ ‘nail’ ‘orange’ ‘casting-net’ ‘salt’

Portuguese loans are not limited to words for recently introduced items. The names of some local animals, such as kamariáo ‘iguana’ (Port. camaleão), and pato ‘duck’ (Port. pato) have also been borrowed.
In the case of some words which have been borrowed from Nheengatu into Portuguese, it is not clear if they entered Kulina from one language or the other, e.g. dzaboro ‘jabiru (a stork species)’ (Port. jaburu, Nheengatu jaburú).

292 Stefan Dienst

VERBS
There are also a small number of Portuguese verbs which have been borrowed into Kulina. Kulina verbs belong to two different morphological types, inflecting and non-inflecting. Inflecting verbs take prefixes and suffixes, whereas non-inflecting verbs are followed by an auxiliary which takes the affixes.

(1) inflecting verb o-wada-de4 1SG-sleep-PAST ‘I slept.’

(2) non-inflecting verb
kona o-na-de swim 1SG-AUX-PAST ‘I swam.’

When Portuguese verbs are borrowed into Kulina, they always become non-inflecting verbs.

(3) hina,

tarabaia i-na-na!

come.on work 1NSG-AUX-HORT

‘Come on, let’s work!’

(tarabaia from Port. trabalhar ‘work’)

Occasionally, a Portuguese verb and its object together become a Kulina verb.

(4) ahidza ti-madi-hi, pakaheda ta-dza here.F 2-live-IMP.F pay.rent 2.AUX-NFIN ‘You will live here, paying rent!’ (pakaheda from Port. pagar renda ‘pay rent’)

NUMERALS
Kulina has only two basic numbers, ohari- ‘(to be) one’ and pama- ‘(to be) two’, which are inflecting verbs. In the past, compound forms were used for three and four. Nowadays, Portuguese numerals are used from three onwards. Unlike the native numbers, they are not verbs. When they are used as noun phrase modifiers, they follow the head noun, like the native numbers and most other Kulina noun phrase modifiers, while in Portuguese modifying numerals precede the head.
The examples below show the noun phrase ‘three weeks’ in Kulina, Popular Brazilian Portuguese and Standard Portuguese. While both words are Portuguese loans in Kulina, the constituent order is different from Portuguese.

Portuguese influence on Kulina 293

Kulina:
semána tres week three ‘three weeks’

Popular Brazil. Portug.:
três semana three week ‘three weeks’

Standard Portuguese:
três semana-s three week-PL ‘three weeks’

The borrowing of European numerals is a typical phenomenon of Amazonian languages of Brazil. Many Amazonian languages have only a small set of native lexical numbers (Dixon and Aikhenvald 1999: 9). But many of the indigenous languages of the Peruvian and Bolivian lowlands have been under Quechua influence and they have often borrowed higher numerals from Quechua rather than Spanish.

5.3.2. Phonology

Kulina has a simple phonology with 16 consonants, 4 vowels, word-final stress and mainly (C)V syllable structure with only a few instances of diphthongs.

Table 1. Consonant phonemes

voiced obstruents voiceless unaspir. obstruents voiceless aspir. obstruents nasals flap approximant

bilabial
b p ph m
w

dental
d t th

alveolar
dz ts tsh n r

velar
k kh

glottal h

SYLLABLE-FINAL /s/
There are no syllable-final consonants in Kulina. In Brazilian Portuguese, only a few consonant phonemes can occur syllable-finally and the only one found in a number of recent loans in Kulina is /s/, e.g. in bis.koi.ta from Portuguese biscoito ‘biscuit, cookie’. But it is not certain that this coda consonant will be preserved for a long time. The word for ‘school’, Portuguese escola, is pronounced iskola or iskora by people who know Portuguese, but from monolinguals tsikora can be heard, a form completely adapted to Kulina phonology. An alternative pronunciation for biskoita, which can be heard from children, is bitsikoita, with an epenthetic /i/ and a change of the

294 Stefan Dienst

pronunciation of the consonant from [s] to [ts]. This and similar forms of other loans may eventually prevail, eliminating /s/ in coda position in established loans. But since new words are freely borrowed, the phenomenon is unlikely to disappear, just moving on from older loans to newer ones.

DIPHTHONGS
Another unusual phonological feature found in biskoita is the diphthong /oi/. In the inherited vocabulary of Kulina, only a few instances of the diphthong /ai/ are found, e.g. in maitha ‘yesterday’. The diphthong /oi/ is found in the word koiza (the name of a fermented beverage and the festival at which it is consumed). This word is probably a loan from another indigenous language, as similar words are found in unrelated neighbouring languages. The word may have entered Kulina before the first contact with Portuguese.
While the existence of diphthongs cannot be regarded to be a result of Portuguese influence, borrowing from Portuguese has led to a significant increase of Kulina words containing diphthongs. The diphthongs /ao/ and /eo/, which occur in loans such as kamariáo ‘iguana’ from Portuguese camaleão and papéo ‘book, paper’ from Portuguese papel ‘paper’, are otherwise only attested in onomatopoeic words.

PHONEME /ts/
The phoneme /ts/ is a recent innovation in Kulina phonology (Dienst 2005). It entered Kulina due to borrowing from neighbouring indigenous languages before the contact with Portuguese. But the number of loans containing this phoneme remained quite limited until the language started to borrow from Portuguese.
With the continual borrowing from Portuguese, the frequency of /ts/ has significantly increased. The phoneme is used in Portuguese loanwords in place of the Portuguese phonemes /s/ and // as well as the allophone [] of the phoneme /t/, which occurs before /i/ in most Brazilian varieties of Portuguese, including those of Acre and southern Amazonas.

Kulina
boratsa ‘biscuit, cookie’ katsado ‘hunter’ paretsi ‘Indian other than Kulina’

Portuguese
bolacha [bo'laa] ‘dry biscuit’ caçador [kasa'do()] ‘hunter’ parente [pa'i] ‘relative’

Portuguese influence on Kulina 295
STRESS Stress always falls on the last syllable of Kulina words, but in recent loans, the Portuguese stress can be preserved, e.g. in iskóra ‘school’ from escola. But, as mentioned above, this word can be completely assimilated and in the pronunciation tsikora, the stress is word-final.
CONCLUSIONS Due to Portuguese loans, two formerly marginal phenomena of Kulina phonology, diphthongs and the phoneme /ts/ have become considerably more frequent. The phonological features which are innovations due to Portuguese influence, syllable-final /s/ and phonemic stress, are restricted to recent Portuguese loans. If it wasn’t for the continued influence of Portuguese, those features would probably soon be lost due to the gradual complete phonological assimilation of loans.

5.3.3. Other influences

Portuguese does not seem to have had any influence on the grammar of the largely monolingual speech community in Acre.
A Portuguese feature which could be observed in the usage of a bilingual speaker living in the town of Eirunepé in Amazonas is the contrastive use of two demonstratives.

(5) a-hari towi o-ne-hera-ni,

a-kha-hari towi

DEM-M GOAL 1SG-AUX-NEG.F-DECL.F DEM-REM-M GOAL

o-na-haro

1SG-AUX-NAR.F

‘I don’t want this one, I want that one.’

In this example, the remote demonstrative akhahari, referring to something further away from the speaker, contrasts with the demonstrative ahari, without the remoteness-suffix -kha. The latter demonstrative refers to something closer to the speaker. This reflects the use of demonstratives in Portuguese.
Though Kulina has a variety of demonstratives, which can be used to express relative distance from the speaker, speakers in Acre never use them contrastively, as in the example from Amazonas above. They would use, for example, ‘ahari… ahari…’, corresponding to English ‘this (one)…that (one)…’.

296 Stefan Dienst
The speaker from whom example (5) comes has spoken Portuguese since her childhood, which is unheard of among the Kulina in Acre and also highly exceptional among the Kulina in Amazonas. There is no indication that the structural influence of Portuguese seen in the example is found among the Kulina of Amazonas in general.
5.4. Conclusions
The Kulinas have been in contact with Portuguese-speakers for more than a century, but most of them remain monolingual. The main impact of Portuguese has so far been an enrichment of the vocabulary. In some cases Portuguese loans have replaced older words. There has been some influence on the phonology, but none on the grammar of the overwhelming majority of speakers who continue to live in indigenous villages. Given the present healthy state of the language, it is likely to survive for much longer than most other Amazonian languages which are still spoken today. The contact with Portuguese-speakers will probably become more intense over time and the language is bound to show a stronger Portuguese influence in the future.
Notes
1. The earliest traces of Western influence found in Kulina, an indigenous language of Brazil and Peru, are loans from Spanish and Nheengatu, the old lingua franca of northern Brazil. The more recent, but also more enduring influence of Portuguese has left its mark on Kulina phonology as well as the vocabulary. But there is as yet no perceptible Portuguese influence on the grammar of most speakers.
2. The information on Nheengatu is based on Rodrigues (1996). 3. The Kulina data are based on the author’s fieldwork in the Brazilian state of
Acre in 2002/2003, 2004 and 2005 and a short visit to the state of Amazonas in 2004. 4. aspir. = aspirated, AUX = auxiliary, DECL = declarative, DEM = demonstrative, F = feminine, GOAL = goal, HORT = hortative, IMP = imperative, M = masculine, NAR = narrative, NEG = negation, NFIN = non-finite, NSG = non-singular, obs = obsolete, PAST = past tense, PL = plural, Port. = Portuguese, REM = remote, SG = singular, unaspir. = unaspirated.

Portuguese influence on Kulina 297
References
Chandless, William 1869 Notes on a journey up the River Juruá. Journal of the Royal Geographical Society 39: 296 –311.
de Figueroa, Franciso, Cristobal de Acuña et al. 1660–84 [1986] Informes de Jesuitas en el Amazonas. Iquitos: Centro de Estudios Teológicos de la Amazonía.
Dienst, Stefan 2005 The innovation of s in Kulina and Deni. Anthropological Linguistics 47: 424–441.
Dixon, R. M.W. and Alexandra Y. Aikhenvald 1999 Introduction. In The Amazonian languages, R.M.W. Dixon and Alexandra Y. Aikhenvald (eds.), 1–21. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Rodrigues, Aryon Dall’Igna 1996 As línguas gerais sul-americanas. Papia 4 (2), 6 –18. (Also available online: http://orbita.starmedia.com/~i.n.d.i.o.s/textos/txt009lg.htm)
Stradelli, Ermanno 1929 Vocabularios da Lingua Geral, Portuguez – Nheêngatú e Nheêngatú – Portuguez. Rio de Janeiro: Livraria J. Leite.

