J. Linguistics  (), –. Printed in the United Kingdom #  Cambridge University Press
Categories of the Noun Phrase in Jarawara1
R. M. W. D I X O N
Research Centre for Linguistic Typology, La Trobe University, Melbourne
(Received  November  ; revised  April )
The head of an NP is taken to be that component which determines the categories of the NP as a whole. First impression of an NP in Jarawara (Arawa! family, Brazil) involving inalienable possession (e.g. o-mano ‘ my arm ’) is that there is conﬂict of criteria concerning what is head. The gender of the NP, for verbal suﬃx agreement, is determined by the possessor (here sg preﬁx o-), suggesting that this should be taken to be head. But the whole NP counts as rd person, for verbal preﬁx agreement, suggesting that the possessed noun (mano ‘ arm’) should be taken as head. Furthermore, the NP counts as inanimate. Detailed analysis shows that there is in fact no conﬂict. All NPs in this language are rd person (st and nd persons being conﬁned to head marking within the predicate and functioning as possessors within an NP, not as full NPs). And all NPs involving inalienable possession count as inanimate. The only variable is gender, which is determined by the possessor ; plainly, this is the unequivocal head of the NP.
. T         
In Jarawara – a language of the small Arawa! family (see Dixon ), spoken by about  Indians spread over eight jungle villages in southern Amazonia – there appears at ﬁrst sight to be conﬂicting evidence as to what is the head of a noun phrase (NP) which includes an inalienably possessed noun.
There are two types of possession in Jarawara, alienable and inalienable. Alienable possession involves the possessor, the possessive marker kaa, and
[] My greatest debt is of course to the Jarawara people who have patiently taught me their language and answered my questions – Okomobi, Mioto, Soki, Kamo, Botenawaa, Kakai, Wero and others. Alan Vogel is collaborating with me on a grammar of Jarawara and has discussed with me many times the matters dealt with in this paper. Dan Everett helped to articulate the problem, back in . As always, Alexandra Aikhenvald has encouraged this work, and helped me to improve it by her critical and constructive comments. Abbreviations used in this paper are : A, transitive subject function ; , auxiliary ; , declarative ; du, dual ; exc, exclusive non-singular ; f, , feminine ; FPef, far past tense in eyewitness evidential, feminine form ; , future modality suﬃx ; inan, , inanimate ; inc, , inclusive non-singular ; , interrogative ; IPem, immediate past tense in eyewitness evidential, masculine form ; m, , masculine ; NP, noun phase ; n-sg, -, nonsingular ; O, transitive object function ; Oc, preﬁx marking an O-construction where both A and O arguments are rd person ; , postposition marking peripheral function ; , pl, plural ; , possessive ; PN, (inalienably) possessed noun ; S, transitive subject function ; sg, , singular. In all examples the predicate is enclosed between braces, o … q, and NPs within square brackets, [ … ].


. . . 

then the possessed noun. The gender, person and animacy of the whole NP is determined by the possessed noun, which is thus taken to be head of the NP.
Jarawara has two genders, which we can call feminine (f) and masculine (m) – see section . The system is unusual in that f is the unmarked gender. All pronouns (whatever the sex of their referent) engender f agreement on verbal suﬃxes.
Now consider a paradigmatic array of NPs involving alienable possession. In set () the possessed noun is jomee ‘ dog ’, which is m, and in set () it is jimawa ‘ knife ’, which is f. The possessor is a man’s name, Okomobi, in (a) of each set ; a woman’s name, Manira, in (b) ; the rd person non-singular pronoun, mee, in (c) ; the st person non-singular inclusive pronoun, ee, in (d) ; and the st person singular pronoun, o-, in (e). It will be seen that o- plus alienable possessive marker kaa becomes oko.

() (a)
(b) (c) (d) (e)

Okomobi (m) kaa jomee (m)
Manira (f) kaa jomee (m) mee kaa jomee (m) ee kaa jomee (m) oko jomee (m)

‘ Okomobi’s dog ’ (the whole NP is m) ‘ Manira’s dog ’ (m) ‘ their dog ’ (m) ‘ our (inclusive) dog ’ (m) ‘ my dog ’ (m)

() (a)
(b) (c) (d) (e)

Okomobi (m) kaa jimawa (f)
Manira (f) kaa jimawa (f) mee kaa jimawa (f) ee kaa jimawa (f) oko jimawa (f)

‘ Okomobi’s knife ’ (the whole NP is f) ‘ Manira’s knife ’ (f) ‘ their knife ’ (f) ‘ our (inclusive) knife ’ (f) ‘ my knife ’ (f)

The full NPs in (a–e) all show m gender agreement in the predicate while the NPs in (a–e) show f agreement. For example, each of the NPs (a–e) could be followed by the predicate habo na-ka ‘ is barking ’, where habo is the non-inﬂecting verb ‘ bark ’, na is the auxiliary (used after non-inﬂecting verbs) and ka is the m form of the declarative suﬃx. Each of the NPs (a–e) could be followed by predicate ino-ke ‘ is sharp ’ where ino is the inﬂecting verb ‘ be sharp ’ and -ke is the f form of the declarative suﬃx.
All ten NPs count as rd person for person agreement in the predicate. The NPs (a–e) are animate and may carry a number distinction (this is shown not in the NP itself but instead within the predicate). The NPs (a–e) are inanimate and, like all inanimates, may not be speciﬁed for number.
The head of an NP is here recognized as the component of the NP which determines the categories of the NP as a whole.# On this criterion the head

[] In recent years, much has been written about ‘ heads ’, both of NPs and of other types of construction – see, for example, Muysken (), Zwicky (), Hudson () and the


   
of an NP involving alienable possession is straightforward – it is the possessed noun, jomee in (a–e) and jimawa in (a–e). The possessed noun determines the gender, person and animacy of the NP as a whole.$
However, things become more complicated when we turn to NPs which involve inalienable possession. Jarawara has about  inalienably possessed nouns (PNs) which must always take a nominal or pronominal possessor. They simply follow the inalienable possessor within the NP. About half of the PNs have distinct f and m forms. I quote them with the (unmarked) f form ﬁrst, then a slash, then the m form, e.g. mani\mano ‘ arm ’ has f form mani and m form mano. Other examples include tame\teme ‘ foot ’, hawi\hawine ‘ road ’ and mahi\maho ‘ smell ’. (See section  below ; Dixon  is an account of the forms and development of PNs in Jarawara.)
Now consider the paradigm of mani\mano ‘ arm ’ with the ﬁve types of possessor used in ()–() :

() (a) Okomobi (m) mano (m) ‘ Okomobi’s arm ’ (the whole NP is m)

(b) Manira (f) mani (f)

‘ Manira’s arm ’ (f)

(c) mee mani (f)

‘ their arms ’ (f)

(d) ee mano (m)

‘ our (inclusive) arms ’ (f)

(e) o-mano (m)

‘ my arm ’ (f)

The gender of the PN mani\mano within the NP is determined by the possessor. It is the f form mani for an f noun and for n-sg mee as possessor, as in (b–c) ; and the m form mano for an m noun and for any st or nd person pronoun as possessor, as in (a, d–e). (This is discussed further in section  below.)
What is of particular concern to us here are the categories of the noun
phrase as a whole.

(a) Gender. The gender of the NP (shown by agreement on verbal suﬃxes) is that of the possessor – m for an m noun, in (a) ; f for an f noun, in (b) ; and f for any pronoun as possessor, in (c–e). That is, f is the unmarked gender, and all pronouns take f agreement. This is shown in (a–e), which are intransitive clauses having (a–e) respectively as the S NP and a predicate consisting of verb koma- ‘ be sore ’ plus the declarative suﬃx. We get the m form -ka of declarative in (a) and the f form -ke in (b–e). Note that throughout this paper the predicate is enclosed between braces, o … q, and NPs within square brackets, [ … ].

papers in Corbett, Fraser & McGlashan (). Here I adopt a traditional stance, taking the head of an NP as that component which ‘ determines the category of its phrase ’ (Nichols  : ). [] In Jarawara kinship possession is basically a sub-type of alienable possession. There are some special features of formal marking, but with respect to grammatical categories and syntactic functioning ‘ my father ’ essentially behaves like ‘ my knife ’.


. . . 

() (a) (b) (c) (d) (e)

[Okomobi mano] okoma-kaq [Manira mani] okoma-keq [mee mani] okoma-keq [ee mano] okoma-keq [o-mano] okoma-keq

‘ Okomobi’s arm is sore.’ ‘ Manira’s arm is sore.’ ‘ Their arms are sore.’ ‘ Our (inclusive) arms are sore.’ ‘ My arm is sore.’

(b) Person. All the NPs in (a–e) count as rd person for person agreement in the verb (the details of this will be explained in sections  and  below). (c) Animacy. All the NPs in (a–e) count as inanimate (the details are in sections  and ). As a consequence of this, all the NPs in (a–e) lack the possibility of number speciﬁcation in the predicate (see sections  and ).

What then is the head of an NP in Jarawara which involves inalienable possession ? All of (a–e) count as rd person, suggesting that mani\mano ‘ arm ’ should be taken as head. But the gender of the NPs is determined not by mani\mano but by the possessor, suggesting that this should be taken as head. Which of these might be accorded precedence over the other ? Or should we recognize two ‘ heads ’ – each for a diﬀerent purpose – within the NP (and, if so, what would this mean) ?
The situation is complicated by the fact that all ﬁve NPs in (a–e) count as inanimate. Like all inanimates, they cannot receive grammatical marking for number through cross-referencing within the predicate by the n-sg pronoun mee, even though (c) and (d) clearly have a non-singular referent.
This is a statement of the problem. But it is a problem only on a superﬁcial examination of Jarawara. A more detailed study will demonstrate that there is, in fact, no conﬂict of criteria and that all NPs in Jarawara have a single unambiguous head.

. C                                 
There are a number of grammatical categories typically associated with – and often coded onto – a noun phrase. These include animacy, gender, person, number and case.
Case is a category relating to the noun phrase as a whole, not to any part of it, since it marks the syntactic function of the NP within the clause in which it occurs. Case applies to the whole NP ; it may actually be marked just once (on the last word, or on the ﬁrst word, or on the head) or on every word of the NP, according to the grammatical conventions of the language.
The animacy, gender and person of an NP are generally determined by the head noun or pronoun (or demonstrative, etc.) ; they are inherent properties of the head. Other constituents of the NP (such as adjectives) may agree with the head in animacy and\or gender and\or person marking, and so may the verb of the clause.
The marking of number demonstrates considerable variation across languages. It can be shown by an inﬂection on the head noun and\or on


   

modiﬁers within the NP (as in Latin and Spanish). It can be shown by a separate word within the NP ; for example, the Chadic language Mupun may include plural word mo at the end of an NP, after adjectives and demonstratives (Frajzyngier  : ).
In a fair number of languages the number reference of an NP is not shown in the NP itself but in a cross-referencing pronoun in the predicate. This is illustrated in (–) for Boumaa Fijian (Dixon ), a verb-initial language.

() oe

la’oq [a

S go 

‘ The child is going.’

gone]S child

() oera la’oq [a S go  ‘ The children are going.’

gone]S child

Jarawara is essentially a language of this type. It is clear that the head of an NP refers to some class of entity, with no
presuppositions as to quantity. Number is an added speciﬁcation ; it is now a question of whether number should be considered as added to the head, which may then take modiﬁers, or whether number is a category applied to the whole NP, consisting of head plus modiﬁers. Consider os livros vermelhos ‘ the red books ’ in Portuguese. The ﬁrst alternative is to say that plural applies to livro ‘ book ’, producing livros, and that the article o ‘ the ’ and adjective vermelho ‘ red ’ then agree with the head noun in number. The second alternative is to say that we ﬁrst have an NP o livro vermelho and that number applies to this NP, plural -s being added to each word in the NP. It is diﬃcult to suggest a principled basis for choosing between these alternatives.
In summary, we would say that the animacy, gender and person of an NP are generally determined by its head, while case is a feature of the NP as a whole. Number could be taken as a property either of the head or of the NP.
Jarawara is a head-marking language and has no case marking on core NPs. But its NPs do show categories of gender, person, animacy and number. The unusual feature of an NP involving an inalienably possessed noun, as in (a–e), is that it appears to be the possessor which determines gender but the possessed which determines person. In addition, the whole NP is treated by the grammar as inanimate, irrespective of the actual animacy of the entity(s) it refers to.
The following sections describe relevant aspects of the grammar of Jarawara – predicate structure in section , construction types and gender agreement in section , the nature of gender in section , person in section , animacy and number in section , inalienably possessed nouns in section , and the structure of the NP in section . Finally, in section , I provide a solution to the problem outlined in section , and show that an NP in Jarawara does in fact have a single, unambiguous head.



. . . 
$ Object pronoun, obligatory in a transitive clause. $ Subject pronoun, obligatory in all clauses. $ Preﬁxes :
— First preﬁx position : one of o-, sg subject pronoun ; ti-, sg subject pronoun ; hi-, marker of a O-construction (see section ) where both A and O arguments are rd person ; to- ‘ away ’.
— Second preﬁx position : ka-, applicative. — Third preﬁx position : n(ih)a-, causative. $ Verb root, obligatory. $ Suﬃxes, all optional : — Miscellaneous suﬃxes : at least  suﬃxes in about  order
classes (they include ‘ on a raised surface ’ (used in ()), ‘ upriver ’, ‘ do a lot all at once ’ (illustrated in (b-c)), ‘ following ’, ‘ in the morning ’, ‘ do without stopping ’, ‘ again ’, ‘ also ’, and the negator). — Tense-modal suﬃxes (combined with eyewitness\non-eyewitness evidentiality speciﬁcation for the three past tenses) :  possibilities. — A secondary verb, either ama\ama ‘ extent in time ’ – as in ()–() – or awine\awa ’seems ’. — Mood suﬃxes : marking declarative, background, polar interrogative, content interrogative, four types of imperative, etc.
Table Structure of the predicate in Jarawara
. P                 
The predicate in Jarawara includes pronominal reference to core arguments and can make up a complete clause. Its basic structure is shown in table , in slightly simpliﬁed form.%
Some verbs are inﬂecting and themselves take preﬁxes and suﬃxes ; others are not inﬂecting and are immediately followed by an auxiliary (-na- or -ha-) to which aﬃxes are added. In section  we note that the verb describing both ‘ sit ’ and ‘ stand ’ has two forms for a plural S argument ; if the plural S is animate there is an inﬂecting form -naho-, and if the plural S is inanimate then a non-inﬂecting form sii -na- is employed.
The object (O argument in a transitive clause) and subject (S in an intransitive, A in a transitive) pronoun forms, from the ﬁrst two slots of the
[] There can be additional elements within the predicate, but they are not relevant for the present discussion. There can be a third pronominal element, between tense-modal and mood suﬃxes, repeating information concerning the S or A or O argument (depending on construction types) ; this is illustrated in example ().


   

First slot in Second slot in Alienable Inalienable predicate predicate (S and possessor possessor (O function) A functions) in NP in NP

sg sg sg animate  inanimate inc exc n-sg n-sg animate

owa tiwa ø ø era otara tera mee\mera

o-

oko

o-, oko

ti-

tika

ti-, tika

ø

hina kaa fee

ø

—

—

ee

ee kaa

ee

otaa

otaa kaa otaa

tee

tee kaa tee

mee

mee kaa mee

Table Pronominal forms in Jarawara

predicate, are set out on the left-hand side of table . Note that sg is always zero. All the forms in the ﬁrst predicate slot are separate words. The n-sg pronouns in the second slot are also separate words, but the sg forms (sg oand sg ti-) are preﬁxes and move into the ﬁrst preﬁx slot to the verb. They are mutually exclusive with the other two forms in this slot : hi- which marks an O-construction when both A and O arguments are rd person (this is explained in section ) and to-, which simply has semantic eﬀect ‘ away ’ indicating movement away from a place, or change away from a certain state into another (e.g. ‘ become cold’).&
In other parts of the grammar there is a distinction between sg (referring to one), dual (to two) and plural (to three or more), so that it is convenient to adopt these labels for the grammar as a whole – see section  below. Pronouns simply distinguish singular (sg) from non-singular (n-sg) ; n-sg refers to two or more, and covers dual and plural.

. C                                  
Leaving aside copula constructions, each clause in Jarawara is either intransitive – with a single core NP, in S function – or transitive (with two core NPs, in subject (A) and object (O) functions. There are two kinds of transitive construction, one where the pivot (grammaticalized topic) is in A
[] There is a ‘ pecking order ’ to these preﬁxes : o-, ti- and hi- take precedence over to-. That is, to- cannot be expressed on a verb which includes o-, ti- or hi-. However, if the verb is reduplicated, the pronominal preﬁx is attached to a special reduplication auxiliary and tothen resurfaces on the verb. Full details are in Dixon & Vogel (forthcoming).


. . . 
function and the other where it is in O function. I call these the Aconstruction and the O-construction respectively.'
The use of these construction types is discourse-determined. When the A argument in a clause is pivot for the bit of discourse in which it occurs then an A-construction is used ; when the O argument is pivot then an Oconstruction is used. The two constructions have exactly the same pronominal identiﬁcation : the ﬁrst slot in the predicate marks the O and the second slot the A in both A-construction and O-construction. But they do diﬀer in a number of respects, including gender agreement. The main diﬀerences include :

(a) In an A-construction a n-sg pronoun in O function can have the form mera or mee (in free variation) ; in an O-construction it must be mee.
(b) In an O-construction, if both A and O arguments are rd person (whether sg or n-sg) then the verb must have hi- in the ﬁrst preﬁx slot. This preﬁx cannot occur in an A-construction.
(c) Mood and other verbal suﬃxes agree in gender with the pivot argument – with S in an intransitive clause, with A in a transitive A-construction, and with O in a transitive O-construction.(

Properties (b) and (c) can be illustrated in the intransitive clauses ()–(), the A-construction () and the O-construction (). Note that in () preﬁx hi- plus verb root awa gives hi-wa.

() [Okomobi]S oø

tafa-kaq

() S eat-j

‘ Okomobi (a man) is eating.’

() [Manira]S oø

tafa-keq

()

S eat-j

Manira (a woman) is eating.’

() ([Okomobi]A) [Manira]O () ()
‘ Okomobi sees Manira.’

oø

ø

awa-kaq

O A see-j

[] An A-construction is available for all types of A and O argument. However, there is an Oconstruction only if the O is rd person ; or if the A is rd person and there is an explicit tense-modal suﬃx. Dixon () provides full details and also explains why one transitive construction type could not be labelled ‘ active ’ and the other ‘ passive ’ (or one ‘ active ’ and the other ‘ antipassive ’).
[] This is a slight simpliﬁcation. In an A construction all verbal suﬃxes which vary for gender agree with the A argument. In an O-construction, mood suﬃxes (used in the examples here) always agree in gender with the O argument, but tense-modal suﬃxes agree in gender sometimes with O and sometimes with A, depending on a number of grammatical parameters. Full details are in Dixon ().


   

() ([Manira]O) [Okomobi]A oø

ø

hi-wa hi-ke)q

()

() O A O-see Oc-j

‘ Okomobi sees Manira.’

Most of the suﬃxes to a verb in Jarawara have f and m forms. They will be illustrated here with the declarative mood suﬃx which is -ke for f and -ka for m agreement. We ﬁnd -ka in (), agreeing with the S argument, Okomobi, which is the name of a man and thus m, and -ke in () agreeing with the S argument Manira which is the name of a woman and thus f.
Example () can be recognized as an O-construction through the presence of verbal preﬁx hi-. The declarative suﬃx has f form -ke, indicating that the O argument has f gender – it must thus be Manira, with Okomobi being the A argument. The absence of hi- (in a transitive clause where both A and O are rd person) in () shows that this is an A-construction. The declarative suﬃx has m form, -ka, showing that the A argument is m – it must be Okomobi – and so Manira must be in O function. That is, () and () have the same basic meaning (rather like an active sentence and its passive counterpart in English) and just diﬀer in discourse orientation. Sentence () will be employed when the established discourse pivot is Okomobi, and () when it is Manira.
An A-construction will often lack an explicit A NP since this is likely to be an established discourse pivot ; in the same way an O-construction may lack an explicit O NP. These constituents are enclosed in parentheses in () and () but it should but noted that they may only be omitted when they can be supplied from the surrounding discourse.
If two NPs are included in a transitive clause then that in A function is most likely to come ﬁrst in an A-construction and that in O function is most likely to precede in an O-construction, as in (–). But note that this is only a tendency ; there are plenty of examples of the opposite orderings. Nothing concerning the function of core NPs can with certainty be inferred from their relative ordering.
It is important to bear in mind that hi- is only included in an Oconstruction if both A and O are rd person. Where one of these arguments is st or nd person there are other ways of distinguishing the two transitive construction types. Consider the following examples :

() [Okomobi]O oø

ee

awa-keq

() O A see-j

‘ We (inclusive) see Okomobi.’

() [Okomobi]O oø

ee

awa-kaq

() O A see-j

‘ We (inclusive) see Okomobi.’

[] Under certain conditions, the preﬁx hi- is repeated before the declarative suﬃx, as in (). Full details are in Dixon ().


. . . 
Now in each of () and () the inc pronoun ee is, from its form, in A function ; it will be seen from table  that if it were in O function the form would be era. Thus, the NP Okomobi must be in O function. We noted that all pronouns take f agreement. In () the declarative suﬃx has f form and must be referring to the A argument (inc ee), showing that this is an Aconstruction. In () we ﬁnd the m form of declarative, which must agree with the O argument, Okomobi, showing that this is an O-construction. Just like () and (), sentences () and () have the same cognitive meaning ; () would be used when ee is discourse pivot and () when Okomobi is.
Note that if Okomobi were replaced by Manira, a woman’s name, then both ee and Manira would take f agreement so that () and () would each become Manira ee awa-ke. In this instance we could not distinguish an Aconstruction from an O-construction in terms of predicate marking, only from discourse context.
The important point to note for the purposes of the present paper is the distinction between an A-construction and an O-construction when both A and O arguments are rd person : the inclusion of hi- in an O-construction, such as () and its absence from an A-construction, such as ().
. T                   J       
Almost every noun in Jarawara (other than inalienably possessed nouns) has an inherent gender, either f(eminine) or m(asculine). There is just a handful of forms which can be of either gender, depending on the sex of the referent ; these include habai ‘ friend ’, inamatewe ‘ child ’ and some kin terms such as jibotee ‘ spouse ’ and nomeri ‘ sister’s husband, brother’s wife ’. The gender of a noun is never shown on the form of the noun itself,* only by gender agreement on other words within the NP, and on verbal suﬃxes.
Jarawara has a closed set of about  adjectives, which can function as a modiﬁer within an NP or as copula complement. Just two of these have distinct f\m forms – bite\biti ‘ small, little ’ and one\owa ‘ another ’. As already mentioned, there is a set of about  inalienably possessed nouns (PNs), slightly less than half of which have distinct f\m forms. Gender is also shown in the form of demonstratives, of the interrogative ‘ who ’, and of the reﬂexive pronoun. As shown in ()–() above, the gender of the pivot argument in a clause is cross-referenced by the gender form of a mood suﬃx to the verb.
Feminine is the formally unmarked choice from the gender system. For example, the interrogative himata ‘ what ’ is itself unmarked for gender. When the speaker is unsure of the gender of the item under consideration, then
[] I know of a single exception. The proper name referring to a member of the Paumari tribe has f form Wakara and m form Wakari.


   
himata will take f gender agreement. In () the copula verb ama ‘ be ’ takes the f form, ri, of the content interrogative mood suﬃx (the m form would be -ra).

() [himata]COPULA SUBJECT oama-riq

what

-.j

‘ What is it ? ’

And, as mentioned before, all pronouns are cross-referenced by f gender, illustrated in (compare with ()–() above) :

() oee

tafa-keq

S eat-j

‘ We (inclusive) are eating.’

The form mee can function (i) as the n-sg pronoun, shown in table  ; (ii) as an augment marker within an NP (mentioned in section  below) ; or (iii) as the plural marker with three nouns (three of the four nouns which have distinct sg and pl forms"!), one of which occurs in (). All occurrences of mee require f agreement, as shown in (a\d).
The semantics of gender is somewhat opaque. The one clear point is that all nouns with human reference have sex-determined gender. Of the nonhuman animates about  % have inherent m gender, although a sexdetermined gender may optionally be speciﬁed for higher animals. About  % of non-ﬂora inanimates are f, and about  % of plant names are f. A few general principles may be discerned : for example, all liquids are f ; all vehicles which use a motor (e.g. car, plane) are m ; an artefact made from a certain plant will have the same gender as the plant. However, these appear to cover only a part of the vocabulary ; the gender of a fair number of nouns must (it seems) be learnt, on an individual basis.

.      
In languages without head marking the person of a core argument can only be shown by an NP, outside the predicate (thus, in English, I slept, you slept, it slept). Many languages have obligatory speciﬁcation, within the predicate, of the person (generally also of the number, sometimes also of the gender or noun class) of one or more core arguments. In most instances, this information may be repeated in an NP, but this will be done rather rarely, perhaps to topicalize the argument, or to indicate contrast with some other argument in an adjacent clause, or just for emphasis. Thus, in the Australian language Ngalakan one can say (Merlan  : ) :

[] The nouns with distinct sg and pl forms are : inamatewe\matehe ‘ child\children ’, fana\mee-fana-wi(ri) ‘ woman\women ’, maki\mee-maki-ti ‘ man\men ’ and inamati\meeinamati ‘ spirit\spirits ’.


. . . 

() [<ayka,]S watji o<u-rna<anin4 q



behind S-sitj.

‘ I sat behind.’

The NP consisting of a free pronoun, <ayka,, is here optional. The verbal form <u-rna<aning , which includes full speciﬁcation of the S argument through the sg preﬁx <u-, may constitute a complete clause.
For Jarawara, person may be speciﬁed at only two places within the core of a clause."" One is through the object and subject pronouns in the ﬁrst two slots of the predicate, shown in the ﬁrst two columns of table ."# The other is as alienable or inalienable possessor within an NP, shown in the last two columns of table , and illustrated in ()–().
Unlike Ngalakan and most other head-marking languages, in Jarawara a core NP (in S, A and O function) cannot simply repeat information concerning person and number (which is obligatorily coded in the predicate). If there is a pronoun within an NP it must either be alienable possessor – followed by possessive marker kaa and then a possessed noun, as in (c–e) and (c–e) – or else inalienable possessor – followed by a PN, as in (c–e). It cannot make up the whole NP.
Jarawara does have a further type of NP, a kind of ‘ afterthought ’ that comes right at the end of a clause, following peripheral constituents. This ‘ afterthought NP ’ generally supplies additional information concerning a core argument, e.g. a clause glossed as ‘ [canoe (O)] oI(A)-grabbedq [side] ’ which could be translated ‘ I grabbed a canoe – a side (of the canoe) ’. An ‘ afterthought NP ’ may repeat a pronominal argument, generally as a mechanism for contrast. In one story the Jarawara narrator tells how he and some white companions encountered a wild pig (or peccary). The white men were scared of it but the narrator killed the pig :

() [hijama]Ooø

o-naboha-hamaro

pig() O A-kill-FP

[haa-owa]AFTERTHOUGHT NP 

‘ I killed the wild pig, by myself.’

ama o-keq  -j

Here the ‘ afterthought NP ’ haa-owa"$ repeats the information provided by the sgA preﬁx, o-, to the verb. It is used to stress the fact that the narrator killed the pig, all by himself, while his white comrades simply showed fear.

[] Note that a st or nd person pronoun can function as a peripheral NP, marked by the peripheral postposition jaa, e.g. owa jaa ‘ to me ’, tee jaa ‘ to you (n-sg) ’.
[] One of these pronouns may be repeated (subject to certain grammatical conditions) in the ‘ third pronominal position ’, immediately before mood towards the end of the predicate. This is illustrated in (). Full details will be found in Dixon ().
[] Pronouns as ‘ afterthought NPs ’ have the forms : sg, -owa ; sg, -tiwa ; inc, -ee, exc, -otaa, n-sg, -tee ; n-sg, -mee (there is no sg form). The ﬁrst element, haa-, occurs just in these forms.


   

However, an ‘ afterthought NP ’, such as haa-owa in (), is quite diﬀerent from a core NP before the verb. As already stated, a core NP cannot just specify st or nd person (plus number).
If a core NP includes an alienable possessor (which can be a noun or a pronoun) there must also be speciﬁcation of the possessed entity, which has to be a noun. The whole NP is then rd person, taking the gender of the alienably possessed noun, as in ()–().
If an NP involves inalienable possession, the possessor can again be any person, as in (). But, irrespective of the nature of the possessor, the whole NP will always count as rd person. This is demonstrated by the occurrence of verbal preﬁx hi- ; recall that this can be used in an O-construction only when both A and O are rd person. It follows that if hi- is found in a transitive clause, then both the core arguments must be rd person.
Consider o-mano ‘ my arm ’, from (e). Example () commences with an intransitive clause that has o-mano as S argument, to establish it as pivot for the discourse fragment, and engender the use of an O-construction for the following transitive clause that has o-mano as O argument.

() (a) (b)

[o-mano]S

oø

koma-keq

.-arm() S be.sore-j

‘ My arm is sore.’

[Ara]A ([o-mano]O)

oø

ø

hi-wa-haba

() .-arm() O A O-see-j

ama-keq

-j

‘ Alan will look at it (to decide how it should be treated).’

The fact that hi- is used in (b) indicates that o-mano is treated, within the grammar of Jarawara, as being rd person. Note that both the tense and mood suﬃxes in (b) show f agreement, with the O NP o-mano.
Further investigation shows that any NP involving a st or nd person pronoun as inalienable possessor, followed by one or more PNs, is treated as rd person. This applies even with the one PN which is a quantiﬁer, naﬁ\naﬁ ‘ all ’. Compare () – repeated here – whose S argument is the inc pronoun, ee ‘ us ’ (marked within the predicate) and (), where the S argument is ee naﬁ ’us all ’, which must be expressed as a pre-predicate NP.

() oee

tafa-keq

S eat-j

‘ We (inclusive) are eating.’

() [ee

naﬁ]S oø

tafa-keq

. all S eat-j

‘ We (inclusive) are all eating.’

The analysis of ee in () as being part of the predicate but of ee naﬁ in () as being a pre-predicate NP, in S function, cross-referenced by rd person



. . . 
marker ø within the predicate, is supported when we consider a transitive clause with ee naﬁ as one argument. For example :

() [ee

naﬁ]A [Okomobi ati]O

. all

() voice

oø

ø

hi-mita-re-kaq

O

A O-listen.to-IP-j

‘ We all listened to Okomobi’s words.’

Compare () with (), where the A argument is simply the inc pronoun ee, without the quantiﬁer naﬁ ; the ee is now stated within the predicate.

() [Okomobi ati]O oø

ee

mita-hare-kaq

() voice O A listen.to-IP-j

‘ We listened to Okomobi’s words.’

In () the A argument is inc ee so there is no preﬁx hi- on the verb. The clause is recognisable as an O-construction since the immediate past eyewitness tense\evidentiality suﬃx has m form -(ha)re and the declarative suﬃx has m form -ka agreeing in gender with the O argument Okomobi ati, an NP with inalienable possessor, Okomobi (which supplies the gender for the NP), followed by the PN ati\ati ‘ voice, speech, language ’.
Sentence () is recognisable as an O-construction by the preﬁx hi- on the verb. But hi- is only used when both the core arguments are rd person. That is, the A argument ee naﬁ ‘ us all ’ in () is shown to count as rd person within the grammar of Jarawara.
These facts allow the following conclusion :

() All NPs in core (S, A or O) function in Jarawara count as rd person.

In general, there are two ways in which a core argument can be expressed : (a) as an NP outside the predicate ; and (b) as a bound pronoun within the predicate. In a language which lacks head marking, only (a) is available. Head-marking languages may combine (a) and (b). A st or nd person argument is generally fully speciﬁed at (b), by a bound pronominal element. However, most head-marking languages permit information concerning a st or nd person core argument to be repeated at (a), for topicalization or contrast or emphasis ; this was exempliﬁed by () from Ngalakan. Jarawara does not allow this possibility. If a core argument is simply a st or nd person pronoun this can only be coded in the predicate within the clausal core (it may also be expressed as an ‘ afterthought NP ’, but this is a peripheral element). That is, an NP cannot consist of just a st or nd person pronoun (nor of the n-sg pronoun). This correlates with the fact that all core NPs are rd person.


   
The NP o-mano is rd person not because mano is rd person but simply because every core NP is rd person. This applies even to ee naﬁ ‘ all of us ’, involving the inc pronoun ee plus qualiﬁer naﬁ\naﬁ (which is a PN).
. A               
As mentioned in section , Jarawara has a basic three-term number system : singular, dual and plural (referring to three or more). This is realized in diﬀerent ways in diﬀerent parts of the grammar.
About twenty verbs have suppletive forms depending on the number reference of the S or O argument. For instance, ‘ take out ’ is -iti- for referring to taking out just one thing (singular O) and -jaba- for three or more things (plural O). For a dual O either -iti- or -jaba- may be used, with the dual suﬃx -ikima (a member of the class of miscellaneous suﬃxes to the verb – see table ).
There is some neutralisation of meaning in n-sg numbers. Consider the forms of the verbs ‘ sit, stay ’ and ‘ stand, be located ’, given in table . The

* ‘sit, stay’
‘ stand, be located ’

Singular S
-(w)ita -wa(a)-

Dual S
joro -na- & teme -na-

Plural S
animate S : -nahoinanimate S : sii -na-

Table Forms of the verbs ‘ sit, stay ’ and ‘ stand, be located’

form (w)ita- is used for ‘ sit, stay ’ when the S argument is sg, whether it is animate or inanimate (for example, a lake or a trap). Similarly, -wa(a)- is used for ‘ stand, be located ’ when the S argument is sg, whether this is animate or inanimate (e.g. a tree, a house or a candle). When the S argument has dual reference a single verb is used for both ‘ sit, stay ’ and ‘ stand, be located’ ; that is, the diﬀerence in stance orientation can only be inferred from the nature of the referent of the S NP. There are here two verbs which are in free variation : joro -na- and teme na-. (Consultants repeatedly aﬃrmed that these are freely interchangeable synonyms.)
For plural S there is again no contrast between ‘ sit, stay ’ and ‘ stand, be located ’ but here we do ﬁnd two verbs with a meaning diﬀerence : -naho- is used for animate S and sii -na- for inanimate S. Occurrence with -naho- or with sii -na- is one of the criteria for deciding whether an NP is treated as animate or inanimate within the grammar of Jarawara. (Note that distinguishing animacy just in plural number is typologically unusual – see Aikhenvald & Dixon  :  and Aikhenvald  : –.)


. . . 

As shown in table , pronouns have distinct sg and n-sg forms. However, the sg\n-sg distinction for rd person only applies for animates (plus the heavenly bodies ‘ sun ’, ‘ moon ’ and ‘ stars ’ which are classed as animate in Jarawara cosmology). Reference to any kind of animates (including insects) involves making an obligatory choice between sg (zero pronominal crossreferencing) and n-sg (marked by the n-sg pronoun mee). All inanimates have zero pronominal cross-referencing ; mee cannot be used with them. It is not the case that all inanimates are cross-referenced as sg ; rather, the sg\ n-sg distinction does not apply to inanimates and zero reference is used in the ﬁrst two slots of the predicate, as shown in the th row of table .
An NP involving alienable possession can be animate, as in (), or inanimate, as in (). If the NPs in () were the S argument of a verb ‘ sit, stay ’ or ‘ stand, be located ’ and had plural reference, then they would take both the n-sg pronoun mee in the S slot of the predicate and also verbal form -naho(for plural animate S), as in (). If the NPs in () were S argument of the same verb, with plural reference, then they would not take mee in the predicate (since they are inanimate) and would select verb form sii -na- (for plural inanimate S), as in ()."%

() [oko

jomee]S omee naho-keq

. dog() -S sit\stand(  S)-j

‘ My dogs are sitting\standing.’

() [oko

jimawa]S oø

sii

. knife()  \ (  S)

to-na-keq

--j

‘ My knifes are sitting\standing.’

Note that the declarative suﬃx in () has f form to agree with the n-sg pronoun mee. In () it has f form to agree with the f noun jimawa.
Thus, an NP involving alienable possession can be animate or inanimate and, if animate, can be cross-referenced as sg or n-sg. In contrast, an NP involving inalienable possession can only take zero cross-referencing and is almost always treated as inanimate. Full details of this are given in section , following a discussion of the nature of PNs and of the structure of the NP in Jarawara.

. P             
The class of (inalienably) possessed nouns (PNs) plays a pervasive role in the grammar of Jarawara. It covers parts of human and animal bodies and parts of trees and other plants, physical characteristics such as ‘ smell ’ and ‘ itch ’

[] Note that the verb sii -na- always requires (as an idiomatic property) the preﬁx to- on its auxiliary.


   
and also such concepts as ‘ name ’, ‘ noise ’, ‘ shadow, reﬂection, spirit ’, ‘ dream ’, ‘ companion ’, ‘ possession ’, ‘ container ’, ‘ weapon ’, ‘ food ’ and ‘ home ’. There is one quantiﬁer in the class of PNs : naﬁ\naﬁ ‘ all ’.
A largish set of PNs relate to orientation, e.g. ‘ front of ’, ‘ top of ’, ‘ outer part of ’, ‘ middle of ’, ‘ other side of ’. There is in this language a single main peripheral marker, the postposition jaa ; this corresponds to a range of prepositions in English, including at, in, on, to, from and with. Further speciﬁcation employs PNs. For instance, I noticed a chicken sitting on the back of a domestic pig and was told to describe it by :

() [arakawa]S oø

ita-ri-kaq

chicken() S sit-.-j

[boroko mese

jaa]

pig() top.surface 

‘ The chicken is sitting on the pig’s back (lit. on the top surface of the

pig).’

In () the verb bears the miscellaneous suﬃx -ri ‘ on a raised surface (i.e. not on the ground)’ ; the peripheral NP involves the m noun boroko ‘ (domestic) pig ’ followed by the PN mese\mese ‘ top surface ’.
Agglutinative forms of PNs have been reconstructed for proto-Arawa! , where an invariable root took suﬃx -ni for f and -ne for m. In the development of Jarawara there have been a number of assimilations, blendings and elisions, giving rise to the fusional nature of modern-day PNs. We thus get, for example (for full details see Dixon ) :

proto-ArawaT

Jarawara

*maho-ni\maho-ne mahi\maho

*tama-ni\tama-ne tame\teme

*ama-ni\ama-ne ame\eme-ne

*hagi-ni\hagi-ne hawi\hawi-ne

*ati-ni\ati-ne

ati\ati

*neme-ni\neme-ne neme\neme

‘ smell ’ ‘ foot ’ ‘ blood ’ ‘ path ’ ‘ voice, language ’ ‘ top of ’

It will be seen that some PNs retain distinct f and m forms (although these are now marked in a variety of ways) while for others f and m forms have fallen together – these include ati\ati, neme\neme and also mese\mese ‘ top surface ’, used in ().
There is also a semi-productive derivational process for forming PNs from verbs ; this involves adding -ri (for both f and m forms) to the verb root. For example, from -sina- ‘ be sweet ’ we get sinari\sinari ‘ sweetness ’.
PNs divide into two classes according to the form of a sg or sg possessor (for those PNs which can have such a possessor – parts of trees, for instance, plainly cannot have). About half the PNs take preﬁxes o- for sg and ti- for sg ; for example o-mano ‘ my arm ’, o-noko ‘ my face ’, ti-moni ‘ your noise (the



. . . 
noise you make) ’ and ti-taboro ‘ your house ’. The remainder take oko and tika ; for example, oko emene ‘ my blood ’, oko wahati ‘ my liver ’, tika komene ‘ your sickness ’, tika hawine ‘ your path (the path that you habitually use) ’. Non-sg pronominal possessors have a constant form (see table ), e.g. ee taboro ‘ our (inclusive) house ’, ee hawine ‘ our (inclusive) path ’.
One of the most intriguing aspects of PNs in Jarawara is the gender forms they show after diﬀerent kinds of inalienable possessor. After an m or f noun all PNs are m or f respectively ; that much is straightforward. In (c–e) we saw that a PN immediately following a st or nd person pronoun must be in m form while one following the n-sg pronoun is in f form. In fact NPs often include two or more PNs, and the gender speciﬁcation is then even more complex. All PNs following n-sg will be f and all those following inc, exc or n-sg will be m. But after sg or sg the ﬁrst PN has m form with later PNs being f."& This is set out in table , and exempliﬁed in () using the PNs mani\mano ‘ arm ’ and baki\bako ‘ inside surface of ’. (Note that an inalienable possessor can be sg animate fee – see table  – which is not itself marked for gender. This behaves with respect to gender agreement just like st and nd person pronouns.)

Possessor
m noun f noun n-sg mee inc ee, exc otaa, n-sg tee sg o- or oko ; sg ti- or tika

First PN
m f f m m

Later PNs
m f f m f

Table Gender forms of inalienably Possessed Nouns (PNs) following inalienable
possessors

() (a) Okomobi (m) mano (m) bako(m)
(b) Manira (f) mani (f) baki (f) (c) mee mani (f) baki (f) (d) ee mano (m) bako (m)
(e) o-mano (m) baki (f)

‘ Okomobi’s inside arm ’ (whole NP is m) ‘ Manira’s inside arm ’ (f) ‘ their inside arms’ (f) ‘ our (inclusive) inside arms ’ (f) ‘ my inside arm ’ (f)

[] There are in fact three exceptions. The PNs iﬁ\ifo ‘ lower lip ’, isi\iso ‘ leg ’ and ini\ino ‘ tooth, name ’ use the f form following sg o- and sg ti- (and also employ an epenthetic -w-), e.g. o-w-iﬁ ‘ my lower lip ’, ti-w-isi ‘ your leg ’.


   
The f gender of PNs following the n-sg pronoun mee has a likely historical origin. Other Arawa! languages lack a n-sg pronoun and mee in Jarawara pretty certainly developed rather recently, from the generic noun madi ‘ person ’. There would have been a series of changes madi mai mee. Support for this comes from (a) n-sg is mai in the related Jamamadi dialect, and also occurs as an archaic form in Jarawara songs ; (b) mee has an allophone mati in clause-ﬁnal position (note that *d has merged with t in Jarawara, so that this mati is a direct reﬂection of the original madi). It is likely that the noun madi ‘ people ’ had f gender so that following PNs had f form, and this has carried through to the n-sg pronoun mee.
I have no plausible explanation, in the present state of knowledge, for the gender choice of PNs following st and nd person pronouns, in table  and ().

. S                       
I shall present evidence that an NP in Jarawara has basic structure – with respect to alienable and inalienable possession – as exempliﬁed in ().

() [fana

kaa] jomee teme

woman()  dog() foot()



 ()



 

‘ the woman’s dog’s foot ’ (whole NP counts as m)

That is, I suggest that where there is alienable possession, the possessed is the head, and that where there is inalienable possession the possessor is the head. In () jomee ‘ dog ’ is both alienable possessed and inalienable possessor. It requires that the following PN (teme ‘ foot’) agree with it in gender and it supplies the gender for the complete NP.
The ﬁrst piece of justiﬁcation for this analysis lies in discourse structure. Jarawara diﬀers from a language like English in that in each clause of a discourse there is a grammatically identiﬁed topic, or ‘ pivot ’. As described in section , the pivot is the S argument in an intransitive clause, the A in a transitive A-construction, and the O in a transitive O-construction.
NPs jomee ‘ dog ’ and jomee teme ‘ dog’s foot ’ (or ee ‘ us ’ and ee teme ‘ our feet’) count as equivalent as pivots within successive clauses in a discourse. That is, a pivot can be stated as a noun or pronoun, then elaborated by a PN added to this noun or pronoun, and it may then revert back to the original noun or pronoun. Consider an extract from a text describing how the narrator and a companion were tied up in the middle of the jungle by some evil spirits :


. . . 

() (a) (b) (c) (d) (a)

[mee-inamati"']A oera

ø

wete naq

-spirit

O A bind j

[ee

mano]S oø

soki kasaq

. arm() S tie ..j

[ee

iso]S oø

soki kasaq

. leg() S tie ..j

[mee-inamati]A oera

ø

wete naq

-spirit

O A bind j

‘ The evil spirits bound us (with string)’ ; (b) ‘ our arms were tied

together’ ; (c) ‘ our legs were tied together’ ; (d) ‘ the evil spirits

bound us.’

The pivot running through these four clauses is the inc pronoun. In (a) it is in O function in a transitive clause,"( in (b) and (c) it is in S function in an intransitive clause, and in (d) again in O function in a transitive clause, which in fact repeats (a). Note that we just get era (the O form of ee) in (a) and (d) but in each of (b) and (c) it is augmented by a PN – ee mano ‘ our arms ’ and ee iso ‘ our legs ’. The point is that ee mano and ee iso are regarded as ‘ type of ee ’.") The head of these NPs is ee.
The full statement of NP structure is given in table ."* Note that an adjective can appear at two places in a NP, either modifying the head, as in (), or modifying a PN, as in ().

() [[jomee biti]

teme]

dog() smallj footj

‘ the small dog’s foot\feet ’

() [jomee [teme

biti]]

dog() footj smallj

‘ the dog’s small foot\feet ’

[] As mentioned in section  (see note ), inamati ‘ evil spirit ’ is one of just four nouns in Jarawara which have distinct plural forms ; here plural is marked by the preﬁx mee (cognate with n-sg pronoun mee). Since mee is part of the noun it is not repeated in the appropriate slot in the predicate. The noun mee-inamati is like n-sg mee in taking f gender agreement.
[] Note that, from its form, clause (a)\(d) could be either an A-construction or an Oconstruction. In terms of the criteria summarised in section , it will be seen that there could be no preﬁx hi-, since the O argument is not rd person ; and both A and O would trigger f agreement on the verb. From the discourse context it is plainly to be taken as an O-construction.
[] Exactly the same analysis is appropriate for NPs in Dyirbal. Dixon ( : ) provides an example of the ‘ elaboration ’ of a topic in Dyirbal – as an inalienably possessed noun is added – and then ‘ reversion ’ to just the head, within a sequence of clauses in discourse. Other Australian languages behave in similar fashion – see, for instance, Hosokawa () on Yawuru.
[] There are a couple of further elements which are not relevant to the discussion here – a contrastive marker taa, and the possibility (but as an archaic feature, mostly used just by the oldest speakers) of a ﬁnal accusative marker ra on an NP in O function, if the A argument is also rd person. Full details will be in Dixon & Vogel (forthcoming).


   
A Alienable possessor, an embedded NP plus alienable possessive marker kaa.
B Head of NP (only obligatory element) – can be a free (common) noun, a proper noun, a demonstrative, a pronoun (or a complement clause). Modiﬁers to the head : Ba A noun, specifying material (e.g. yati ‘ stone ’) or sex (fana ‘ female ’ or maki ‘ male ’). Bb One or more adjectives. Bc The augment modiﬁer mee.
C One or more possessed nouns (PNs). Modiﬁers to a possessed noun : Ca One or more adjectives.
Table NP structure in Jarawara
Gender assignment is straightforward in ()–() ; the head noun jomee is m and it takes the m form both of the adjective bite\biti ‘ small ’ and of the PN tame\teme ‘ foot ’.
Now consider the NP corresponding to () with the inc pronoun ee as head :
() [ee [teme bite]]  footj smallj ‘ our small feet ’
As stated in section , a PN following a n-sg st or nd person pronoun must be in m form, here teme. The interesting point is that the adjective modifying the PN is in f form, agreeing in gender with ee rather than with teme. This provides further evidence – in terms of inter-NP agreement – that ee (and not teme) should be regarded as head of the NP ee teme ‘ our feet ’.
It is interesting to compare the properties of hijama ‘ wild pig ’ as S argument to a verb with those of hijama tone ‘ wild pig bone(s) ’, each with either sg or nsg reference. We can select the verb ‘ sit ’, which is -(w)ita- with a singular S, naho- with an animate plural S and sii -na- with an inanimate plural S – see table . Hijama ‘ wild pig ’ is animate and can be marked for sg reference (by ø in the S slot of the predicate) as in () or for n-sg reference (by mee in the S slot of the predicate), as in (). The verbs involved are -(w)ita- in () and naho- in ().#!
[] To each of ()–() the peripheral NP bofe jaa ‘ on the ground ’ could be added, to create a contextually appropriate sentence.


. . . 

() [hijama]

oø

ita-kaq

wild.pig() S sit( S)-j

‘ A wild pig is sitting.’

() [hijama]

omee naho-keq

wild pig() -S sit\stand(  S)-j

‘ Several wild pigs are sitting\standing.’

Hijama tone ‘ wild pig’s bone(s) ’ counts as inanimate and there can be no speciﬁcation of number in the predicate. However, the number of the S argument can be shown in the choice of verb – -(w)ita- for one bone, as in () and sii -na- for a number of bones, as in ().

() [hijama

tone] oø

ita-kaq

wild pig() bone S sit( S)-j

‘ a wild pig’s bone is sitting ’

() [hijama

tone#"] oø

sii

wild pig() bone S sit\stand(  S)

to-na-kaq

--j

‘ wild pig’s bones are sitting ’

Alongside (), which states that all NPs in Jarawara count as rd person, we can put forward a second generalisation :

() Any NP including a PN is treated as inanimate. Like all inanimate NPs, it cannot engender a number speciﬁcation (n-sg marked by mee versus sg with zero marking) in the ﬁrst two positions within the predicate.

 . T                      
We began by looking at an NP such as o-mano ‘ my arm ’ and asking whether mano should not be regarded as the head, since the NP counts as rd person, as demonstrated by sentences such as (), where o-mano is O argument and the verb takes preﬁx hi-, which is restricted to clauses where both A and O are rd person. There is no doubt that o-mano does count as rd person, within the grammar of Jarawara, but this is nothing to do with mano. In section  we arrived at the generalisation ().
() All NPs in core (S, A or O) function in Jarawara count as rd person.
We saw that in Jarawara person may only be speciﬁed within the predicate, or as possessor within a core NP (or in a peripheral NP). A core NP cannot

[] Note that the PN tone\tone has the same form for f and m agreement. For a PN showing diﬀerent forms, the m form would be used here, e.g. hijama (m) teme (m) ‘ wild pig’s foot\feet ’.


   
itself consist just of a st or nd person pronoun. And an NP with a st or nd person pronoun as inalienable possessor (whether the PN is a body part such as mano ‘ arm ’ or the quantiﬁer naﬁ ‘ all’) counts as rd person.
We also noted that o-mano counts as inanimate. This is again not a feature of o-mano but of the type of NP it is. In section  we arrived at the generalisation ().
() Any NP including a PN is treated as inanimate. Like all inanimate NPs, it cannot engender a number speciﬁcation (n-sg marked by mee versus sg with zero marking) in the ﬁrst two positions within the predicate.
That is, the person, animacy and number of the NPs in (a-e) are determined by general rules of the grammar.
The only variable is, in fact, gender. The rule is simple : it is the inalienable possessor which determines the gender of the NP. If the inalienable possessor is an m noun, then the NP counts as m ; if it is an f noun or a pronoun, then the NP counts as f.
In section  we noted that, in most languages, it is the head of an NP which determines its gender. In keeping with this we take the sg possessive pronominal preﬁx o- to be head of the NP o-mano in (e) (and similarly, mee and ee to be heads of mee mani and ee mano in (c–d)). Further justiﬁcation for this analysis was presented in section . We saw that in a discourse sequence ee mano ‘ our arms ’ and ee iso ‘ our legs ’ are treated as equivalent to ee ‘ us’ ; each is simply an elaboration of ee. This is consistent with ee being the head of an NP ee mano, and so on. We also saw, in (), that within the NP ee teme bite ‘ our small feet ’ the adjective bite\biti is f, agreeing in gender with ee rather than with the m form of the PN, teme. This provides further evidence that the inalienable possessor, ee, should be regarded as head of the NP.
What appeared to be a conﬂict of criteria simply dissolves away. Once we recognize that all core NPs count as rd person, and that all NPs involving a possessed noun count as inanimate, the only variable property of an NP including a possessed noun is its gender. This is determined by the head, which is the alienable possessed and\or the inalienable possessor element. In o-mano ‘ my arm ’ the head must be taken to be the sg pronominal element o-.
REFERENCES
Aikhenvald, A. Y. (). Classiﬁers : a typology of noun categorization devices. Oxford : Oxford University Press.
Aikhenvald, A. Y. & Dixon, R. M. W. (). Dependencies between grammatical systems. Language . –.
Corbett, G. G., Fraser, N. M. & McGlashan, S. (eds.) (). Heads in grammatical theory. Cambridge : Cambridge University Press.
Dixon, R. M. W. (). The Dyirbal language of North Queensland. Cambridge : Cambridge University Press.


. . . 
Dixon, R. M. W. (). A grammar of Boumaa Fijian. Chicago : University of Chicago Press. Dixon, R. M. W. (). Fusional development of gender marking in Jarawara possessed nouns.
International Journal of American Linguistics . –. Dixon, R. M. W. (). Arawa! . In Dixon, R. M. W. & Aikhenvald, A. Y. (eds.), The
Amazonian languages. Cambridge : Cambridge University Press. –. Dixon, R. M. W. (). A-constructions and O-constructions in Jarawara. International
Journal of American Linguistics . – Dixon, R. M. W. & Vogel, A. R. (forthcoming) A grammar of Jarawara, from southern
Amazonia. Frajzyngier, Z. (). A grammar of Mupun. Berlin : Dietrich Reimer. Hosokawa, K. (). ‘ My face am burning ! ’ : quasi-passive, body parts and related issues in
Yawuru grammar and cultural concepts. In Chappell, H. & McGregor, W. (eds.), The grammar of inalienability : a typological perspective on body part terms and the part-whole relation. Berlin : Mouton de Gruyter. –. Hudson, R. A. (). Zwicky on heads. Journal of Linguistics . –. Merlan, F. (). Ngalakan grammar, texts and dictionary. Canberra : Paciﬁc Linguistics. Muysken, P. (). Parametrizing the notion ‘ head ’. Journal of Linguistic Research .. –. Nichols, J. (). Head-marking and dependent-marking grammar. Language . –. Zwicky, A. M. (). Heads. Journal of Linguistics . –. Author’s address : Research Centre for Linguistic Typology,
Institute for Advanced Study, La Trobe University, Bundoora, Vic, , Australia. No E-mail.


