Language and Linguistics Compass 4/5 (2010): 319–336, 10.1111/j.1749-818x.2010.00197.x
A Survey of Contemporary Research on Amazonian Languages
Caleb Everett*
University of Miami
Abstract Amazonian languages have long confounded linguists. The languages represent a large number of linguistic families, including Tup´ı, Jeˆ, Carib and Arawak, and the languages exhibit a wide variety of typologically-remarkable structural characteristics. Since the inception of the European colonization of Amazonia over four hundred years ago, missionary linguists have attempted to document the languages of the region. It is only relatively recently, however, that a large number of linguists at academic institutions have undertaken in-depth ﬁeld research in the region. The author examines the current state of Amazonian linguistics. The history of language research in the region is ﬁrst outlined, though the majority of attention is devoted to surveying signiﬁcant ﬁeld research that has been undertaken in the last decade. Some recent studies on morphology, syntax, phonetics, and psycholinguistics are highlighted. The reader’s attention is drawn to trends, related to both the methodology and content of the research. Despite some possible areas for improvement, it is suggested that much of the recent work is of excellent quality, as evidenced by the fact that much of the research in question has drawn attention within linguistics and the cognitive sciences more generally.
1. Introduction
Amazonia has long-fascinated westerners. Ever since the fantastic accounts of the region by explorers such as Francisco de Orellana, who was the ﬁrst European to navigate (albeit semi-inadvertently) the length of the Amazon in 1542, the region has captured the imagination of many. While some of the initial accounts of Amazonia were patently false, e.g. the popularized tale of a tribe of ﬁerce headless warriors, some of the accurate accounts nevertheless painted an other-worldly picture. The unfathomable size of the jungle and its waterways, the biological diversity, the unwelcoming climate, the impenetrable density of the environment, and a panoply of tropical diseases – these and other factors have helped to generate a miasma about the region, serving as obstacles to the documentation of its cultures and languages. It is only relatively recently that such obstacles have been overcome, although not completely, and the tableau of Amazonian cultures and languages has been depicted with some detail. The increasingly crystallized image we are left with has helped to demystify Amazonia, but it has only served to fuel the interest of many linguists concerned with the languages of the region.
Comparative research on Amazonian languages has revealed remarkable linguistic diversity. Nichols (1990) suggests that there are over 50 linguistic stocks and approximately 300 total languages located in Amazonia. In contrast to this, consider that in all of Africa, there are only approximately 14 clear linguistic groupings. As Rodrigues (2000) notes, the only world region to exceed Amazonia in this sort of linguistic diversity is New Guinea.
ª 2010 The Author Journal Compilation ª 2010 Blackwell Publishing Ltd

320 Caleb Everett
The eclectic nature of the Amazonian linguistic milieu makes it difﬁcult to demarcate exactly which are the Amazonian languages. It is not clear, after all, that there is such a thing as an Amazonian linguistic area. Attempts have been made to delineate shared grammatical characteristics of the languages of the region (see, e.g. Derbyshire and Pullum 1986:16–19; Dixon and Aikhenvald 1999:8–10), not to mention shared discourse-based characteristics (Beier et al. 2002). Nevertheless, more research is required to deﬁnitively establish Amazonia-wide linguistic characteristics (see Epps 2009:590), such as the recent efforts focused on delineating linguistic areas within more restricted Amazonian regions (e.g. Crevels and van der Voort 2008; Fausto et al. 2008). For this reason, I should stress that when I refer to Amazonian languages, this term is geographically rather than linguistically-based, referring as it does to those languages that are autochthonous to the jungles of Amazonia.1
The major linguistic families in Amazonia are Tup´ı, Macro-Jeˆ, Carib, and Arawakan, each of which is represented by at least 30 languages. In an area that in many ways exhibits a modest archeological record (but see Roosevelt 1994; Erickson 2008; and Heckenberger et al. 2008; inter alia), comparative linguistics has proven useful to the understanding of the history of these language families, yielding tentative estimates of the ancestral homelands for proto-Tup´ı (Rodrigues 1999), proto-Macro-Jeˆ (Ribeiro and van der Voort forthcoming), proto-Carib (Leite and Franchetto 2006), and proto-Arawak (Aikhenvald 1999) speakers. Fairly ambitious attempts at large-scale classiﬁcations of Amazonian languages, notably Greenberg (1987), Kaufman (1990), and Campbell (1997), also exist. Despite such efforts, it seems clear that historical-comparative work on Amazonian languages is inchoative and that the advancement of such studies and hypotheses on genetic afﬁliations between proto-languages must await a greater number of detailed descriptive studies on individual languages (cf. Rodrigues 2000). For a detailed survey of the extant comparative work, I refer the reader to Epps (2009). In the present article, I restrict my attention to recent non-comparative ﬁeld research on the grammars of individual languages. I should note that the article also does not focus on ethnographic studies of Amazonian discourse, as a discussion of that literature is available elsewhere (see Beier et al. 2002). This work is not meant to serve as an exhaustive reference of the relevant research.2 Instead, it is meant to serve as point of departure for the reader, drawing attention to important threads in the larger fabric of contemporary research on Amazonian languages.
The paper is organized as follows: In the following, Section 1 present an abbreviated introduction to the background of current Amazonian linguistic research, drawing attention to some foundational works and inﬂuential researchers. In Section 3, I discuss some of the recent descriptive work on the morphosyntax of Amazonian languages. Section 4 represents an overview of some recent research on sound patterns in Amazonian languages. Section 5 contains a discussion of cross-disciplinary work on these languages. In the ﬁnal section, I highlight some of the trends evident in Sections 3–5, and offer some concluding remarks on the state of Amazonian linguistics.

2. The Background
In some sense, the story of Amazonian linguistics began in the 16th century with the work of Jesuit missionaries who sought to convert contacted indigenous tribes. The most famous example is that of Jose´ de Anchieta, a linguist, naturalist, and physician who learned to speak Tup´ı and wrote Arte De Grama´tica (1933 [1595]), a grammar of Tup´ınamba. Despite the work of Anchieta and other missionaries, however, relatively

ª 2010 The Author Journal Compilation ª 2010 Blackwell Publishing Ltd

Language and Linguistics Compass 4/5 (2010): 319–336, 10.1111/j.1749-818x.2010.00197.x

Amazonian Linguistics 321
little research was done on Amazonian languages until the mid-20th century.3 Sadly, during the intervening period, the vast majority of the indigenous population of Amazonia was decimated, primarily by diseases that were introduced by settlers. As Hemming (1978) notes, many people were also enslaved and ⁄ or killed by settlers, and many of the coastal Tup´ı tribes ﬂed further inland. The indigenous population was further decimated as colonizers also travelled inland. This trek was particularly expedited during the Amazonian rubber boom (ca. 1875–1920), which led to exponential increases in the non-indigenous populations of cities such as Bele´m, Manaus, and Porto Velho. It also led to increased exploitation of and disease transmission to the indigenous population, as well as the enslavement and murder of many indigenes (cf. Hill 1999 for discussion). In addition to the human tragedy they created, such processes inevitably contributed to the obfuscation of the pre-Columbian Amazonian linguistic ecology.
During the 1960s research on Amazonian languages began in earnest. As Dixon and Aikhenvald (1999:3) note, most of the amateur data gathered prior to this time have a ‘limited usefulness’. One notable exception to this is the data collected and analyzed by Kurt Unkel, a German anthropologist most commonly referred to by his Tup´ı-Guaran´ı name Nimuendaju. Among many other projects in the ﬁrst half of the 20th century, Unkel collected word lists from a remarkable variety of tribes throughout the Amazon, and these word lists have served as a valuable reference for numerous subsequent studies.
The sudden increase of linguistic research in Amazonia during the 1960s was largely due to spiritual motives, namely the translation of the New Testament into indigenous languages. This is the avowed goal of the Summer Institute of Linguistics (SIL), which was responsible for much of the initial research undertaken on Amazonian languages. SIL’s initial work in Brazil was greatly facilitated by Darcy Ribeiro, the noted Brazilian anthropologist, minister of education, and house chief-of-staff (for President Goulart), who was keenly interested in the preservation and documentation of Brazil’s indigenous languages.
The quality of the initial research, both by SIL missionaries – who had at least some graduate-level training in linguistics – and others, varied. Many of the initial products of SIL research were couched in the esoteric framework of tagmemics, which is nearly impenetrable to researchers unversed in the approach. Similarly, much of the work produced by SIL linguists and others in the 1970s is embedded within what are now nearly obsolete formalisms characteristic of the most popular incarnation of the generative paradigm of the time. While the theory-speciﬁc treatments of many of these languages are not generally user-friendly, in many cases they are excellent sources of data and analysis. Representative works produced during this time by SIL linguists in Amazonia include Pickering and Lou Pickering (1964), Kensinger (1965), Olson (1967), Key (1968), Pease (1968), Burgess (1971), Crofts (1971, 1984), Pickering (1971), Matteson (1972), Boswood (1973), Harrison (1975), Chapman and Ann Odmark (1964), Dobson (1973), Smith (1973), Sheldon (1974), Dooley (1976), Landin (1976), Wise (1976), Payne (1983), Graham et al. (1984), David Payne (1985), and Weber (1986).4 Among the most signiﬁcant contributions to Amazonian linguists made during this time were those produced by the SIL linguist Desmond Derbyshire (1961, 1977, 1979), who famously drew attention to the fact that the basic word order in Hixkaryana is best described as Object-VerbSubject, a fact that contravened the expectations of many.
Of course SIL members were not the only linguists working on Amazonian languages at the time. Aryon Rodrigues, the most widely recognized Brazilian linguist studying Amazonian languages, produced signiﬁcant comparative studies on Tup´ı and Macro-Jeˆ languages during this period (cf. Rodrigues 1958, 1962, 1964). Since that time,

ª 2010 The Author Journal Compilation ª 2010 Blackwell Publishing Ltd

Language and Linguistics Compass 4/5 (2010): 319–336, 10.1111/j.1749-818x.2010.00197.x

322 Caleb Everett
Rodrigues has produced dozens of studies while also training linguists and founding linguistic programs at the Federal University of Rio de Janeiro, the State University of Campinas, the University of Bras´ılia, as well as the National Museum in Rio de Janeiro, where the Museu do ´Indio is housed.
In the 1980s, Amazonian languages began to draw heightened interest from researchers at academic institutions outside of South America. One of the most noteworthy end products of this interest was the four-volume Handbook of Amazonian Languages (HAL), the ﬁrst volume of which was published in 1986, the last of which was published in 1998. The four volumes of the series include 10 high-quality grammatical sketches, four comparative studies, as well as three typological studies. The studies include work on Cariban, Macro-Jeˆ, Mura, Tup´ı-Guaran´ı, Yanomami, Arawan, Arawakan, and PebaYaguan languages. The volumes, edited by Desmond Derbyshire and Geoffrey Pullum, primarily contain contributions from missionary linguists, several of whom were also academic linguists (e.g. Dan Everett and Doris Payne). Since the volumes were co-edited by a missionary (Derbyshire) and non-missionary academic (Pullum), the HAL series arguably represents the ﬁrst major synergistic effort between missionary and non-missionary linguists dedicated to describing Amazonian languages. Another volume that represented a collective effort of missionary and academic linguists was Amazonian Linguistics (Doris Payne 1990), which consisted of papers presented at a 1987 conference on Amazonian languages, held at the University of Oregon. The volume contained papers on comparative linguistics, as well as studies of stress systems, morphological paradigms, and systems of grammatical relations. Not all major 1980s works describing Amazonian languages were restricted to such grammatical inquiries, however. Some excellent work by linguistic anthropologists interested in patterns of discourse in Amazonia surfaced during this time. Likely, the most inﬂuential contribution to the investigation of discourse patterns in the region was Sherzer and Urban’s (1986) Native South American Discourse.
It is worth stressing that, despite the existence of these volumes, ‘general linguistics was being practiced almost entirely without reference to even the existence of Amazonian languages’. (Derbyshire and Pullum 1998:3) Apart from these compendia of works on the languages, studies on Amazonian linguistics were generally characterized by a restricted circulation. A paucity of studies appeared in major international journals. As Derbyshire and Pullum (1998) note, in the two decades following Kaye (1971), not one full-length article on an Amazonian language was published in Linguistic Inquiry, and only a few squibs on such languages were published in the journal. With the exception of work published in the International Journal of American Linguistics, only a few studies on Amazonian languages were scattered throughout the major journals of the ﬁeld.
By the time the fourth volume of HAL appeared in 1998, as well as Dixon and Aikhenvald’s (1999) The Amazonian Languages one year later, the situation was beginning to change. The latter volume consists of 15 chapters, each presenting an overview of a language family or group of isolates in the region. As in the case of the HAL series and Amazonian Linguistics, The Amazonian Languages is based on contributions by missionary and academic linguists alike. For detailed reviews of this volume, I refer the reader to Doris Payne (2001) as well as Franchetto and Gomez-Imbert (2003).
Partially as a result of the appearance of the aforementioned volumes, many academic researchers began to take a greater interest in these languages during the 1990s. However, as Derbyshire and Pullum (1998) note, the heightened interest in Amazonian languages in the 1990s was also due in large part to several Amazonian specialists who advised numerous graduate students during the decade and ⁄ or encouraged other linguists to work in the region. According to Derbyshire and Pullum, three of the most inﬂuential

ª 2010 The Author Journal Compilation ª 2010 Blackwell Publishing Ltd

Language and Linguistics Compass 4/5 (2010): 319–336, 10.1111/j.1749-818x.2010.00197.x

Amazonian Linguistics 323
Amazonianists were Spike Gildea (1992), Denny Moore (1984)), Daniel Everett (1991), (Everett and Kern 1997). Gildea served on the PhD committees of several Amazonian linguists at Rice University. Working out of the Museu Goeldi in Bele´m, Brazil, Moore created an important institutional base that served and serves a crucial role for linguists interested in Amazonian ﬁeld research. These linguists include Brazilians, Americans, and Europeans too numerous to list here. Furthermore, Moore helped place Brazilian students in several American and European graduate programs in linguistics. Dan Everett is a former student of Aryon Rodrigues who edited the only two issues of the Journal of Amazonian Languages in 1998 and who, in the mid-1990s, encouraged other prominent researchers such as Peter Ladefoged and Peter Gordon to accompany him to Amazonia. More recently, his research on Piraha˜ has received extensive attention inside and outside the linguistic community (see Section 5).
It should also be noted that many other inﬂuential researchers, besides these three highlighted by Derbyshire and Pullum (1998), were active in the growth of Amazonian linguistics in the 1990s. These include Doris Payne, whose numerous works include the aforementioned edited volume Amazonian Linguistics, and who herself served as Gildea’s advisor. Prominent linguists based outside of North America were also highly inﬂuential in the rise of Amazonian linguistics, conducting ﬁeld research while also advising students who themselves conducted such research. These linguists included European-based researchers such as Colette Grinevald (Universite´ Lumie`re-Lyon) and Leo Wetzels (Free University of Amsterdam). Well-established faculty at South American institutions also advised ﬁeld researchers during this period. These faculty included Lucy Seki (Universidade Estadual de Campinas), Jon Landaburu (Centro Colombiano de Estudios de Lenguas Abor´ıgenes), and Aryon Rodrigues (Universidade de Bras´ılia). Many of the latest crop of linguists working in the region can trace inﬂuence of some sort to at least one of the researchers mentioned in the two preceding paragraphs.
In the following sections, I survey some of the signiﬁcant contributions to the study of Amazonian languages produced in the last decade. My focus here is on substantive research based on original ﬁeldwork. Of course, the works based on such research and discussed below have been informed by and beneﬁted from the foundation of Amazonian linguistics established in the preceding half-century.
3. Studies on Morphology and Syntax
As results from the investigations into Amazonian languages began to ﬁlter their way to interested linguists during the latter part of the 20th century, it became clear that many of the languages of the region exhibit striking features vis-a`-vis their morphosyntactic characteristics. Besides the aforementioned word-order ‘violations’ evident in Hixkaryana and several other Amazonian languages, other perplexing features surfaced. As Dixon and Aikhenvald (1999:1) note, studies of Amazonian languages tended to reveal properties such as ‘multiple sets of classiﬁers, oddly conditioned ergativity splits, and so on – that constitute exceptions to received ideas about typological universals’. Other common ﬁndings included the existence of extensive patterns of nominalization and of verb serialization. In the 10 years since Dixon and Aikhevald (1999), such morphosyntactic phenomena have been described in dozens of detailed grammars by a variety of scholars. Many of these grammars are the result of dissertation projects (e.g. Meira 1999). In other cases, the grammars have been produced by established researchers (e.g. Seki 2000; Aikhenvald 2003).

ª 2010 The Author Journal Compilation ª 2010 Blackwell Publishing Ltd

Language and Linguistics Compass 4/5 (2010): 319–336, 10.1111/j.1749-818x.2010.00197.x

324 Caleb Everett
The grammars written in the last decade represent all of the major Amazonian linguistic families. For example, Facundes (2000) grammar of Apurina˜, Aikhenvald’s (2003) grammar of Tariana, Santos (2006) grammar of Wapishana, and Danielsen’s (2007) volume on Baure all document Arawak languages in detail. Recent volumes on Tup´ı languages include Gabas (1999) grammar of Karo, Galu´cio’s (2001) grammar of Mekens, and Gonza´lez (2005) grammar of Tapiete. Storto’s (1999) dissertation as well as C. Everett’s (2006) contain detailed descriptions of the morphosyntax of Karitiaˆna, another Tup´ı language. Other volumes dedicated to the morphosyntax of Tup´ı (including Tup´ıGuaran´ı) languages include Rose’s (2003) description of Emerillon, Gomes (2006) account of Munduruku´, Magalha˜es (2007) work on Guaja´, and Prac¸a’s (2007) description of Tapirape´. Carib languages have also been the subject of several recent grammars. These include grammars on Tiriyo written by Meira (1999) and Carlin (2004), as well as Bruno (2003), a grammar of Waimiri-Atroari, and Tavares (2006), a grammar of Wayana. Recent volumes on Macro-Jeˆ languages include M. Ferreira’s (2003) morphosyntactic description of Parkateˆjeˆ, R. Oliveira’s (2007) analysis of Xavante morphosyntax, as well as C. Oliveira’s (2005) grammar of Apinaje´ and Dourado’s (2001) dissertation on Panara´.
Of course not all of the recent grammars represent the four major linguistic families of the region, i.e. Arawak, Tup´ı, Carib, and Macro-Jeˆ. Valenzuela (2003) and Fleck (2003) describe the grammars of Shipibo-Konibo and Matses, respectively, both of which are Pano languages. Another grammar of a Pano language is R. Ferreira (2005), which is a description of Matis. Dixon (2004) presents a comprehensive overview of Jarawara, an Arawa language. Stenzel (2004) presents a grammar of Wanano, a Tucano language, whereas Seifart (2005) describes Miran˜a, a Witotoan language. Epps (2008a) outlines the grammar of Hup, a Maku´ language. Guirardello (1999) describes the grammar of Trumai, an isolate spoken in the Xingu park of Brazil, whereas Haude (2006) delineates the grammar of Movima, an isolate spoken in Bolivia. Guillaume (2008) provides the ﬁrst extensive grammar of a Tacanan language, Cavinen˜a, and Giro´n (2008) offers an extensive description of Puinave.
By documenting in detail such a wide assortment languages, these and other grammars or grammar-length works (see note 2) have extremely enriched, in the course of one decade, the ﬁeld of Amazonian linguistics. The aforementioned studies are of generally excellent quality. This assessment is supported by the fact that four of these grammars received the Mary Haas Award, which is presented annually by The Society for the Study of the Indigenous Languages of the Americas to submitted dissertations that are judged to provide a signiﬁcant contribution to the documentation of Native American languages. Meira (1999), Valenzuela (2003), Stenzel (2004), and Seifart (2005) were all recipients of this award. Furthermore, Epps (2008a) received the Panini award, presented by the Association of Linguistic Typology biannually for the best grammar submitted as a dissertation.
In addition to these and other works, three signiﬁcant contributions to the study of morphosyntactic phenomena of Amazonian languages are the books written by Aikhenvald (2002), edited by Wetzels (2007), and edited by Gildea and Queixalo´s (forthcoming). In Aikhenvald (2002), the author presents a detailed documentation of the language contact and language change occurring between and among the Arawak and Tucanoan languages in the Vaupe´s region of central north-western Amazonia. Among other issues, Aikhenvald considers the role of language contact on the diffusion of morphological features such as verb-compounding, negation, tense, and evidentiality. Wetzels (2007) contains linguistic and anthropological studies, some of which address speciﬁc morphosyntactic phenomena in Maku and Nambikwara languages. Cabral and Rodrigues (2002) contains morphosyntactic (as well as phonological) data on a wide range of Amazonian

ª 2010 The Author Journal Compilation ª 2010 Blackwell Publishing Ltd

Language and Linguistics Compass 4/5 (2010): 319–336, 10.1111/j.1749-818x.2010.00197.x

Amazonian Linguistics 325
languages. Gildea and Queixalo´s’ forthcoming volume entitled Ergativity in Amazonia is an important addition to the description of morphological and syntactic phenomena in the region, given the well-attested existence of unusual patterns of split-intransitivity and split-ergativity in many Amazonian languages. Their volume consists of the detailed analysis of ergativity in nine languages, produced by 10 established Amazonianists. It should also be noted that numerous works on the morphosyntax of Amazonian languages have appeared in larger edited volumes on typological phenomena such as causation (Shibatani 2002), deixis (Lenz 2003), and depictives (Himmelmann and Schultze-Berndt 2005), as well in Gildea’s (2000) edited volume on diachronic approaches to syntax.
Besides these volumes, treatments of morphosyntactic phenomena in Amazonian languages have appeared in major peer-reviewed venues. Recent works by some of the above authors include articles in publications such as Language, IJAL, Studies in Language, Linguistic Typology, and Anthropological Linguistics, inter alia. Unfortunately, it remains the case that relatively little work on Amazonian linguistics has been published in international journals. While Derbyshire and Pullum’s (1998) assessment of the work on Amazonian linguistics in major journals is no longer accurate, most work is still published in venues with modest audiences, or remains in unpublished manuscript form. One of the challenges for the current batch of linguists working on the morphology and syntax of these languages is to more widely disseminate their ﬁndings. One way in which this is being done is via publication in non-English peer-reviewed venues dedicated to American indigenous languages and cultures, namely the L´ınguas Ind´ıgenas Americanas series published annually, with seven volumes to date, by the Univesidade Estadual de Campinas, as well as the 33-year-old Amerindia series published by the Centre National de la Recherche Scientiﬁque. These publications contain various recent morphosyntactic studies of Amazonian languages, by an assortment of authors. (For instance, a recent volume of Amerindia contains over a dozen studies on Amazonian alignment systems.)
The challenge of publishing ﬁndings on Amazonian morphosyntactic phenomena, particularly in venues such as those mentioned above, is one that must be met by the current crop of resarchers. This is true for two primary reasons. First, given the host of typologically remarkable phenomena that are evident in the recent literature on Amazonian languages, it is clear that data from these languages should play an important role in informing theoretical approaches to many grammatical phenomena. Second, given the endangered status of so many of the languages in question, future opportunities for documenting the relevant phenomena will in many cases be limited. There is therefore an onus to publish original research while the ﬁeldwork it is based on can still be conducted.
Given the number of works produced in the last 10 years, and given the depth of many of these, it is of course impossible to encapsulate their ﬁndings on morphosyntactic phenonema here. However, it should be noted that discussions of certain types of phenomena are particularly well-attested in the recent literature. For example, certain topics recur in the dozen-or-so articles on Amazonian languages that have appeared in IJAL since 2000. One such topic is nominal classiﬁcation systems. For instance, in a special issue of the journal, Aikhenvald (2007), Doris Payne (2007), Pin˜eros (2007), and Seifart (2007) all present recent ﬁndings from investigations into Amazonian classiﬁer systems. Another recurring topic is that of ergativity, as evident in Guillaume’s (2006, 2009) work. Ergativity in all of its many forms remains a hot issue of inquiry in Amazonian linguistics, as evidenced by the above-mentioned volume on the topic. Many of the grammars mentioned above devote signiﬁcant portions to discussions of ergativity in the described languages.
While the above studies cannot be pithily encapsulated, it is worth illustrating the sorts of interesting ﬁndings they have presented. For instance, one morphological category that

ª 2010 The Author Journal Compilation ª 2010 Blackwell Publishing Ltd

Language and Linguistics Compass 4/5 (2010): 319–336, 10.1111/j.1749-818x.2010.00197.x

326 Caleb Everett

has received signiﬁcant attention recently is tense. Two particularly fascinating sets of ﬁndings on tense have been laid out in Fleck (2007) and Epps (2008b). The former presents a description of so-called ‘double tense’ in Matses, whereas the latter presents a diachronically oriented treatment of the nominal origins of a tense marker in Hup.
The central claim of Fleck (2007) is that, in Matses:

…when the source of information is inferred from resulting evidence, two temporal distances must be speciﬁed on the verb: the length of time from the moment when the event itself took place to the moment when the event was detected; and the time from the detection of the evidence to the moment of the verbal report. (589)

The described interaction is evident in clauses such as the following:

(1) mayu-n

be¨ste-wa-ak-onda-sh.

non.Matses.Indian-ERG hut-make-REC.PAST-DIST.PAST.EXP-3

‘Non-Matses Indians (had) made a hut.’ [a recently made hut was

discovered by the speaker a long time ago] (2007:589)

As we see in this example, the Matses speaker’s report allows the interlocutor to grasp something about the time elapsed between the described event and the uptake of the evidence for that event, as well as something about the time elapsed between the uptake of the evidence and the utterance of the clause. This particular sort of interaction between a system of evidentiality and a system of tense is unattested in the literature, and Fleck’s documentation of it contributes to the understanding of both types of systems.
Epps (2008b) describes evidence for the nominal origins of a future marker in Hup. The relevant future tense sufﬁx in Hup, te´g, is remarkably similar to a free noun form meaning ‘sticks, wood, ﬁrewood’ (2008b:384). She presents a plausible analysis demonstrating how this free form came to be used as a classiﬁer term and then had its use extended to that of a generic nominalizer. According to the analysis presented, the form then came to be used as a purpose marker in adverbial clauses until, ﬁnally, it was reanalyzed as a future tense sufﬁx. This ﬁnding on the nominal origins of a pervasive tense marker is signiﬁcant since previous investigations into the origins of future markers have suggested that they are expected to be derived from modal verbs or verbs of movement.
Many other recent interesting ﬁndings on the morphosyntactic features of Amazonian languages could be adduced, including the adverbial agreement with clausal arguments discussed in Valenzuela’s (2003) work on Shipibo or the multilingual imperatives discussed in Aikhenvald (2008). It seems clear that an assortment of fascinating morphosyntactic phenomena has been analyzed in the recent literature on Amazonian languages. This literature has contributed to linguists’ understanding of phenomena as diverse as causation patterns, the grammaticalization of ergativity, the development of tense markers, verbal systems of evidentiality, and esoteric nominal classiﬁer systems. Countless other morphosyntactic phenomena are also investigated in the studies referenced above. What is clear from the studies cited here, along with many not cited for the sake of space (see notes 2 and 4), is that recent morphosyntactic studies of Amazonian languages have made clear contributions to various branches of linguistic typology and linguistics more generally.

4. Studies of Sound Systems
Typological rarities also surface in the sound systems of Amazonian languages (see, e.g. D. Everett 1982). The recent investigations into Amazonian sound systems are generally more modest, however, than the investigations into morphosyntactic phenomena. This is

ª 2010 The Author Journal Compilation ª 2010 Blackwell Publishing Ltd

Language and Linguistics Compass 4/5 (2010): 319–336, 10.1111/j.1749-818x.2010.00197.x

Amazonian Linguistics 327
not to suggest that careful studies on such sound systems have not been undertaken in the last decade. In fact, nearly all of the grammar-length works cited in the previous section contain examinations of the general phonetic and phonological characteristics of the respective languages. Nevertheless, in most cases, a relatively small portion of the overall work is dedicated to the delineation of sound-related phenomena. In many cases, this delineation is focused primarily on outlining and ⁄ or substantiating the language’s phonemic inventory, with some discussion of basic phonological patterns. Despite the greater attention placed on morphosyntactic phenomena, however, studies dedicated solely to Amazonian sound patterns have also surfaced in the literature. Some of this work is simply descriptive, e.g. Sebastia´n and Marlett’s (2008) work on Yine and Valenzuela et al.’s (2001) work on Shipibo. Other work includes the detailed analysis of particular sound patterns via new ﬁeld methods.
As a result of the improved processing speeds, data storage capacities, and software available for notebook computers, researchers are now able to carry portable phonetic laboratories into the ﬁeld. Perhaps not surprisingly, one incipient trend evident in work done on Amazonian sound systems is the deployment of acoustic and ⁄ or quantitatively oriented methodologies.5 Such methodologies allow researchers to adopt methods once restricted to laboratory phonetics to ﬁeld settings (see discussion in C. Everett 2008a). An examination of the recent Amazonian literature suggests that a small but growing number of researchers are examining the sound patterns of such languages with such methodologies. One particularly substantive example of this trend is El´ıas-Ulloa’s (2009b) work on Shipibo, a Pano language. The work contains over 450 pages dedicated to providing an acoustically oriented characterization of a single language. It is arguably the most detailed phonetic study of an Amazonian language to date. One of the recurring themes of the work is that non-acoustic or impressionistic data have in several cases resulted in incorrect analyses of Shipibo sounds. As El´ıas-Ulloa notes:
An example can be found in the two sounds of Shipibo that have traditionally been described as a voiced bilabial fricative and a ﬂap, orthographically represented as ‘b’ and ‘r’. This study, however, will show through an acoustic examination that they are in fact, a voiced bilabial affricate and a voiced retroﬂex affricate, respectively. (14)
I refer the reader to the original for the detailed substantiation of this claim. The description of the rare bilabial affricate is illustrative of the sort of interesting ﬁndings being made in Amazonian acoustic-phonetic studies.
For another example, consider El´ıas-Ulloa’s (2009a) analysis of laryngeal segments in Capanahua. The alternations shown by glottal stops and coalesced glottalized vowels in the language offer an interesting picture of the intersection between prosodic and segmental features. Crucially, the clear illustration of the patterns of glottalization in question necessitates the high-temporal resolution afforded by the spectrographic data presented by the author. Similarly, in C. Everett (forthcoming a), the author describes a phenomenon in Karitiaˆna that would be impossible to document without the hightemporal resolution afforded by spectral data. In the language, word-medial nasals occurring between two oral vowels may be post-oralized, circum-oralized, or completely oralized. For example, the word for ‘thing’ may surface as [kinda], [kidnda], or [kida]. C. Everett provides quantitative data, based on LPC spectra gathered in the ﬁeld, suggesting that the duration of velic lowering in the relevant context varies somewhat randomly. In some relevant tokens, the velum is lowered for 200 ms or more, in others for signiﬁcantly less, and in others not at all. This unpredictability of velic opening violates typologically and theoretically oriented predictions of nasality and would be impossible to describe without

ª 2010 The Author Journal Compilation ª 2010 Blackwell Publishing Ltd

Language and Linguistics Compass 4/5 (2010): 319–336, 10.1111/j.1749-818x.2010.00197.x

328 Caleb Everett
appealing to acoustic data. Other recent research by Wetzels (2008) addresses similar phenomena, speciﬁcally the phonological status of nasal and oral contours in a number of Amazonian languages. Wetzels (2009) also provides a detailed examination of nasal harmony in Maxacal´ı. Each of these studies is illustrative of the sorts or typologically remarkable nasal patterns characterizing many Amazonian languages.
Other examples of the trend toward acoustically focused analyses include Demolin et al. (2006) work, also on nasality in Karitiaˆna, as well as C. Everett’s (2008a,b) work on stops and vowels in the language. Other recent studies based on the careful examination of acoustic data include Gordon and Rose’s (2006) discussion of stress in E´ me´rillon, a Tup´ı-Guaran´ı language, and D’Angelis (1999) description of circum-oralization in Kaingang, a Macro-Jeˆ language. Given the host of remarkable sound patterns that can be more carefully detailed with such data, or in fact cannot be described at all without such data (as in the case of several phenomena mentioned above), it seems plausible that the usage of acoustically oriented analyses will continue to grow in the coming years.
Of course not all recent substantive studies of fascinating sound patterns in Amazonian languages involve the usage of acoustically oriented methods. For example, GomezImbert and Kenstowicz (2000) present a detailed segmental analysis of tone and accent in Barasana. Employing optimality theory, Crowhurst and Michael (2005) describe the stress system of Nanti. They demonstrate that Nanti stress-patterns are typologically remarkable in that they are sensitive to a series of factors including vowel height, syllable nucleus type, moraic quantity, as well as the syllable’s status as open ⁄ closed.

5. Cross-Disciplinary Work
Some contemporary research on Amazonian languages is not strictly linguistic per se, but represents the cross-pollenization of several ﬁelds of inquiry. Not surprisingly, one of these ﬁelds is anthropology, and some studies on Amazonian cultures and their languages have recently appeared in major anthropological journals, e.g. Beier et al. (2002), Chernela (2003), and D. Everett (2005). Beier et al. (2002) provide an important discussion of Amazonia as a discourse area. They suggest that there are recurrent patterns of discourse across geographically and genetically unafﬁliated Amazonian groups, relating to ‘ceremonial dialog, dialogical performance, templatic ratifying, echo speech, ceremonial greeting, ritual wailing, evidentiality, speech reporting practices, parallelism, special languages, and shamanistic language use’(121). The interesting observations presented by the authors are, as they themselves note, tentative to the extent that they are based on discourse-oriented research with ‘an uneven geographical distribution’ (125). Perhaps most signiﬁcantly, Beier et al. (2002) serves as a gateway to a host of ethographically and ethnopoetically oriented studies of Amazonian languages that fall outside the purview of the present endeavor.
Chernela (2003) describes the ‘community of talk’ among the Wanano and Tukano in northwest Amazonia. The author examines the ways in which female speakers create community via shared linguistic practice, speciﬁcally shared wept greetings. The study appeals to the linguistic and anthropological literature while utilizing basic ethnographic methods to delineate the community of talk (as well as the gender differentiation crucial to its establishment) among the given speakers in the Vaupe´s region.
Another recent example of an interdisciplinary study examining Amazonian languages is Fausto et al. (2008). This study examines the well-known linguistic area of the upper Xingu and was conducted among the Kuikuro. The area in question includes speakers of Tup´ı, Arawak, and Carib languages such as Kuikuro, not to mention Trumai, an isolate.

ª 2010 The Author Journal Compilation ª 2010 Blackwell Publishing Ltd

Language and Linguistics Compass 4/5 (2010): 319–336, 10.1111/j.1749-818x.2010.00197.x

Amazonian Linguistics 329
The study utilizes ethnographic, linguistic, and archeological data, to offer new insights into the way in which the ‘sociocultural complex’ of the Xingu park has been shaped since the 9th century.
Much of the recent cross-ﬁeld Amazonian research relates to the ‘linguistic relativity’ hypothesis (often referred to as the Sapir–Whorf hypothesis), which is being investigated by psychologists, anthropologists, and linguists alike. In an article in Science, Gordon (2004) provided experimental evidence that the speakers of Piraha˜ were unable to perform basic tasks that involved the exact one-to-one matching of more than three items, and suggested that the most plausible motivation for this fact was the absence of corresponding number words in the language. Gordon’s interpretation of the data has been called into question by recent work by several cognitive scientists (Frank et al. 2008) who also carried out psycholinguistic experiments among the Piraha˜ and suggested that their results support a weaker interpretation of the linguistic relativity hypothesis.
Other recent studies on the subject of linguistic relativity include work among the Munduruku´. Pica et al. (2004) present interesting experimental evidence for a possible ligature between the restricted number system in the language and the poor performance of its speakers in tasks that require exact arithmetic with numbers greater than four or ﬁve. Dehaene et al. (2006) discuss the performance of the Munduruku´ on geometric tasks, and note that their performance is not generally weakened by the absence of geometric terms in the language. In another work on linguistic relativity, C. Everett (forthcoming a) presents experimental evidence for language-mediated thought in the perception of gender-neutral stimuli by speakers of Karitiaˆna. In short, the study suggests that speakers of languages with gender-neutral pronominal paradigms (like Karitiaˆna) exhibit reduced androcentrism in their perception of the relevant stimuli, when contrasted with speakers of languages without gender-neutral pronominal paradigms.
Other work on the interaction between language, cognition, and culture includes that produced by D. Everett (2005, 2009), who describes a number of typologically remarkable features in Piraha˜. He suggests that the language is characterized by a lack of embedding, an absence of color terms, and a lack of number words, among other unusual features. Furthermore, he claims that such features follow from general principles of Piraha˜ culture, and proposes a relationship between cultural principles and the aspects of Piraha˜ grammar described. D. Everett’s ideas have received much attention inside and outside the ﬁeld. For instance, a signiﬁcant portion of a recent issue of Language was dedicated to a critique of his claims on Piraha˜ grammar, along with a response by D. Everett wherein he further suggested the incompatibility of Piraha˜ grammar with recent recursion-oriented approaches to universal grammar. The debate surrounding D. Everett’s work is of course part of a growing debate regarding the existence of universal grammar (cf. Pinker and Jackendoff 2005; Evans and Levinson 2009).
Given that the focus of such cross-disciplinary works is less on linguistic description and more on possible relationships between linguistic phenomena and other cognitive and ⁄ or cultural phenomena, the results of such studies are of interest to linguists and many non-linguists as well. It is worth noting that, given that the studies mentioned in this section have appeared in journals with circulations that exceed those of most linguistic journals, many researchers are ﬁrst being exposed to some of the more exotic characteristics of Amazonian languages via these sorts of cross-disciplinary projects.

ª 2010 The Author Journal Compilation ª 2010 Blackwell Publishing Ltd

Language and Linguistics Compass 4/5 (2010): 319–336, 10.1111/j.1749-818x.2010.00197.x

330 Caleb Everett
6. Trends and Conclusion
Several general trends are apparent in contemporary Amazonian linguistics, as described in Sections 3–5. One such trend is that, in contrast to work carried out in the latter half of the 20th century, much of the research is not inextricably linked to any particular formal paradigm. Instead, many of the studies undertaken in the last decade adopt a typological approach to data presentation and analysis, or what Dixon (1997) refers to as ‘basic linguistic theory’.6 This trend is evident from a perusal of the grammars mentioned in Section 3, which for the most part employ fewer formalisms, and are more typologically oriented, than for example the majority of the work by SIL linguists in the 1960s and 1970s. One advantage to this trend is that it should result in a less impenetrable literature for future readers.
A second trend that is apparent in studies of Amazonian languages (as well as linguistics more generally) is the increased use of digitized data. This trend is apparent in the study of sound systems, as mentioned in Section 4, and perhaps more signiﬁcantly, it is apparent in the trend toward the online archival of data and research on Amazonian languages. For a recent project on information structure in Amazonian languages, funded by the NSF, several researchers archived digitial audio recordings of word lists, clauses, and larger texts online.7 Larger online-archival efforts include the Archive of Indigenous Languages of Latin America, which is funded by the National Endowment for the Humanities and National Science Foundation and directed by Joel Sherzer, and is an online database containing hundreds of digital recordings of texts and narratives. Many of these recordings are of Amazonian languages. The recordings are accessible in various formats through the University of Texas web site.8 World-wide language documentation programs such as the Hans Rausing Endangered Languages Project and Dokumentation Bedhrohter Sprachen (DoBeS, hosted by the Max Planck Institute for Psycholinguistics) have already produced online digital archives that include data from Amazonian languages,9 and will likely include data from others in the future.
Along with such efforts to archive new digital data online, much of the old research on Amazonian languages is also being converted to digital formats and archived online as well. For instance, SIL has begun archiving pdf ﬁles of all the research produced by SIL members in South America (see note 4). Likely, or at least hopefully, the trend toward digitized and widely available archived data will become more pronounced in the coming years. There is, after all, evidence of a global trend toward online archival. Along with technological developments facilitating data digitization and sharing, one of the impetuses for this trend toward online archival is the endangered status of many Amazonian languages. Amazonian linguists, as with linguists of so many other regions, are acutely aware of this endangerment and recent studies, e.g. Franchetto (2006), Wetzels (2007) and Moore (2007), have speciﬁcally addressed the topic of language documentation among endangered Amazonian languages. Seifart et al. (2008) contains a discussion of the ethical and technical challenges faced by linguists interested in such documentation. The authors also describe a promising emerging network of Amazonian language archives hosted by South American institutions.
Another general trend evident in Amazonian linguistics is the increasingly international composition of the body of researchers currently dedicated to such work. The researchers whose works are mentioned above are currently based out of academic institutions around the world, including James Cook University, La Trobe University, The Max Planck Institue, Centre d’Etudes des Langues Indige`nes d’Ame´rique, Leiden University Centre for Amerindian Studies, The Free University of Amsterdam, Radboud University, Museu Goeldi, Illinois State University, Rosenburg University, the University of Oregon,

ª 2010 The Author Journal Compilation ª 2010 Blackwell Publishing Ltd

Language and Linguistics Compass 4/5 (2010): 319–336, 10.1111/j.1749-818x.2010.00197.x

Amazonian Linguistics 331
the University of Texas at Austin, the University of Miami, Universidade de Sa˜o Paulo, Universidade Estadual de Campinas, and the Universidade de Bras´ılia’s Laborato´rio de L´ınguas Ind´ıgenas. This list is certainly not exhaustive, but serves to illustrate the global scope of contemporary Amazonian linguistics. In contrast to previous eras, many of the linguists working at such institutions are native South Americans. There are no doubt many motivations for the incursion of such a diverse body of linguists into Amazonia. These include increased sources of funding for linguistic research from various academic, governmental, and non-governmental sources, as well as the increased urgency to document endangered languages. As was mentioned in Section 1, another important motivation is the desire to more carefully document many of the typological rarities that surfaced in research on Amazonian languages during the latter part of the 20th century. Whatever the motivations may be for the exponential increase in academic linguists’ research on Amazonian languages, the trend is an extremely welcome one that has already resulted in dozens of quality in-depth studies. In the course of one decade, these studies have resulted in signiﬁcant progress toward the description and documentation of languages that are in many cases endangered.
Interestingly, as the number of Amazonian linguists working out of academic institutions around the world has increased, there has been a concomitant drop in the number of missionary linguists in Amazonia. Most of the SIL missionaries that helped document Amazonian languages in the latter half of the 20th century have since retired, and the organization has reduced the number of its bases of operation in the region. This reduction is due in part to the growing political obstacles faced in some parts of Amazonia, as access to indigenous areas has in many cases become increasingly restricted. Support for SIL’s work among governmental organizations in Brazil and other nations has also waned signiﬁcantly since Darcy Ribeiro’s tenure as minister of education. For these and other reasons, only a relatively small portion of the recent studies on Amazonian languages has been carried out by missionary linguists, SIL or other, in contrast to previous eras. Despite the reduction of SIL’s inﬂuence in Amazonia, it remains the case that, for a number of endangered languages in the region, the only detailed descriptions available are those written by SIL linguists. Given the well-known endangerment of so many of the languages, it remains to be seen whether the decreased SIL presence in Amazonia will have a deleterious effect on the documentation of endangered languages.
The story of language death in Amazonia is a grim one. Some estimates suggest that over 75% of the pre-Columbian Amazonian languages have already become extinct (Moore 2007). Many more are severely endangered at present, and only a few languages in the region currently have more than 1000 speakers. It appears unlikely at this point that more than a handful of the 300 or so living Amazonian languages will survive the 21st century. For this reason, one can only hope that the heightened interest in Amazonian languages evident in the research described above will continue to grow, and that more linguists will seek to document these languages while they still can.

Short Biography
Caleb Everett is an Assistant Professor of anthropological linguistics in the Department of Anthropology at the University of Miami. His research interests include unusual sound patterns, cognitive approaches to grammatical relations, as well as the linguistic relativity hypothesis. He is particularly interested in quantitative and experimental approaches to investigating these areas of inquiry. His recent and forthcoming work includes articles in journals such as Anthropological Linguistics, International Journal of American Linguistics, Studies

ª 2010 The Author Journal Compilation ª 2010 Blackwell Publishing Ltd

Language and Linguistics Compass 4/5 (2010): 319–336, 10.1111/j.1749-818x.2010.00197.x

332 Caleb Everett
in Language, and Language Documentation and Conservation. He holds a PhD in Linguistics from Rice University. His PhD dissertation (Patterns in Karitiaˆna: Articulation, Perception, and Grammar) was the result of ﬁeld work in southwestern Amazonia, where he continues to conduct research.
Notes
* Correspondence address: Caleb Everett, Department of Anthropology, University of Miami, PO Box 248106, Coral Gables, FL 33124-2005, USA. E-mail: caleb@miami.edu
1 Geographically, Amazonia refers to the region encompassing all of the areas drained by the Amazon and its tributaries. This region is approximately 7 million square kilometers in size, the majority of which exists in Brazil, and the majority of which is covered in broadleaf rainforest. Linguistically, I take Amazonia to include the northward drainages of the Orinoco, as well as the Caribbean-ﬂowing river systems of Guiana. This decision is justiﬁed since many members of the language families discussed here, most notably Carib, are found in these more northerly jungles. 2 For a wider list of references on the relevant literature, the reader may consult Fabre (2005), which is a fairly comprehensive list of relevant work, both published and unpublished, on South American languages. 3 The little work that was done is nevertheless useful to specialists in pertinent languages. For instance, the Brazilian historian Joa˜o Capistrano de Abreu’s work on narratives in Cashinahua, undertaken in 1914, has proven useful to those presently documenting the language, as evident from the online documentation of the DoBeS project (see Section 6). 4 For a comprehensive list of publications produced by SIL-afﬁliated personnel in the Amazonia, I refer the reader to SIL’s online bibliography categorized according to country: http://www.ethnologue.com/country_index_ bibl.asp. Dozens of publications on Amazonian languages are available for download from the site. 5 It is worth noting that, prior to the last decade, Peter Ladefoged helped to pioneer this sort of work in Amazonia (as in so many other regions), and collaborative efforts between him and others represented the ﬁrst substantive acoustically oriented works to document unusual Amazonian sound patterns, for instance, the ‘voiceless apico-dental plosive [followed by a] voiceless labio-labial trill’ (Ladefoged and Everett 1996) in Oro Win. Ladefoged also co-authored an account of Banawa phonetics (Ladefoged et al. 1997) and served as an advisor for an in-depth acoustic analysis of the acoustic correlates of Piraha˜ stress (K. Everett 1998). 6 This trend, it should be pointed out, also surfaces in recent descriptive work carried out in other world regions. Dryer (2006) suggests that since the 1970s there has been a sharp decline in the use of generative grammar for the purpose of grammar writing. The trend toward ‘basic linguistic theory’ is arguably due in large part to linguists’ recognition of the beneﬁts of restricting the usage of theory-speciﬁc formalisms, so as to facilitate the interpretation of their work after the obsolescence of any particular paradigm. 7 http://wings.buffalo.edu/linguistics//people/faculty/vanvalin/infostructure/Site/Intro.html. 8 http://www.ailla.utexas.org/site/welcome.html. 9 For instance, the DoBeS online archive includes data from Trumai, Kuikuro and Awet´ı. The archive is accessible at: http://www.mpi.nl/DOBES

Works Cited
Aikhenvald, Alexandra. 1999. Arawak. The Amazonian languages, ed. by R. M. W. Dixon and Alexandra Aikhenvald, 65–106. Cambridge, UK:Cambridge University Press.
——. 2002. Lange contact in Amazonia. Oxford: Oxford University Press. ——. 2003. A grammar of Tariana, from northwest Amazonia. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. ——. 2007. Classiﬁers in multiple environments: Baniwa of Ic¸ana ⁄ Kurripako – a North Arawak perspective. Inter-
national Journal of American Linguistics 73. 475–500. ——. 2008. Multilingual imperatives: the elaboration of a category in Northwest Amazonia. International Journal
of American Linguistics 74. 189–225. Anchieta, Jose´ de. 1933 [1595]. Arte de grama´tica da lingua mais usada na costa do Brasil. Rio de Janeiro: Imprensa
Nacional. Beier, Christine, Lev Michael, and Joel Sherzer. 2002. Discourse forms and processes in indigenous lowland South
America: an areal-typological perspective. Annual Review of Anthropology 31. 121–45. Boswood, Joan. 1973. Evideˆncias para a inclusa˜o do Aripaktsa no ﬁlo Macro-Jeˆ. Se´rie Lingu¨´ıstica 1. 67–78. Bruno, Ana Carla. 2003. Waimiri-Atroari grammar: some phonological, morphological, and syntactic aspects.
Tucson, AZ: University of Arizona PhD dissertation.

ª 2010 The Author Journal Compilation ª 2010 Blackwell Publishing Ltd

Language and Linguistics Compass 4/5 (2010): 319–336, 10.1111/j.1749-818x.2010.00197.x

Amazonian Linguistics 333
Burgess, Eunice. 1971. Duas ana´lises das s´ılabas do Xavante. Estudos soˆbre l´ınguas e culturas ind´ıgenas: Trabalhos lingu´ısticos realizados no Brasil (edic¸a˜o especial), ed. by S.C. Gudschinsky, 96–102. Bras´ılia: SIL Press.
Cabral, Ana Suelly, and Aryon Rodrigues. 2002. L´ınguas ind´ıgenas brasileiras : fonologia, grama´tica e histo´ria : Atas do I encontro internacional do grupo de trabalho sobre l´ınguas ind´ıgenas da ANPOLL. Bele´m, Brazil: Editora Universita´ria UFPA.
Campbell, Lyle. 1997. American Indian languages. The historical linguistics of Native America. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Carlin, Eithne. 2004. A grammar of Trio, a Cariban language of suriname. Frankfurt am Main: Peter Lang. Chapman, Shirley, and Mary Ann Odmark. 1964. Paumari phonemic statement. Ana´polis, GO: Associac¸a˜o Inter-
nacional de Lingu¨´ıstica. Chernela, Janet. 2003. Language ideology and women’s speech: talking community in the Northwest Amazon.
American Anthropologist 105. 794–806. Crevels, Milly, and Hein van der Voort. 2008. The Guapore´-Mamore´ region as a linguistic area. From linguistic
areas to areal linguistics, ed. by Peter Muysken, 151–79. Studies in Language Companion Series. Amsterdam, Netherlands: John Benjamin. Crofts, Marjorie. 1971. Repeated morphs in Munduruku´. Estudos sobre l´ınguas e culturas ind´ıgenas, ed. by S.C. Gudschinsky, 60–80. Bras´ılia: SIL Press. ——. 1984. Ideo´fonos na narrac¸a˜o munduruku. Se´rie Lingu¨´ıstica 11. 207–18. Crowhurst, M. J., and L. D. Michael. 2005. Iterative footing and prominence-driven stress in Nanti (Kampa). Language 81. 47–95. D’Angelis, Wilmar da Rocha. 1999. Gradient versions of pre- and circum-oralized consonants in Kaingang (Brazil). Proceedings of the 14th International Congress of Phonetic Sciences, ed. by J. Ohala, Y. Hasegawa, M. Ohala, D. Granville and A. Bailey, Vol. 2, 1043–46. San Francisco. Danielsen, Swintha. 2007. Baure, an Arawak language of Bolivia. Leiden, Netherlands: CNWS Publications. Dehaene, Stanislas, Veronique Izard, Pierre Pica, and Elizabeth Spelke. 2006. Core knowledge of geometry in an Amazonian indigene group. Science 311. 381–84. Demolin, Didier, Katharina Haude, and Luciana Storto. 2006. Aerodynamic and acoustic evidence for the articulation of complex nasals. Revue Parole 40. 177–205. Derbyshire, Desmond C. 1961. Hixkaryana (Carib) syntax structure. International Journal of American Linguistics 27. 125–42. ——. 1977. Word order universals and the existence of OVS languages. Linguistic Inquiry 8. 590–9. ——. 1979. Hixkaryana. Lingua Descriptive Studies, volume 1. Amsterdam, The Netherlands: Croom Helm. Derbyshire, Desmond, and Geoffrey K. Pullum (eds). 1986. Handbook of Amazonian languages, volume 1. Berlin: Mouton de Gruyter. Derbyshire, Desmond, and Geoffrey K. Pullum (eds). 1998. Handbook of Amazonian languages, volume 4. Berlin: Mouton de Gruyter. Dixon, Robert M. W. 1997. The rise and fall of languages. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. ——. 2004. The Jarawara language of southern Amazonia. Oxford: Oxford University Press. Dixon, Robert M. W., and Alexandra Aikhevald (eds). 1999. The Amazonian languages. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. Dobson, Rose. 1973. Notas sobre substantivos do Kayab´ı. Se´rie Lingu¨´ıstica 1. 30–56. Dooley, Robert A. 1976. Participants in Guarani narrative. Bras´ılia: SIL Press. Dourado, Luciana. 2001. Aspectos morfossinta´ticos da l´ıngua Panara´. Campinas, SP: UNICAMP PhD dissertation. Dryer, Matthew. 2006. Descriptive theories, explanatory theories, and basic linguistic theory. Catching language: The standing challenge of grammar writing, ed. by Felix Ameka, Alan Dench, and Nicholas Evans, 207–34. Berlin, Germany: Mouton de Gruyter. El´ıas-Ulloa, Jose´. 2009a. The distribution of laryngeal segments in Capanahua. International Journal of American Linguistics 75. 159–206. ——. 2009b. An acoustic phonetics of Shipibo (Pano). Manuscript. Epps, Patience. 2008a. A grammar of Hup. Berlin: Mouton de Gruyter. ——. 2008b. From ‘wood’ to future tense: nominal origin of the future construction in Hup. Studies in Language 32. 383–404. ——. 2009. Language classiﬁcation, language contact, and Amazonian prehistory. Language and Linguistic Compass 3. 581–606. Erickson, Clark. 2008. Amazonia: The historical ecology of a domesticated landscape. South American archaeology, ed. by Helaine Silverman, and William H. Isbell, 157–84. New York: Springer. Evans, Nicholas, and Stephen Levinson. 2009. The myth of language universals: language diversity and its importance for cognitive science. Behavioral and Brain Sciences 32. 429–92. Everett, Caleb. 2006. Patterns in Karitiana: articulation, perception, and grammar. Houston, TX: Rice University PhD dissertation.

ª 2010 The Author Journal Compilation ª 2010 Blackwell Publishing Ltd

Language and Linguistics Compass 4/5 (2010): 319–336, 10.1111/j.1749-818x.2010.00197.x

334 Caleb Everett
——. 2008a. Locus equation analysis as a tool for linguistic ﬁeldwork. Language Documentation and Conservation 2. 185–211.
——. 2008b. Aspects of Karitiaˆna vowels. Anthropological Linguistics 50. 266–91. ——. Forthcoming a. Variable velic movement in Karitiaˆna. International Journal of American Linguistics. ——. Forthcoming b. The ligature between epicene pronouns and a more neutral gender perception. Gender and
Language. Everett, Daniel. 1982. Phonetic rarities in Piraha˜. Journal of the International Phonetics Association 12. 94–96. ——. 1991. A l´ıngua Piraha˜ e a teoria da sintaxe: Descric¸a˜o, perspectivas e teoria. Campinas, Sa˜o Paulo: Editora da
Universidade Estadual de Campinas. ——. 2005. Cultural constraints on grammar and cognition in Piraha˜: another look at the design ﬁgures of human
language. Current Anthropology 46. 621–46. ——. 2009. Piraha˜ culture and grammar: a response to some criticisms. Language 85. 405–42. ——, and Barbara Kern. 1997. War´ı: the Pacaas Novos language of Western Brazil. London, UK: Routledge Press. Everett, Keren. 1998. The acoustic correlates of stress in Piraha˜. Journal of Amazonian Languages 1. 104–62. Fabre, Alain. 2005. Diccionario etnolingu¨´ıstico y gu´ıa bibliogra´ﬁca de los pueblos ind´ıgenas sudamericanos. Online
version (periodically updated): http://butler.cc.tut.ﬁ/~fabre/typologydatabase.html. Facundes, Sidney da Silva. 2000. The language of the Apurina˜ people of Brazil. Buffalo, NY: State University of
New York PhD dissertation. Fausto, C., B. Franchetto, and M. Heckenberger. 2008. Language, ritual and historical reconstruction: towards a
linguistic, ethnographical and archaeological account of Upper Xingu society. Lessons from documented endangered languages, ed. by K. D. Harrison, D. S. Rood, and A. Dwyer, 129–58. Amsterdam, Netherlands: John Benjamins. Ferreira, Mar´ılia. 2003. Estudo morfossinta´tico da l´ıngua Parkateˆjeˆ. Campinas, SP: UNICAMP PhD dissertation. Ferreira, Roge´rio Vicente. 2005. L´ıngua Matis (Pano): uma descric¸a˜o gramatical. Campinas, SP: UNICAMP PhD dissertation. Fleck, David. 2003. A grammar of Matse´s. Houston, TX: Rice University PhD dissertation. ——. 2007. Evidentiality and double tense in Matses. Language 83. 589–614. Franchetto, Bruna. 2006. Ethnography in language documentation. Essentials in language documentation, ed. by J. Gippert, P. Himmelmann, and U. Mosel, 183–212. Berlin: Mouton de Gruyter. ——, and E. Gomez-Imbert. 2003. The Amazonian languages (review). International Journal of American Linguistics 69. 232–8. Frank, Michael, Daniel Everett, Evelina Fedorenko, and Edward Gibson. 2008. Number as a cognitive technology: evidence from Piraha˜ language and cognition. Cognition 108. 819–24. Gabas Jr, Nilson. 1999. A grammar of Karo, Tup´ı (Brazil). Santa Barbara, CA: University of California Santa Barbara PhD dissertation. Galu´cio, AnaVilacy. 2001. The morphosyntax of Mekens (Tup´ı). Chicago, IL: University of Chicago PhD dissertation. Gildea, Spike. 1992. Comparative Cariban morphosyntax: on the genesis of ergativity. Eugene, OR: University of Oregon PhD dissertation. Gildea, S. (ed.) 2000. Reconstructing grammar: comparative linguistics and grammaticalization. Typological Studies in Language 43. Amsterdam, Netherlands: John Benjamins. Gildea, Spike, and Fracesc Queixalo´s. forthcoming. Ergativity in Amazonia. Amsterdam: John Benjamins. Giro´n, Jesu´s Mario. 2008. Una grama´tica del wa¨nso¨jo¨t (puinave). Amsterdam, Netherlands: Vrije Universiteit PhD dissertation. Gomes, Dioney Moreira. 2006. Estudo morfolo´gico e sinta´tico da l´ıngua Munduruku´ (Tup´ı). Bras´ılia, Brazil: Universidade de Bras´ılia PhD dissertation. Gomez-Imbert, E., and M. Kenstowicz. 2000. Barasana tone and accent. International Journal of American Linguistics 66. 419–63. Gonza´lez, Hebe Alicia. 2005. A grammar of Tapiete (Tupi-Guarani). Pittsburgh, PA: University of Pittsburgh PhD dissertation. Gordon, Peter. 2004. Numerical cognition without words: evidence from Amazonia. Science 306. 496–9. Gordon, Matthew, and Franc¸oise Rose. 2006. E´ me´rillon stress: a phonetic and phonological study. Anthropological Linguistics 48. 132–68. Graham, Albert, Sue Graham, and Carl H. Harrison. 1984. Preﬁxos pessoais e numerais da l´ıngua Satere´-Mawe´. Se´rie Lingu¨´ıstica 11. 175–206. Greenberg, Joseph. 1987. Language in the Americas. Palo Alto, CA: Stanford University Press. Guillaume, Antoine. 2006. Revisiting ‘split ergativity’ in Cavinen˜a. International Journal of American Lingistics 72. 159–92. ——. 2008. A grammar of Cavinen˜a. New York: Mouton de Gruyter. ——. 2009. Hierarchical agreement and split intransitivity in Reyesano. International Journal of American Linguistics 75. 29–48.

ª 2010 The Author Journal Compilation ª 2010 Blackwell Publishing Ltd

Language and Linguistics Compass 4/5 (2010): 319–336, 10.1111/j.1749-818x.2010.00197.x

Amazonian Linguistics 335
Guirardello, Racquel. 1999. A reference grammar of Trumai. Houston, TX: Rice University PhD dissertation. Harrison, Carl. 1975. Grama´tica asurin´ı: Aspectos de uma grama´tica transformacional e discursos monologados da
l´ıngua asurin´ı, fam´ılia tupi guaran´ı. Se´rie Lingu¨´ıstica 4. Haude, Katharina. 2006. A grammar of Movima. Nijmegen, The Netherlands: Radboud Universiteit PhD disserta-
tion. Heckenberger, M. J., J. C. Russell, C. Fausto, J. R. Toney, M. J. Schmidt, E. Pereira, B. Franchetto, and A. Kuik-
uro. 2008. Pre-Columbian urbanism, anthropogenic landscapes, and the future of the Amazon. Science 321. 1214–17. Hemming, John. 1978. Red gold: the conquest of the Brazilian Indians. London, UK: Macmillan Press. Hill, Jonathan. 1999. Indigenous peoples and the rise of independent nation-states in lowland South America. The Cambridge history of the native peoples of the Americas, volume III, part 2, ed. by Frank Salomon, and Stuart B. Scwhartz, 704–64. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press. Himmelmann, N. P., and E. Schultze-Berndt (eds). 2005. Secondary predication and adverbial modiﬁcation: the typology of depictives. Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press. Kaufman, Terrence. 1990. Language history in South America: what we know and how to know more. Amazonian linguistics: studies in lowland South American languages, ed. by Doris L. Payne, 13–74. Austin, TX: University of Texas Press. Kaye, Jonathan. 1971. Nasal harmony in Desano. Linguistic Inquiry 2. 37–56. Kensinger, Kenneth M. 1965. The Cashinahua of southeastern Peru. Expedition 7(4). 5–9. Key, Mary R. 1968. Comparative Tacanan phonology, with Cavinen˜a phonology and notes on Pano-Tacanan relationship. Janua Linguarum, series practica, 50. The Hague, Netherlands: Mouton. Ladefoged, Peter, and Daniel Everett. 1996. The status of phonetic rarities. Language 72(4). 794–800. ——, Jenny Ladefoged, and Daniel Everett. 1997. Phonetic structures of Banawa´, an endangered language. Phonetica 54. 94–111. Landin, David. 1976. Karitiaˆna clauses. Porto Velho, Brazil: SIL. Leite, Yonne, and Bruna Franchetto. 2006. 500 anos de l´ınguas ind´ıgenas no Brasil. Quinhentos anos de histo´ria ling´ıstica do Brasil, ed. by S. Marcelino Cardoso, J. Andrade Mota, and R. V. Mattos e Silva, 15–62. Salvador: Fundo da Cultura de Bahia. Lenz, F. (ed.) 2003. Deictic conceptualisation of space, time and person. Amsterdam, Netherlands: John Benjamins. Magalha˜es, Marina Maria Silva. 2007. Sobre a morfologia e a sintaxe da l´ıngua Guaja´ (fam´ılia Tup´ı-Guaran´ı). Bras´ılia, Brazil: Universidade de Bras´ılia PhD dissertation. Matteson, Esther. 1972. Proto Arawakan. Comparative studies in Amerindian languages, ed. by Esther Matteson, 160–242. Janua Linguarum, series practica, 127. The Hague, Netherlands: Mouton. Meira, Se´rgio. 1999. A grammar of Tiriyo´. Houston, TX: Rice University PhD dissertation. Moore, Denny. 1984. Syntax of the language of the Gavia˜o Indians of Rondoˆnia. New York: City University of New York PhD dissertation. ——. 2007. Endangered languages of lowland tropical South America. Language diversity endangered, ed. by Matthias Brenzinger, 29–58. Berlin, Germany: Walter de Gruyter. Nichols, Johanna. 1990. Linguistic diversity and the ﬁrst settlement of the New World. Language 66. 475–521. Oliveira, Christiane Cunha de. 2005. The language of the Apinaje´ people of Central Brazil. Eugene, Oregon: University of Oregon PhD dissertation. Oliveira, Rosana Costa de. 2007. Morfologia e sintaxe da l´ıngua Xavante. Rio de Janeiro. Brazil: Universidade Federal do Rio de Janeiro PhD dissertation. Olson, R. D. 1967. The syllable in Chipaya. International Journal of American Linguistics 33. 300–4. Payne, David L. 1985. The genetic classiﬁcation of Resigaro. International Journal of American Linguistics 51. 222–31. Payne, Doris. (ed.) 1990. Amazonian linguistics: studies in lowland South American languages. Austin, TX: University of Texas Press. Payne, Doris. 2001. The Amazonian languages (review). Language 77. 594–8. ——. 2007. Source of the Yagua nominal classiﬁcation system. International Journal of American Linguistics 73. 447–74. Payne, Thomas E. 1983. Yagua object clitics: syntactic and phonological misalignment and another possible source of ergativity. Proceedings of the Chicago Linguistic Society, 173–84. Ann Arbor, MI: Chicago Linguistic Society. Pease, Helen. 1968. Parintintin grammar. Porto Velho, Brazil: SIL. Pica, Pierre, Cathy Lemer, Veronique Izard, and Stanislas Dehaene. 2004. Exact and approximate arithmetic in an Amazonian indigene group. Science 306. 499–503. Pickering, Wilbur N. 1971. Apurina˜ grammar. Ana´polis, Brazil: SIL. ——, and Ida Lou Pickering. 1964. Apurina˜ phonemic analysis. Ana´polis, Brazil: SIL. Pin˜eros, Gabriele Petersen de. 2007. Nominal classiﬁcation in Uituto. International Journal of American Linguistics 73. 389–410.

ª 2010 The Author Journal Compilation ª 2010 Blackwell Publishing Ltd

Language and Linguistics Compass 4/5 (2010): 319–336, 10.1111/j.1749-818x.2010.00197.x

336 Caleb Everett
Pinker, Steven, and Ray Jackendoff. 2005. The faculty of language: what’s special about it? Cognition 95. 201–36. Prac¸a, Walkiria Neiva Lali. 2007. Morfossintaxe da l´ıngua Tapirape´ (fam´ılia Tup´ı – Guaran´ı). Bras´ılia, Brazil:
Universidade de Bras´ılia, PhD dissertation. Ribeiro, Eduardo, and Hein van der Voort. forthcoming. Nimuendaju´ was right: the inclusion of the Jabut´ı
language family in the Macro-Jeˆ stock. International Journal of American Linguistics (special volume on historical linguistics in South America, ed. by Spike Gildea and Ana Vilacy Galucio), 76. Rodrigues, Aryon. 1958. Die Klassiﬁkation des Tupi-Sprachstammes. Proceedings of the 32nd International Congress of the Americanists, ed. by J. Yde, 679–84. Copenhagen, Denmark. ——. 1962. Comparac¸a˜o das l´ınguas Umut´ına e Boro´ro. Informac¸o˜es etnogra´ﬁcas sobre os Umut´ına. Revista do Museu Paulista, volume 13. ed. by H. Shultz, 100–5. ——. 1964. A classiﬁcac¸a˜o do tronco lingu¨´ıstico Tup´ı. Revista de Antropologia 12. 99–104. ——. 1999. Tup´ı. The Amazonian languages, ed. by R. M. W. Dixon, and Alexandra Aikhenvald, 107–24. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press. ——. 2000. Panorama das l´ınguas ind´ıgenas da Amazoˆnia. As l´ınguas Amazoˆnicas hoje, ed. by Francisco Queixalo´s, and Odile Renault-Lescure, 15–28. Sa˜o Paulo, Brazil: Instituto So´cioambiental. Roosevelt, Anna. 1994. Amazonian Indians from prehistory to the present – anthropological perspectives. Tucson, AZ: University of Arizona Press. Rose, Franc¸oise. 2003. Morphosyntaxe de l’eme´rillon, langue ame´rindienne de Guyane franc¸aise. Lyon, France: Universite´ Lumie`re Lyon 2, PhD dissertation. Santos, Manoel Gomes dos. 2006. Uma grama´tica do Wapixana (Aruak): aspectos da fonologia, da morfologia e da sintaxe. Campinas, Sa˜o Paulo: UNICAMP, PhD dissertation. Sebastia´n, Rittma Urqu´ıa, and Stephen A. Marlett. 2008. Yine. Journal of the International Phonetic Association 38. 365–9. Seifart, Frank. 2005. The structure and use of shape-based noun classes in Miran˜a (North West Amazon). Nijmegen, the Netherlands: Radbout Universiteit PhD dissertation. ——. 2007. The prehistory of nominal classiﬁcation in Witotoan languages. International Journal of American Linguistics 73. 411–45. ——, Sebastian Drude, Bruna Franchetto, Ju¨rg Gasche´, Luc´ıa Golluscio, and Elizabeth Manrique. 2008. Language documentation and archives in South America. Language Documentation and Conservation, 2. 130–40. Seki, Lucy. 2000. Grama´tica da l´ıngua Kamaiura´. Campinas. Sa˜o Paulo: Editora da Universidade Estadual de Campinas. Sheldon, Steven N. 1974. Some morphophonemic and tone perturbation rules in Mura Piraha˜. International Journal of American Linguistics 40. 279–82. Sherzer, Joel, and Greg Urban. 1986. Native South American discourse. Berlin, Germany: Walter de Gruyter. Shibatani, M. 2002. The grammar of causation and interpersonal manipulation. Amsterdam, Netherlands: John Benjamins. Smith, Richard D. 1973. Southern Barasano grammar. Language data, Amerindian series, 3. Dallas, TX: Summer Institute of Linguistics. Stenzel, Kristine Sue. 2004. A reference grammar of Wanano. Boulder, CO: University of Colorado, PhD dissertation. Storto, Luciana. 1999. Aspects of a Karitiana grammar. Cambridge, MA: Massachusetts Institute of Technology. PhD dissertation. Tavares, Petronilla da Silva. 2006. A grammar of Wayana. Houston, TX: Rice University PhD dissertation. Valenzuela, Pilar. 2003. Transitivity in Shipibo-Konibo grammar. Eugene, OR: University of Oregon PhD dissertation. ——, Luis Ma´rquez Pinedo, and Ian Maddieson. 2001. Shipibo. Journal of the International Phonetic Association. 31. 281–5. Weber, David J. 1986. Information perspective, proﬁle, and patterns in Quechua. Evidentiality: the linguistic coding of epistemology, ed. by Wallace Chafe, and Johanna Nichols, 137–55. Norwood, NJ: Ablex. Wetzels, Leo. (ed.) 2007. Language endangerment and endangered languages. Leiden, the Netherlands: CNWS Publications. Wetzels, Leo. 2008. Thoughts on the phonological deﬁnition of nasal ⁄ oral contour consonants in some indigenous languages of South America. Abordagens em fone´tica e fonologia: estudos auditivos, acu´sticos e perceptivos; modelos de ana´lise fonolo´gica de ontem e de hoje. Revista ALFA 52(2). 251–78. Wetzels, Leo. 2009. Nasal harmony and the representation of nasality in Maxacal´ı: evidence from Portuguese loans. Loan phonology, ed. by A. Calabrese, and L. Wetzels, 241–70. Amsterdam, Netherlands: John Benjamins. Wise, Mary Ruth. 1976. Apuntes sobre la inﬂuencia inca entre los amuesha: factor que oscurece la clasiﬁcacio´n de su idioma. Revista del Museo Nacional 42. 355–66.

ª 2010 The Author Journal Compilation ª 2010 Blackwell Publishing Ltd

Language and Linguistics Compass 4/5 (2010): 319–336, 10.1111/j.1749-818x.2010.00197.x

