Panoan languages and linguistics
David W. Fleck version 5 May 2011
Introduction The current state of knowledge of Panoan languages and of the linguistics of
the family has improved significantly over what was known 50 or even 10 years ago, but there is nevertheless a sense of urgency to describe and analyze these languages. Of the approximately 30 known Panoan languages, only 17 are still spoken today. A few large, viable Panoan speech communities still exist, most notably the ShipiboKonibos with 30-40,000 speakers, and Matses, Kashinawa of the Ibuaçu River, Yaminawa, Kashibo, Marubo, and Chakobo with 1000 or more speakers. But most of the rest of the extant Panoan languages are obsolescent or in danger of extinction due to low populations and language replacement by Spanish, Portuguese, or ShipiboKonibo, and most of these are incompletely described. Among the major aims of the present paper is to qualify and put into context the linguistic information available for the family, and to pull together new and old information to provide a more accurate classification and linguistic description of the family.
This paper begins with a classification of the family, which also serves as an inventory of all the extant and extinct Panoan languages and dialects. Next follow descriptions of genetic ties beyond the family level and of lexical borrowing and areal diffusion of grammatical features from, and into, neighboring non-Panoan languages and Kechua. Next is a history of Panoan linguistics, from the first Jesuit notes on affiliation and Franciscan vocabularies to the most recent contributions to the field, followed by suggested priorities for future Panoan linguistic research. Then a brief typological overview of Panoan phonology, morphology and syntax is outlined,
1

pointing out some of the more extraordinary grammatical features found in the family.
Name taboo, post-mortem word taboo, ceremonial languages, in-law avoidance
speech, and other ethnolinguistic phenomena are discussed in the final section.
Classification and Inventory of Panoan Languages and Dialects
Table 1 provides a classification of all the extant and extinct languages and
dialects known to be linguistically Panoan. This classification is based strictly on
linguistic features (lexical, phonological and grammatical similarity, and application of the comparative method1), and consequently differs from previous classifications in
several ways: i) only languages for which we have at least a word list are included; ii)
ethnic identity is not taken into account, so that very similar varieties spoken by
separate ethnic groups are not treated as distinct languages, but as dialects of the same
linguistically-defined language; iii) subgrouping does not take into account
geographical proximity, but rather is guided by relative linguistic similarity and
shared innovations. Consequently, the present classification contains many categories
not recognized in previous classifications.
PLACE TABLE 1 ABOUT HERE
In addition to the known Panoan languages and dialects included in Table 1,
surely other Panoan speech varieties became extinct before they could be
documented. For some extinct, possibly Panoan ethnic groups we have only
1 For two reasons the data and analyses used for this classification is not produced here: 1) because of space restricteion; and 2) because some of this work is still in progress. See Fleck (2007a) and Fleck (in progress) for the methodology used for lexical comparisons; for data and demonstration of the classifcation the languages denominated Remo, of the languages denominated Kulina and Marubo, of language/dialects denominated Kapanawa, and of all the Mayoruna languages and dialects see Krokoszyński and Fleck (this volume), Fleck (2007a), Fleck and Krokoszyński (in progress), and Fleck (in progress), respectively. I have also begun a Panoan lexical and phonological reconstruction to be published in the future. Therefore, the classification presented here can be seen as a preview and in part still somewhat tentative.
2

ethnonyms and occasionally notes on linguistic or ethnic affiliation. The lack of linguistic information for these does not allow us to incorporate them into the classification in Table 1. Even if we felt sure that any one of these ethnonyms referred to Panoan speakers, we often cannot know if it was a synonym for, or the name of a dialect of, a language already included in Table 1. Table 2 provides a list of ethnonyms/language names that have been claimed to be Panoan, but for which no linguistic data are available.
PLACE TABLE 2 ABOUT HERE In addition to the presumably extinct ethnic groups in Table 2, there are several uncontacted groups in westernmost Brazil and easternmost Peru suspected to be Panoans (Erikson 1994; Krokoszyński and Fleck, this volume).
Ethnonyms and orthography Aside from providing a classification of the Panoan languages, Table 1 also
represents a complete inventory of all the Panoan languages and dialects (and of all the Panoan ethnic groups; here I consider an “ethnonym” a term that circumscribes a recognized ethnic group, and which is also the designation for their speech variety, which may be either a dialect or a language). The ethnonyms in Table 1 (and Table 2) were selected by me as the principal English denominations. Below I note the conventions I followed for selecting the principal ethnonyms and their spelling.
The first issue to deal with is synonymy: for many languages/ethnic groups, multiple synonymous terms exist in the literature. For example, Shipibo has also been called Calliseca and Chama in the historical literature, and Kashibo has been referred to by the pseudo-autodenomination Uni (‘people’) in some recent publications (e.g., Frank 1987, 1993, 1994). From such synonym sets the term that is most common in the current academic literature is selected as the primary ethnonym, and if two or
3

more terms are similarly common, the older term is selected.2 All other terms are
treated as secondary synonyms, and can be found listed in Appendix A.
The second issue is homonymy within the family. Specifically, Mayoruna,
Kulina, Remo, Kapanawa, and Kashinawa are each the most widely accepted
ethnonym for more than one Panoan language or dialect. Rather than invent new
ethnonyms, resurrect obscure synonyms, or apply different spelling/pronunciation
variants to differentiate the speech varieties, here I modify these denominations with a
location (e.g., Kulina of the Curuçá River), as can be seen in Table 1. Other cases of
homonymy within the family exist where the term in question is the principal
ethnonym for one Panoan language, and a secondary synonym for another Panoan
language. Most notably, Katukina is used to designate a language on the Gregorio
River, but Shanenawa is also sometimes called “Katukina (de Feijó)”; and Nawa is
used for a now obsolescent language from the Môa River area in Brazil, but
2 In analogy to biological species nomenclature, precedent would seem a more straightforward principle for selecting official ethnonyms, but in practice it is often not possible. Unlike in biology (where published coined names are accompanied by precise descriptions and type specimens), we often cannot be sure of the precise referent of the first usages of some of these older ethnonyms. For example, the earliest use of Chama (translated as ‘friend’ by Portillo 1905[1900]:506) that I have found is by Fritz (1922:130) for an ethnic group on the Ucayali River in 1721, but one cannot be completely certain that the reference was to Shipibos (look up), particularly considering that, while in some instances Chama has been used to refer specifically to Shipibos (e.g., Woodroffe 1914) or Konibos (Tizón 1911:5), more frequently its use is more generic, referring collectively to Shipibos, Konibos, and typically also the Shetebos (e.g., Stiglich 1908:414, Tessmann 1928, 1929). (In the present paper I use the term Chama only in reference to the subgroup in my classificaion; see Kästner 1980 for more discussion on the term Chama). Likewise, while some early sources equate the Shipibos with the Callisecas (e.g., Rojas [1686] and Vital [1791] in Biedma 1989:197, 263; Sobreviela 1791:99; Amich 1854:29; Maroni 1988[1889-92]:501; Alemany 1906:III; Steward and Métraux 1948:561), others claim Calliseca is a synonym for Kashibo (e.g., Smyth and Lowe 1936:232, Herndon 1854:205, Marcoy 1862-7:XI:222, Markham 1910:87, Tessmann 1930:127, Espinoza 1955:583) or Konibo (Rodríguez 2004-5[1780]:I:128). Complicating matters further is that the ancestors of current-day Panoan ethnic groups were not necessarily unified, circumscribed societies historically, so that, for example, Calliseca could well have referred only to a subgroup of Shipibos or Kashibos (see Frank 1994).
4

Parkenawa is also sometimes called Nawa. In these cases the homonymous term is
used, unmodified, as the principal ethnonym only for the language/ethnic group that it
commonly designates; such cases of intra-family homonymy are clarified in Appendix
A. Fleck and Krokoszyński (in progress) provide further discussion of ethnonym
homonymy in the Panoan family
Cases of inter-family homonymy are pervasive in the Panoan family. In these
cases, the Panoan language name is not modified here, and when referring to the non-
Panoan homonym, the family is specified (e.g., “Arawan Kulina”). Table 3 lists these
inter-family homonyms, along with some potentially confusing look-alike language
names.
PLACE TABLE 3 ABOUT HERE
The final issue is orthography. Many ethnonyms have multiple spelling
variants, due to historical vs. modern spellings, Brazilian vs. Peruvian/Bolivian
orthography, difficulty of transcribing sounds not found in an author’s language, etc.
For example, historically Shetebo has been written as Cheteo, Gitipo, Jitipo, Schitebo,
Schitipo, Setebo, Setevo, Setibo, Settebo, Sitibo, Ssetebo, Xetebo or Xitipo (some of these occasionally with an accent on the first of second syllable).3 Two modern
examples are Kashinawa and Yaminawa, spelled Cashinahua and Yaminahua in Peru,
and Kaxinauá/Caxinauá and Jamináwa/Jaminaua in Brazil. Here I adopt a
3 Variants of Shetebo and Shipibo (pronounced [ş t ßo] and [ipißo] in the respective languages) missing the b (or v) were very likely of Kokama origin (see below on Jesuits’ first contact with Shipibos/Chipeos and Shetebos/Cheteos, who were captives of the Kokamas), considering that the Kokama language lacks both a /b/ phoneme and the [ß] sound, the most similar sound in the language being [p]. Note also that Kokama lacks fricatives (i.e., they would likely mispronounce the initial consonants of Shipibo and Shetebo, using instead an affricate ch [t]), but the absence of sh ([] or [ş]) in Spanish surely also contributed the large number variant spellings. With respect to variation in vowels I point out that Kokama and all the Nawa languages lack a contrast between i and e (and between o and u; cf. Conibo vs. Cunibo) and Spanish lacks a high central vowel ([i], i.e., the first two vowels in Shetebo). See Cabral (1995:58ff) for Kokama phonololgy.
5

standardized (English) orthography for Panoan ethnonyms, which is similar to that used by Rivet and Tastevin (1921), Tessmann (1930), and Valenzuela (2003b). In addition to establishing a single form for each denomination, the orthography also aims to make pronunciation straightforward. Thus, 1) sounds absent in English are replaced with the closest English phoneme, most notably, the high central vowel [ ], the retroflex fricative [ş], and the bilabial fricative [ß] are represented, respectively, by e, sh, and b (this is only relevant for those languages, such as some Mayoruna languages, that do not already have well-established denominations in the national languages or in the academic literature); 2) defects of (modern and archaic) Spanish and Portuguese orthography, such as the use of u/hu/gu for w, qu/c for k, x for sh or h, ch for sh, g for h, j for y, etc., have been eliminated; 3) letters/symbols not in the English alphabet, such as š, č, ë, and IPA characters, are excluded; and 4) all stress marks are left out, due to the inconsistency with which these are applied. After 1-4 have been applied, there may be more than one variant left (which would actually be pronunciation variants, at least in English), such as Konibo vs. Kunibo vs. Konivo, or Kulina vs. Kulino vs. Kurina, in which case I chose the form in more common usage, or the one resembling the more common unmodified forms(s) (assuming it can be established that these in fact refer to the same ethnic group/language).
Former misconceptions about the Panoan family Past classifications have suffered from both overdifferentiation and
underdifferentiation. By overdifferentiation I mean that the best-known speech varieties, especially those in the Chama group, have been misinterpreted as representing more languages than there really are. Consider, for example, that Shipibo and Kapanawa of the Tapiche River share 90% of their vocabulary and have fewer phonological differences than American and British dialects of English.
6

Conversely, there has been consistent underdifferentiation of the Mayoruna languages. Erikson (1990, 1992, 1994) revealed that Mayoruna referred to multiple extant groups, but most linguists, even in some relatively recent publications (e.g., Kaufman 1994, Campbell 1997, Loos 1999b), have failed to recognize the internal diversity of the Mayoruna branch, treating “Mayoruna” instead as a single language.
In addition to underestimating Mayoruna diversity, Mayoruna divergence has also been misjudged. Many authors have commented on the high level of divergence of the Mayoruna languages from the other Panoan languages, both in reference to the historical Mayorunas (Sagols 1901 [1874]:364; Larrabure 1908:XIII:261; Izaguirre 1922-29:IX:40), and to the modern Matses (d’Ans 1982:92; Kneeland 1994:23; Lanes 2000:162, 2002:116; Dorigo 2001:9-10). However, except for Lanes4, previous classifiers of the Panoan family have not separated the Mayoruna languages at the highest level as I have done, typically instead placing the Mayoruna languages (or “language”) on the same level as groupings that according to my classification would be subdivisions of the Nawa group (e.g., Bright 1992, Valenzuela 2003b, Gordon 2005). Additionally, I find Kasharari to be clearly the most divergent Mainline language, at least lexically and phonologically, yet its very divergent status has been completely ignored by almost all Panoan linguists (Campbell’s 1997 and Lanes’ 2000 Panoan classifications being two notable exceptions). This imbalance must be rectified before sound reconstructions and comparative studies can be carried out.
Traditionally the Panoan language family has been characterized as being extraordinarily homogenous (e.g., Rivet and Tastevin 1932:232), particularly in comparison with other Amazonian families, such as Arawakan (e.g., Lathrap
4 Lanes actually places Matses in a separate stock. This is partly due to the inaccuarate Matses data he used (from Dorigo) and a result of lexical replacement due to word taboo (see below), but also a reflection of the high level diversion between the Mayoruna and Mainline branches.
7

1970:79). The authors that initially made such statements did not have access to detailed information on Kasharari or the Mayoruna languages, and thus did not take into account the most divergent units of the family; but nevertheless, this notion has persisted even after data became available on these languages (e.g., Erikson 1993). In comparison with the larger Amazonian families, the Panoan family is indeed relatively less diverse, but not as homogenous as the family was once thought to be.
On dialects and languages
Dialects are notoriously difficult to define, but most linguists will agree that distinct speech varieties that share more than 80% of their vocabulary are dialects of the one language. This is the primary criterion that I used for making the distinction between dialects and languages in Table 1.5 This difference between the categories “dialect” and “language” has multiple repercussions on how we think about Panoan languages. For example, one cannot say that Kapanawa (of the Tapiche River) is an endangered language as it is a co-dialect of Shipibo-Konibo, whose speakers number in the tens of thousands; nor is Pano an extinct language as long as the few speakers of its co-dialect Shetebo remain alive. Likewise, it affects the count of Panoan languages or the world’s languages, the relative weight given to a speech variety in a linguistic reconstruction, estimates of the length of time since different Panoan groups have been separated, and so on.
5 Mutual intelligibility is more commonly offerred as the principal criterion for defining dialects, but this is a complex, gradable, and highly subjective measure, and therefore quite imprecise (Vogelin and Harris 1951, Chambers and Trudgill 1980:34). Nevertheless, in my classification I have also considered, observations of communication attemps among speakers of different speech varieties (Matses, Matis, Marubo and Shipibo) and, secondarily, judgements of mutual intelligibility reported to me by speakers of all the Mayoruna groups and of Shipibo-Konibo, Kapanawa, Marubo, and Kashibo, as well as published reports of mutual intelligibility for many of the other Panoan languages.
8

In addition to those listed in Table 1, we would expect there to be many unnamed dialects. For example, Déléage (personal communication) reports that there are at least three fairly distinct dialects of Amawaka, yet in the literature they are not distinguished by different names (see also Hassel 1905:34). Meanwhile, many of the dialects in the Yaminawa dialect complex have distinct names (and have often been treated as separate languages by linguists).6 Thus, the linguistic situation may not be so different among these two closely related languages, but rather it appears to be a case of different autodenomination/denomination practices, presumably based on a desire, and the lack of a desire, of closely-related non-coresident societies to distinguish themselves from each other.
Panoan internal classification and Panoan dispersal The conclusions from the preceding two sections have several important
implications for hypotheses about the initial dispersal of the Panoan family and later movements that eventually led to the current geographic distribution of the family. The first issue is the date of the initial dispersal of the family, considering that it is generally assumed that “[t]he [Panoan] languages show close similarities, indicating a fairly shallow time-depth and recent expansion and split” (Loos 1999b:227). According to Lathrap (1970:187), “It is likely that not much more than 1,000 years ago all these people shared the same language and had a common culture.” AndréMarcel d’Ans (1973), in an oft-cited publication, calculated, through the controversial glottochronological method, that 17-19 centuries ago the Panoan languages began to differentiate, and 12.5-14 centuries ago dispersed geographically into distinct groups.
6 In addition to these differently-named dialects, all listed in Table 1, there are at least three linguistically distinct dialects, spoken by geographically separated communities, all three of which are called “Yaminawa” (Townsley 1994:249, Déléage, personal communication).
9

Once the Mayoruna languages and Kasharari are taken into account, however, estimates calculated by any method will lead to much older dates for the initial dispersal of the family.
It is not only the date of initial dispersal that must be reconsidered, but also the nature of this dispersal. Based on my linguistic classification, the scenario that suggests itself is as follows: 1) first the Mayoruna ancestors split off from the Mainline Panoans; 2) then, later, the Kasharari ancestors split off from the other Mainline Panoans; 3) next, the Kashibo ancestors split off from the Nawa Panoans; 4) then the Bolivian Panoans split off from the rest of the Nawa group; and 5) last would be a period of fission (and perhaps occasional fusion) of the rest of the Nawa ancestors. I note that these first four units to break away are now found, respectively, at the northernmost, westernmost, easternmost, and southernmost reaches of Panoan territory [a map will be provided to accompany this article, or the volume]. A ProtoPanoan homeland in east-central Peru and westernmost Brazil (i.e., at the center of the family’s current territory) would allow for the simplest dispersal scenario leading to the current distribution of the family (i.e., consistent with Carneiro and Wurzel’s proposal in this volume). Although other pre-historical Panoan homelands cannot be ruled out based on these findings on family-internal linguistic relations, considering that the Panoan-Takanan relation has not been adequately demonstrated (see below), one cannot accurately use “linguistics” as an argument for a Bolivian homeland.
Lathrap (1970:186) explains the current distribution of Panoan speakers with a postulated scenario whereby the current Riverine Panoans forced the current Backwoods Panoans, from the overpopulated the riparian ecosystems along the Ucayali River, into the interfluvial areas. Consider, however, that the Kapanawas of the Tapiche River are an interfluvial group, properly classified as Backwoods Panoans
10

following Lathrap’s definition, while the Konibos are the prototypical Riverine Panoans. Yet the Kapanawas of the Tapiche River and the (Shipibo-)Konibos are so closely-related linguistically that their separation must have been closer to 1600AD. Thus, it would appear that in the case of the Kapanawas of the Tapiche River (and perhaps a few others, such as the Manamanbobos and Manannawas), the current distribution of Panoan speakers can be partly accounted for by much more recent fissions from the present large riparian cultures. This also raises the question whether at the time of this fission the Shipibo-Konibo-Kapanawa ancestors were an inland group, with the Konibo settling on the Ucayali banks only after Loyola’s 1557 voyage (perhaps after European diseases wiped out or severly reduced non-Panoan groups living along the Ucayali, such as the Pariaches).
Relations to other South American Families With approximately 30 known languages and 40-50,000 speakers, Panoans
compose a medium-sized family, the fifth largest in South America, following the Arawakan, Cariban, Tupian and Ge families. Panoans are/were in geographic proximity with speakers of languages belonging to two of these large families (Arawakan and Tupian). Other neighboring language families include, Katukinan, Arawan (not to be confused with Arawakan), Takanan, Chapakuran, Harakmbet, Zaparoan, and Peba-Yaguan, and the linguistic isolates Tikuna and Movima. It would be expected that Panoan languages have some relations to some of these neighboring languages, whether these relations be genetic or areal.
Panoan-Takanan relations Rudolph Schuller (1933:481) first attempted to demonstrate the genetic
relationship between Panoan and Takanan, and considered it confirmed despite his
11

scanty evidence. Before that, Armentia (1886; apud Navarro 1903:172), Navarro (1903:172), Groeteken (1907:733), Hestermann (1910), Créqui-Montfort and Rivet (1921:298-301), and Rivet (1924) had noted similarities between the two families. Later, more extensive Proto-Pano-Takanan reconstructions were carried out by Key (1963/1968) and Girard (1971),7 after which the grouping of the Panoan and Takanan language families was generally unreservedly accepted (“proved beyond doubt” according to Suárez 1973:137), despite Girard’s conclusion that “Unless one can extract roots, one is left with a meager corpus of allegedly cognate material—so meager indeed that the evidence for a Pano-Takanan relationship seems only probable” (1971:145) and his severe and apt criticism of Key’s reconstruction (1970) (see Key 1971 for her rebuttal).
According to Swadesh’s (1959:18) lexicostatistic calculations, Panoan and Takanan would have separated 47 centuries ago, approximating the date (5000 years) beyond which conservative linguists consider genetic relations to be impossible to demonstrate. More recently some authors have questioned this grouping (e.g., Fabre 1998, Loos 1999b), suggesting similarities may be due to areal rather than genetic factors. However, this new wave of skepticism did not seem to be based on any new reconstruction or comparative studies, but on recent general rejection of long-distance connections among Amazonian families. Even more recently Amarante Ribeiro (2003) claims to have proven the Panoan-Takanan connection, but his lexicostatistical method does not distinguish borrowing from chance occurrence of lexical matches and therefore brings us no closer to resolving the issue. Loos (2005) points out that (some) Panoan and Takanan languages have SOV constituent order, split
7 Wistrand (1991:245) mentions two unpublished studies on this topic: Loos (1964) and Loriot (1965).
12

ergative pronominal systems, metrical tense systems, a similar imperative suffix, and share a few body-part prefixes.
In short, a genetic relationship is far from having been convincingly demonstrated: comparative studies have shown that there are indeed more lexical matches and grammatical similarities than could be attributed to mere chance, but only further reconstruction work demonstrating that alleged cognates and shared grammatical features are common to both Proto-Panoan and Proto-Takanan will exclude the possibility that the resemblances are the result of borrowing.
Borrowing between Takanan and Panoan languages may have been going on for thoughsands of year (regarless of their genetic relation), but only sound reconstructions will allow us to identify ancient borrowings. I end this section with some information on post-colonial borrowing between Takanan languages and the southernmost Panoan languages. Consider the following language contact situation in Bolivia in the 1880s:
The language spoken by the Indians of the Cavina mission is a mix of Pakawara and Takana, due undoubltedly to the mix of Araonas [speakers of a Takanan language that Armentia considered essentially the same as the Takana language] and Pakawaras who have composed or formed the population of said mission... (Armentia 2006[1887]:574).8
Moving westward along the Panoan-Takanan contact area, I point out that the most notable difference between Yamiaka and its co-dialect Atsawaka is that Yamiaka has, of Nordenskiöld’s (1905:275-6) 46-word list, at least five borrowings from Takanan languages (more are likely to be found in Nordenskiöld’s list published by CréquiMontfort & Rivet 1913), while Atsawaka lacks these words. The closely related
8 My translation from the Spanish original: El idioma hablado por los indios de la misión de Cavinas es una mezcla de Pacaguara y Tacana, debido sin duda a la mezcla de Araonas y Pacaguaras que han compuesto o formado la población de dicha misión.
13

Arazaire language shares only two of these five Takanan loans, namely the numerals one and two (Llosa 1906b:306). This distribution of loanwords suggests, not only that these shared lexical items are not of genetic origin, but also that linguistic contact was post-colonial, possibly as late as the rubber boom era.9
Other proposed genetic ties beyond the family
Schuller (1933) placed Panoan and Takanan in a larger group he called “Carib-Aruác.” Since then many authors have put forward higher-order affiliations of the purported Pano-Takanan unit, which I list in Table 4. It is worth noting that most of the classifications include Moseten and Yuracare, both linguistic isolates in Bolivia, adjacent to and south of Takanan territory. These can be seen as serious possibilities worthy of further study, but the proposed connections with Patagonian languages, Yanomami, and especially Uto-Aztecan seem less plausible. More controversial has been Greenberg’s (1987) classification of Macro-Panoan into his Ge-Pano-Carib phylum; see Dixon and Aikhenvald (1999), Rodrigues (2000), and Gildea and Payne (2007) for objections. Swadesh’s proposed higher-order link between Pano-Takanan (“Tacapano” by his terminology) and Kechuan arouses skepticism, particularly in light of the obvious borrowing from Kechua into western lowland South American languages (next section), but it is of interest in that several early missionaries claimed a fundamental similarity or suggested possible affiliation between Panoan languages and Kechua (e.g., Navarro 1903:172, Alemany 1906:51). The association of Panoan with the Arawakan family (top of Table 4) is by way of observed similarities between Takanan and Arawakan languages (also noted by
9 The level of lexical similarity between Arazaire and Atsawaka/Yamikaka (70-75%) and the larger gap between these and the rest of the Nawa subgroups (<57%) suggests that speakers of languages in the Madre de Dios subgroup broke away from the main body of Panoans well before the Spanish conquest of Peru, though we cannot date their evident southwest migration to the proximity of Takanan lands.
14

Loukotka 1968:174), which nevertheless likely originate from borrowing among neighbors, in Bolivia, where Takanan and Arawakan languages are in close contact.
PLACE TABLE 4 ABOUT HERE
Contact with other Amazonian groups and Kechua speakers Panoan languages possess areal features found in Amazonia in general or only
in western Amazonia, such as ergativity, evidentiality, and the high central vowel (i), suggesting that Panoan languages have been influenced by and/or have influenced neighboring languages. These Amazonian areal features are listed in Derbyshire (1987), David Payne (1990), Doris Payne (1990), Dixon and Aikhenvald (1999:8-9), and Aikhenvald (2007:193). Below, in the typological overview, I consider some of these areal characteristics found in the Panoan family. Taking of captives and coresidence at mission villages are two situations that entailed contact between Panoans and non-Panoans, but I have not yet been able to pin down any specific linguistic repercussions of this.
Borrowing from, and into, Arawakan languages has been noted, particularly Ashaninka (e.g., Valenzuela 2003:63). For example, the Ashaninka word for ‘dog,’ uchiti is found in Shipibo-Konibo, Kapanawa of the Tapiche River, Pano (but not Shetebo) and Poyanawa; the Ashaninka word shima ‘fish’ is found in some Yaminawa dialects; and Créqui-Montfort and Rivet (1913:56) noted that Arazaire, Atsawaka and Yamiaka rather than use the Panoan words for woman and wife used the Kampa word for woman, činani (tsinane in Ashaninka and Nomatsiguenga; Kinberg 1980, Shaver 1996). Arawakan influence is also evident in Brazil; specifically, Kanamari appears to have borrowed the word for tapir from Manetenery (Chandless 1866:118). Linguistic influence has not been one-way: Campbell (1997:12) and Wise (1976:356) report Panoan (and Kechuan) borrowings in Amuesha
15

(Arawakan). Dienst (2005, 2006:349-51) noted minor linguistic influence on Arawan Kulina and Deni from neighboring Panoan languages, and Amarante Ribeiro and Cândido (2005a) noted at least one Arawan Kulina loan in the Shanenawa and Yawanawa dialects of Yaminawa, namely yuma(i) ‘jaguar.’
The Peruvian Amazonian Spanish words conta ‘Attalea tessmannii palm,’ shebón ‘Attalea cf. septuagenata palm’ and paca ‘bamboo’ appear to be borrowings from Chama languages, and the Panoan word for (large) river, paru/paro appears in the historical literature as an alternate name for the Ucayali River (e.g., Marqués 1931 [1800]:117). Additionally many tributaries of the Ucayali have official names of Chama origin, such as the Tamaya (tama ‘peanut’ + -ya ‘having’ = ‘river of [bountiful] peanuts’) and Pacaya Rivers (for more see DeBoer’s appendix in this volume); likewise several towns along the Ucayali and its tributaries. I know of no traces of Panoan linguistic influence on western Amazonian Portuguese, and this may be due to the lesser prominence of Brazilian Panoans as compared with the larger societies of speakers of the Chama languages in Peru. Borrowings from Spanish or Portuguese are now abundant in all the Panoan languages; see Fleck (2003:200-201, 332), Valenzuela (2006), and Zariquiey (2012, chapter 2) for examples of Spanish borrowings into Matses, Shipibo-Konibo, and Kashibo.
Various authors have noted that Shipibo has many words of Kechua origin (e.g., Steinen 1904, Lathrap et al. 1985, Valenzuela 2003). García (1990) identified 49 words and three suffixes of probable Kechua origin in Shipibo. Although in my opinion some of these are doubtful (especially the three suffixes), it is clear that most are indeed of Kechua origin. Amarante Ribeiro and Cândido (2005c) point out the numerals kimisha ‘three’ in Shipibo-Konibo, Kapanawa of the Tapiche River, Pano, Amawaka, and Kashibo (I add Karipuna and Pakawara; see Martius 1967:241 and
16

Créqui-Montfort and Rivet 1913:78) and chosko ‘four’ and picha ‘five’ in ShipiboKonibo, Kapanawa of the Tapiche River, and Pano, all three words of obvious Kechua origin. The most widespread Kechua loan in Panoan languages may be tashi ‘salt,’ found in Shipibo-Konibo, Kapanawa of the Tapiche River, Pano, Amawaka, Kashibo, Yaminawa, Mastanawa, Nukini and Iskonawa. The controversy surrounding Kechua loans in Panoan languages is the question of whether these words were borrowed directly from Inkas in pre-colonial times, or whether they were borrowed after Spanish contact, when Kechua was used as a lingua franca in the Peruvian Amazon. This question cannot be readily resolved with linguistics because there is no reason why all the loans would have to have been borrowed at once: some could have been borrowed from Inkas (directly or through pre-Andean neighbors) and others later from priests and other speakers of the lingua franca. Therefore, although it is possible to show that some Kechua loans were not borrowed directly from Inkas, for many other words there is no way to determine when they were borrowed. We can be fairly sure that Inkas had contact with more westerly groups (e.g., Arawakans like the Amueshas and Kampas), but no linguistic evidence that Kechua speakers ever had direct contact with Panoans has been uncovered.
History of Panoan Linguistics
The Jesuits (1640s-1768) As will be related in detail below, the first Panoan linguistic data became
available outside Amazonia only in the 1800s. However, the earliest data recorded for Panoan languages were vocabularies, grammars, and catechisms prepared by Jesuit missionaries as early as the second half of the 1600s. As related by Father Francisco de Figueroa (1904[1661]), the first Panoan society to be reduced in a
17

mission was that of the Barbudos of the Huallaga River in 1653, but before that the
Jesuits were already at least vaguely familiar with the languages of other Panoans
captured by the Kokamas (contacted in 1644; Figueroa 1904:100) on the Ucayali
River, namely the Shipibos, Shetebos and Kapanawas, the first two of whom were
later reduced at the Jesuit mission of Santiago de la Laguna in 1670 (Maroni
1988[1889-92]:222, Luzero 1904[1681]:415). The Jesuits also reduced Panos,
Konibos, Mayorunas, Manamanbobos, and Manannawas (Zárate et al. 1904[1735];
Zárate 1904[1739], Maroni 1988[1889-92]). We assume that the Jesuits prepared
materials for most of these, but none survived the exodus of the Jesuits form the
Spanish and Portuguese colonies in the late 1760s (Veigl, cited by Pallarés and Calvo,
cited by Bayle in the introduction to Uriarte 1952 [1771]:II:xiv-xv; Hervás 1800:271;
Chantre 1901:91-3).10 Thus, from the Jesuit era we have only early notes on linguistic
affiliation, like the following:
1654 The language [of the Barbudos] is the same as Chipeo [Shipibo], Cheteo [Shetebo] and Capanagua [Kapanawa], which are [spoken] on the Ucayali River (Figueroa 1904:115; original manuscript 1661, citing a letter by Father Raymundo de Santa Cruz written in 1654).11
1730-50s The Pano [language], related to others, and matrix of Chepea [Shipibo] and Mayoruna. (Chantre 1901:93, original manuscript written around 17701801).12
10 Hervás (1800:271) cites a letter by Mr. Abate Velasco of Quito who mentions vocabularies and catequisms of Piro, Kampa, Konibo, and Komabo (we don’t know if the latter was Panoan or Arawakan) prepared by Father Henrich Richter, who began work in the upper Ucayali missions in 1685. But there is no indication in this citation or elsewhere that the manuscript still existed at the time or that it was ever in Quito. Tessmann (1929, 1930), in reference to Hervas’ citatation, which he evidently misread, listed this document in his bibliographies as located in Quito and dated 1685. 11 My translation from the Spanish original: La lengua es la mesma que la del Chipeo, Cheteo y Capanagua, que están en el rio de Ucayali. 12 My translation from the Spanish original: La Pana, común á otras y matriz de la Chepea y Mayoruna.
18

1768 At the Mission they generically call Panos the descendents of different branches of the Chepæos (Tschepäos) [Shipibos], or, as others call them, Chipæos, Zipivos, Xitipos, including the Mananaguas [Manannawas], which means people of the hills. All of them speak the same language with somewhat different dialectal variation. (Veigl 1785:63).13
The source of the second of the above three citations is from Father Martin
Iriarte, who worked in the Maynas missions from the 1730s to the 1750s and was
renowned for his ability to learn the local languages (Chantre 1901:367). These early
notes of the Jesuits can be considered the first steps toward recognition and
circumscription of the Panoan family, although most of this type of information was
not published until the beginning of the 20th century. Veigl’s 1785 publication could
be seen as the first fairly accurate, if brief, information on the Panoan family to be
made available to the outside world.14 By contrast, one of the few other
documentations of Jesuit knowledge of the western Amazon to be made widely
available at an early date can be seen as a step backwards for Panoan linguistics.
Based on second-hand accounts from Jesuits expelled from the Spanish colonies, Juan
Velasco wrote a three-volume work on all aspects of the Jesuit missions in Peru and
Ecuador, which he finished in 1789, and although some copies and translations of the
manuscript were circulated, it was not published until 1837 (and French and Italian
translations in the 1840s). Along with much other implausible information, Velasco
came up with some ludicrous classifications of Panoan languages; for example
13 My translation from the German original: Panos nennt man in der Mission überhaupt die Nachkömmlinge verschiedener Sprossen der Chepæos, (Tschepäos) oder wie andere sagen, Chipæos, Zipivos, Xitipos, ja wohl auch Mananaguas, welches letztere bey [bei] ihnen so viel heisset, als Gebürgleute. Alle diese haben die nämliche Sprache, mit etwas verschiedener Mundart. 14 Veigl’s suggestion that the Chamikuros were related to the Shipibos is the only major error in his treatment of Panoan languages. Consequently, Chamikuro (a nearly exitinct Arawakan language of the Huallaga River valley) was considered Panoan (e.g., Brinton 1891, Steinen 1904), and even afterwards (e.g., Steward and Métraux 1948:555) until Tessmann (1930) published a Chamikuro list.
19

Amawaka and Remo as Kampa (Arawakan) dialects (1981:546) and Mayoruna as an Urarina (isolate) dialect (1981:548). Unfortunately, Velasco’s misinformation was copied by Hervás into his opus on the world’s languages (1800:262-3), which in turn was copied by Adelung (1817:580-1), and has been repeated up until fairly recent times (e.g., Steward and Métraux 1948:557).
Most of the work done by the Jesuits was in the Maynas missions in Peru. Due to conflicts between Portuguese slave raiders and Maynas Jesuits in the first half of the 18th century, it was not until 1756, shortly before their expulsion, that Portuguese Jesuits were sent to missionize Indians in the upper Amazon, where they established a mission at Tabatinga (at the present Peru-Brazil border on the Amazon River) with Tikunas; before that, Carmelite priests worked the Brazilian strech of the Amazon River (Werlich 1968; Uriarte 1952:II:208). It is possible that the Portuguese Jesuits and Carmelites had contact with Panoans in the vicinity of Tabatinga, but there is no record of them having reduced Mayorunas, and Sampaio (1825:64) explicitly stated that it had been impossible to reduce the Kulinas of São Paulo de Olivença. d’Orbigny (1838) claims that Pakawaras were taken to Jesuit missions in Bolivia several times, though I have found no other information corroborating this or any linguistic comments or documentation on Panoan languages by Jesuits in Bolivia. No missionaries visited the remote headwaters of the Juruá and Purus Rivers, where most of the Brazilian Panoan ethnic groups are found, until the early 20th century. In the end, the Jesuits considered their work in the Maynas missions a failure, and the diversity and difficulty of the local languages was identified as one of the principal contributing factors (e.g., Maroni 1988[1889-92]:167-8).
20

The Franciscans (1657-1930s)
When the Jesuits were expelled from the South American colonies in 1767-8,
secular priests took over the Maynas missions for a few years, but they did not leave
any information on Panoan languages. In 1790 the Maynas missions were eventually
handed over to the Franciscans of the missionary missionary college of Santa Rosa de
Ocopa, but it should be noted that almost as early as the Jesuits began working with
Panoans the Franciscans had began working with Panoan groups on the upper Ucayali River15; and they did leave much valuable linguistic information.
As early as 1800, Father Buenaventura Marqués had prepared an extensive
Konibo vocabulary with accompanying grammatical notes, and also a Pano
vocabulary, but these were not published until a century later (Marqués 1903, 1931).
Around 1810-2 and 1877, two unknown Franciscan monks prepared Shipibo
vocabularies accompanied by grammatical notes, but these were also not published
until much later (Steinen 1904). A mission for the Pakawaras was first established in
1771 (Santiago de Pacaguaras on the Madidi River; Armentia 2006[1887:480]), and
by the late 1800s Franciscans were publishing linguistic data on Bolivian Panoan
languages. Meanwhile linguistic contributions by Franciscans working in Peru became available only at the beginning of the 20th century (Table 5). (From Brazil we
have nothing from Franciscans.) It is worth noting that the Franciscans’ substantive productions were all on Chama languages.16
15 The first Panoans to be contacted (in 1657) and reduced by the Franciscans were the Shetebos and Callisecas (the latter probably Shipibos, in this context) along the lower couse of the Pachitea River (Amich 1988:102). 16 According to C.A.R., in the introduction to Marqués (1931:113), the Franciscan missionaries Frezneda and Francisco de San José in 1861 produced a Shetebo grammar and vocabulary that was not published. Hestermann (1913) also draws attention to a supposed Shetebo vocabulary cited in Ludewig (1858:162) “Vocabulario de la Lengua Passa ó Setaba. MS. On paper, 1795, 8vo. Oblong (Catal. P. 51, No. 582)”; though Ludwid’s index (p. 254) says “Setaba, or Passa (Quichua),”
21

PLACE TABLE 5 ABOUT HERE
Like the Jesuits, Franciscans also made early observations about similarities
among Panoan languages, as in the following passages:
1800 This language [Konibo] is very different from the rest on the Ucayali River, and even among the Konibos themselves there are different manners of speaking, with different terms and words, as is the case with the Inga [Kechua] language, and it should be considered the general language among the Shetebo, Shipibo, Amawaka, Sensi, and Kapanawa nations, and others, because they have many terms and words in common, and with ease these nations understand each other. (Marqués 1931:197).17
1883-84 The Pano language is the one that the Pano Indians speak, which extends along the Ucayali, in Peru. Although this language is not spoken in Bolivia, I include a sample of it because it is like the mother of the dialects that are spoken by the Chakobos, Sinabos, Karipunas, Pakawaras and others. (Cardús 1886:308).18
1887 Pakawara [is spoken by] the tribes of the Chakobos, Pakawaras, Karipunas, and even by the tribes of the Ucayali, where it is known as the Pano language, which is divided into several dialects. (Armentia 2006 [1887]:574).19
1906 By means of this [Shipibo] language, it is possible to communicate, not only with the Shipibos, but also the Konibos, Shetebos, Amawakas, Remos, and
suggesting this was may not have been a Panoan language after all. Erikson et al. (1994) cite this as having been published by Sampaio and in the Revista do Instituto Brazileiro Historico y Geografico, but I have not found the word list in these publications), any help with this would be appreciated. See Appendix B for Shetebo sources. 17 My translation from the Spanish original: Esta lengua es muy distinta de las demás del Ucayali, y aun entre los mismos cunibos hay su distinto modo de hablar, con distintos términos y vocablos, como sucede en la lengua Inga, y se debe considerar como lengua general entre las naciones Séteba, Xípiba, Hámue-huáca, Sénsi, y Cápanáua, y otras, pues tienen muchos términos y vocablos comunes, y con facilidad dichas naciones se entienden unas con otras. 18 My translation from the Spanish original: La lengua pana es la que hablan los indios panos, que se extienden por el río Ucayali, en el Perú. Aunque en Bolivia no se habla dicha lengua, pongo la muestra de ella por ser como la madre de los dialectos que hablan los chacobos, sinabos, caripunas, pacaguaras y otros. 19 My translation from the Spanish original: El Pacaguara, [es hablado] por las tribus de Chacobos, Pacaguaras, Caripunas, y aun por las tribus del Ucayali, donde es conocido con el nombre de lengua Pana, que se subdivide en varios dialectos.
22

Panos [...] The languages that they speak are all related: all are agglutinating, have identical structure, have the same sounds, are based on a lexicon of common origin with variations in letters and syllables, their suffixes are similar... (Alemany 1906:III).20
To summarize all such observations made by Franciscans, we can say that by
the early 1800s Franciscans had noticed that the Panaon languages/dialects of the
Ucayali basin with which they were familiar (Konibo, Shipibo, Pano, Shetebo,
Amawaka, Remo, Kashibo, Sensi, and often Mayoruna21) were related, and by the late
1800s Bolivian languages/dialects (Pakawara, Chakobo, Karipuna and Sinabo of the
Mamoré River) were recognized as also being close to these. In the Jesuits’ and
Franciscans’ understanding of linguistics, some “dialects” were derived from, or
corruptions of, more pure “languages” (perhaps in analogy to how Latin and the
modern Romance languages were at the time thought to be related). As can be seen in
the various citations above, the principal such “pure” or “mother” varieties were
sometimes called “matrix languages,” “general languages,” or simply “languages”
with related varieties being but dialects of these. “Pano” was most frequently
considered to be the principal/matrix Panoan language of the Ucayali, and was used as
a lingua franca in missions such as Sarayacu. “Pano” has been used at several levels
of inclusiveness: 1) as a co-dialect of Shetebo; 2) as a language that includes Shetebo
as a dialect or a synonym; and 3) as a superordinate category that includes Shipibo,
20 My translation from the Spanish original: Por medio de este idioma, se puede entenderse, no solo con los Shipibos, si no también con los Cunibos, Setebos, Amahuacas, Remos y Panos [...] Las lenguas que hablan todas estas tribus son congéneres, todas de aglutinamiento, tienen idéntica estructura, igual fonismo, se fundan en un léxicon que presenta un origen común con variantes de letras y sílabas, sus sufijos son similares... 21 Some references suggest that Mayoruna was related to the other Panoan languages (e.g., Pallarés in Izaguirre 1922-29:IX:202), whereas other references (e.g., Leceta in Izaguirre 1922-9:II:40) describe it as completely different. I suspect some references to Mayoruna were to the Arawakan-like Moríke or Mayú (see Fleck 2007d), or else, Franciscan were not familiar enough with Mayoruna languages to recognize shared features between the two (quite divergent) branches of the Panoan family.
23

Konibo and Shetebo, and even all the Panoan speech varieties of the Ucayali basin. As such, it is not surprising that Pano was chosen to name the family.
Foreign travelers of the 1800s The Franciscans were not able to work continuously with Panoan groups
primarily due to multiple Indian uprisings where priest were killed and/or forced to retreat to the highlands for many years. As damning as these insurrections was the independence of Peru in 1821, when all the Franciscans working in Panoan territories were force to leave the country, except for the Ecuadorian-born Father Manuel Plaza, who remained as the lone missionary in Panoan lands until the 1840s. Meanwhile, the Peruvian independence opened up the country to many foreign explorers and scientists. Father Plaza remained essentially the reservoir of Franciscan knowledge of Panoan tribes, and he related this knowledge to the many foreign travelers who passed by the Sarayacu mission as they travelled the Ucayali-Amazon route to the Atlantic. While the thitherto unpublished Panoan lexica were likely in circulation among the Franciscan priests, the earliest lists to actually become available to a wider audience were collected by foreign travelers, who often did not tarry in publishing their lists. Table 6 lists, in the chronological order in which they became known to the outside world, the Panoan languages or dialects for which published lexica became available in the 1800s.
PLACE TABLE 6 ABOUT HERE Of the authors listed in Table 1, only Armentia and Cardús were missionaries, and the rest were scientists and explorers from foreign countries;22 see Appendix B
22 Though not published until early in the next century, a Peruvian naval officer who accompanied Castelnau during part of his trip on the Urubamba and Ucayali Rivers in 1846 collected a 167-item comparative Anti-Piro-Shipibo-Konibo vocabulary (Carrasco 1901). See Raimondi (1880:154ff) for Carrasco’s report.
24

for details on these and other sources. In contrast to the Franciscans’ Chama lexica
(Table 5), these travelers’ published lists were relatively short, contain many
misunderstandings (due to the travelers’ lack of familiarity with these languages, and
their probable rudimentary skills in the contact languages), and were not accompanied
by grammatical notes, with only a very few minor exceptions. French naturalist
Francis de Castelnau published two pages of grammatical notes on Pano that he
copied from the work of Ucayali missionaries (1850-9:V:304-5). He also published
information on affiliation of Panoan languages that he learned from Father Plaza at
Sarayacu:
1846 According to the information that I was able to collect, all the following peoples speak a language derived from that of the Panos: Konibos, Kashibos, Shipibos, Amawakas, Sensis, Remos, Tapanaouas [Kapanawas?], Pitsobos and Yawabos. (Castelnau 1850-9:IV:387).23
Italian-born Peruvian scholar Antonio Raimondi likewise published information on
affiliation and a very brief phonological and grammatical characterization of the Pano
language:
1859 The Pano language, considered relative to the necessities of the Indians that speak it, has a very rich vocabulary, because it has many words that cannot be translated into another language, other than by a phrase. The pronunciation is somewhat difficult because there are many words that are very much aspirated, and others are guttural, and finally, some that are pronounced touching the tip of the tongue to base of the teeth. Also, its construction does not fall short in presenting some difficulties, with the existence of some particles [bound morphemes] that when interposed in words change entirely the sense of the sentence (Raimondy 1862:123).24
23 My translation from the French original: D’après les renseignements que je pus recueillir, tous les peuples suivants parlent une langue dérivée de celle des Panos: les Conibos, les Cachibos, les Sepibos, les Amouacas, les Sensis, les Remos, les Tapanaouas, les Pitsobus et les Jawabus. 24 My translation from the Spanish original: La lengua Pana considerada relativamente á las necesidades de los indios que la hablan, es bastante rica de voces,
25

Although not stated explicitly, Franciscan missionaries on the Ucayali are undoubtedly the source of at least some of Raimondi’s information.
Other travelers of the 1800s who mentioned Panoan affiliations are Paul Marcoy (1862-7:X:185) and F. L. Galt:
ca. 1871 The old “Pano” lives now only as a sort of basis for some of the dialects, especially Remo, Conibo [Konibo], Sipibo [Shipibo], and Setibo [Shetebo]. (Galt 1878:313).
Paul Marcoy (alias Laurent St-Cricq), in addition to the short Konibo list published in 1864 (see Table 6), claims to have produced, while in the Pampa de Sacramento, a ca. 3000-vocabulary and grammar of Konibo (St-Cricq 1853:286) and/or to have produced, with the help of missionaries and a Pano Indian, an extensive vocabulary and grammar of the Pano language (Marcoy 1869:I:675). Most likely both references are to the same manuscript, with “Pano language” in the second reference meant to be read generically as Panoan or Chama (i.e., for Marcoy to document Konibo would be to document a dialect of the “Pano language”). In any case, the manuscript(s) is/are apparently lost (Schuller 1911), and one can only wonder if Marcoy actually copied it/them from Marqués’ Konibo vocabulary (of ca. 3300 entries) and grammar (and Pano vocabulary), and later removed it when a copy Marqués’ manuscript found its way to England.
porque tiene muchas palabras que no se pueden traducir en otro idioma, sino por una frase. La pronunciacion es algo difícil porque hay muchas palabras muy aspiradas y otras guturales y, en fin, algunas que se pronuncian, aplicando la punta de la lengua á la raiz de los dientes. Tambien su construccion no deja de presentar algunas dificultades, existiendo algunos partículas que se interponen en las palabras que hacen cambiar enteramente el sentido de la oración.
26

In summary, we can make the general observation that until the beginning of the 20th century, missionaries had access to higher-quality materials and had a more precise understanding of Panoan languages and the relationships among them than did contemporary academics in Europe and North America. The travelers introduced in this section can be credited with making bits of Panoan linguistic information available to a wider audience, either through collection of short word lists, or by relaying fragments of missionaries’ knowledge about classification and grammar.
While Father Plaza and, later, other Franciscans provided foreign travelers with much information on local tribes and languages, comparable information was not thus obtained on Panoans in Brazil.
European philologists of the late 1800s Based on a comparison of word lists of seven of the languages listed in Table
6 (Mayoruna of the Amazon River [both dialects], Mayoruna of Tabatinga, Pakawara, Karipuna, Kulina of São Paulo de Olivença, Konibo and Pano), at the 1888 International Congress of Americanists held in Berlin, Raoul de la Grasserie presented the first formal demonstration that Panoan languages constitute a linguistic family (Grasserie 1890). Grasserie’s lecture (and its subsequent publication) was a landmark in Panoan linguistics in that, unlike the travelers’ reports, it provided data to substantiate his claim. Prior to Grasserie’s paper, there was much confusion (outside of Amazonia) about the affiliation of Panoan languages. For example, Martius, who published several of the lists upon which Grasserie based his work, wrote that Pano was closely related to Tupi and Movima (Martius 1867:I:298). There was also Hervás’ (1800) misguided classification mentioned above, which repeated Velasco’s errors. Nevertheless, Grasserie’s presentation can hardly be called a discovery, since the affinities among the seven Panoan languages were already well known among
27

missionaries in Peru, and information on Panoan affiliation like Castelnau’s, Ramondi’s, and others’ was already in the public domain. Grasserie’s classification, based entirely on phonetics (or, more accurately, on transcriptions by different nonlinguists), could not have been more wrong: he divided the two Mayoruna languages into different categories, divided Pano and Konibo, grouped together Mayoruna of the Amazon River and Konibo, and grouped together Kulina of São Paulo de Olivença, Pano, and Pakawara.
The most comprehensive 19th-century work on Amazonian languages was by Daniel Brinton (1891), who added Barbudo, Cochiquinas (as a Mayourna subtribe), Kashibo, Kanamari, Remo, Sensi, Shetebo, Shipibo, Calliseca (as a synonym for Shetebo), and, mistakenly (following Veigl 1785:56), Chamikuro. Brinton did not sub-classify the languages, and some of the languages he added did not yet have linguistic data available, so they must have been added based on historical comments on these languages’ affiliation. His work can be seen as representing what was known about Panoan linguistics by European and American linguists at the end of the century, which was essentially limited to the awareness of the existence of a handful of closely related languages in western Amazonia.
A new generation of list collectors and linguists (1900-1930s) In the first third of the 20th century many more languages and dialects became
known for the first time, thanks to a new generation of mostly foreign travelers and missionaries. These are listed in Table 7, in the order in which the language/dialect became known (see appendix B for more details on these and other sources).
PLACE TABLE 7 ABOUT HERE Most of the publications in Tables 6 and 7 contain relatively short word lists collected following different institutions’ standard lists (e.g., Heath used the
28

Smithsonian list), the collectors own standard lists (e.g., Tessmann), or simply randomly; and often the same collector produced divergent lists for different languages. The consequence of this is that when a linguist wishes to compare a pair of lists of, say, 100-200 entries, often only a handful of lexical items are contained in both lists, making lexical comparisons imprecise and a systematic comparison of all the languages impossible. Similarly, the short list collectors were typically unfamiliar wtih the sounds of the languages they documented, and so their transcriptions are too imprecise to draw more than a few speculative observations on the phonology of the languages. This problem was partially solved when better and larger vocabularies of more than 1000 words began to be published at the turn of the century, all on languages for which brief lists had already been made available. These more substantial works include the Franciscans’ contributions on Chama languages mentioned above (Table 5), and, importantly, Abreu’s (1914/1941) monograph on Kashinawa of the Ibuaçu River containing a vocabulary (1779 entries), a phonology/grammar (22 pages) and the first Panoan text collection (488 pages with 5926 sentences). Koch-Grünberg (1941:623) called Abreu’s 1914 edition “the most substantial and best material that has ever been published on a South American Indian language.” Karl von den Steinen, in addition to publishing the two Franciscans’ Shipibo dictionaries in his 1904 book, also included a valuable ethnohistorical study of the family, some comparative grammatical material, and an inventory of all the Panoan languages known at the time.
Father Constant Tastevin collected word lists of many thitherto unknown or little-known Panoan languages/dialects in Brazil during the first third of the 20th century (Tastevin mss. a-f). Four of these (Nawa, Kapanawa of the Juruá River, Katukina, and Kashinawa of the Tarauacá River) were published as part of an
29

analytical publication (Rivet and Tastevin 1927-9/1932), but the others were either published much later and only partially (Paranawa, Yumanawa, Nehanawa, Nishinawa, Mastanawa and Yawanawa; Loukotka 1963), or have never been published (Poyanawa, Kashinawa of the Tarauacá River, Yaminawa, and Nukini lists exist in Paul Rivet’s archive in Paris).
Paul Rivet can be considered the foremost Panoan linguist of the first third of the 20th century, when the first Panoan comparative works were produced (e.g., Rivet 1910; Créqui-Monfort and Rivet 1913; Rivet and Tastevin 1927-9/1932). Rivet’s first (1910) attempt was a failure due to confusion stemming from the homonymy between the Panoan and Takanan languages called Yamiaka and Arazaire/Arasa. Meanwhile, his 1913 paper with Créqui-Montfort and his paper presented with Tastevin at the 1922 International Congress of Americanists held in Rio de Janeiro (published in 1927-9 and in 1932) was a genuine contribution to Panoan linguistics. The first comparative description of Panoan grammar is found in Créqui-Montfort and Rivet (1913), and Rivet and Tastevin (1927-9/1932) contains a lexical comparison incorporating data from all of the Panoan languages for which word lists were available. Rivet and Tastevin (1921) contains about 50 Panoan ethnonyms with information on geography, synonymy, affiliation, and (speculative) etymology that was more useful than any other publication available at the time for sorting out the Panoan ethnic groups/languages.
Tessmann’s work (1928, 1929, 1930), despite his questionable methodology, is also noteworthy in that he made an important contribution with new data on several thitherto undocumented Panoan languages and a detailed grammar of ShipiboKonibo.
30

The newly collected Panoan material made available during this time also generated many new internal classifications of the Panoan family (e.g., Rivet 1924, Schmidt 1926, Rivet and Tastevin 1927-9/1932, Loukotka 1935, 1939), but these classification were all geographically based. Geographic classification made possible the classification of a large number of languages for which no data were available, but were linguistically unsound.
The Summer Institute of Linguistics (1940s-present) In 1945 Summer Institute of Linguistics (SIL) missionaries began work on
Panoan languages, mostly in Peru (Table 8). In addition to Matses (Peruvian dialect) and the Sharanawa dialect of Yaminawa, listed in Table 8 among Panoan languages and dialects studied in detail, several other Panoan languages and dialects were documented for the first time, by SIL personnel, during the 1960s (Iskonawa, Marinawa dialect of Yaminawa), 1970s (Paud Usunkid dialect of Matses, all three dialects of Kulina of the Curuçá River; Kasharari, Remo of the Môa River), 1980s (Parkenawa dialect of Yaminawa), and 1990s (Chitonawa dialect of Yaminawa). Except for a short article on Marinawa (Pike and Scott 1962), these were documented only with short lists that were not published (they exist as microfiche in the SIL archives in Dallas or as documents in the personal archives of Eugene Loos; see appendix B for references). Meanwhile, for the languages/dialects listed in Table 8, the SIL produced an unprecedented flood of academic articles and pedagogical materials, partly in compliance with a contract made with the Peruvian ministry of education to produce such materials and run bilingual schools. A few linguistic articles were published in international journals (next section), but most of this work was printed as in-house publications or archived as microfiche.
PLACE TABLE 8 ABOUT HERE 31

Franciscan missionaries and Abreu had written traditional Latin-style grammars (i.e., mostly conjugation and declension paradigms), and additionally made some observations about the Panoan languages with respect to the qualities in which they differed from well-known European languages (of the type in the citation by Raimondi above). By the beginning of the 1900s, many academic linguists (e.g., Ferdinand de Saussure, Franz Boas, and Edward Sapir) preferred descriptions that were guided by the language’s unique structure, rather than pressed to fit into IndoEuropean-style grammars. Unfortunately, during this period no such descriptions were produced for Panoan languages. By the 1950s, academic linguists were interested in describing languages using complex abstract models often embedded in very intricate notation and which are considered of little use today. During the 1960s, some of the SIL missionaries working in Peru obtained M.A. and Ph.D. linguistics degrees in American universities and wrote theses on Panoan languages (Table 8). Most of these theses and many publications by SIL missionaries of this period followed the then in-vogue abstract models, producing generative phonologies (e.g., Loos 1967/1969) and tagmemic (e.g., Prost 1965/1967a), grammemic (e.g., Shell 1957), and transformational (e.g., Russell 1965/1975) grammars. Exceptionally, Shell (1965/1975b) produced her reconstruction of seven Panoan languages, which remains the only Panoan lexical reconstruction study and is the hitherto most sound contribution to the genetic classification of the Panoan languages.
In the 1970s, more valuable descriptions of Panoan languages began to be produced by the SIL (e.g., Loos 1978a[1973] inter alia, Loos 1978b[1973] inter alia). Starting in the 1980s, lengthy (lexicographically naive, but useful) dictionaries of Kashinawa of the Ibuaçu River (Montag 1981), Shipibo-Konibo (Loriot et al. 1993), and Kapanawa of the Tapiche River (Loos and Loos 1998/2003) became available,
32

along with some shorter vocabularies (Amawaka: Hyde 1980; Kashibo: Shell 1987; Pano: Parker 1992; Sharanawa: Scott 2004).25 Pedagogical grammars (which include short vocabularies) were written for Shipibo-Konibo (Faust 1973), Matses (Kneeland 1979), Kashinawa of the Ibuaçu River (Montag 1979/2004), and Yaminawa (Eakin 1991), though it should be kept in mind that in these the language’s grammar is simplified and that these were not written for use by linguists; the only SIL descriptive grammars are for Yaminawa (Faust and Loos 2002) and Amawaka (Sparing 2007). Olive Shell did not continue her excellent reconstructive Panoan work, and Eugene Loos became the foremost expert on the Panoan family, becoming consultant for the SIL personnel working on Panoan languages and writing several comparative works and edited volumes on Panoan linguistics (Loos 1970, 1975b, 1976a, 1978a, b, c, d, e; 1999b; 2005).
All the Panoan languages (and many dialects) in Peru and Bolivia were studied by the SIL at some level. Meanwhile, in Brazil we have from the SIL only a Portuguese translation of Montag’s (1979) Kashinawa of the Ibuaçu River pedagogical grammar (Montag 2004), an unpublished Kasharari word list (Pickering 1973) and an unpublished Kasharari phonology (Couto 2005). Generally speaking, the real value of the SIL’s Panoan linguistic descriptions, particularly the later ones, is that the missionaries spent enough time in the field to become intimately familiar with the languages. Thus, even if some of their analyses are fallacious, one can feel fairly confident that the data and the generalizations are valid (often imprecise, but unlikely to be completely wrong).
25 Preliminary versions of some of these dictionaries were archived as microfische; Shell’s 1959 (prelimnary) Kashibo vocabulary was the only one published before the 1980s.
33

While the SIL were the only missionaries conducting linguistic work on Panoan languages in Peru, non-SIL missionaries working in Bolivia and Brazil produced a few linguistic descriptions. A lengthy Chakobo dictionary was compiled by Zingg (1998) of the Swiss Mission. New Tribes Mission personnel worked with the Marubos and Katukinas (in Brazil), but they produced mostly readers, and the only linguistic descriptions available, for Marubo, were never published (Kennell 1976, 1978).
University academics (1970s-present)
During the 1970s, the only academic (i.e., without a missionary agenda) institution to take interest in Panoan linguistics was the San Marcos national university in Lima (UNMSM). The academics working on Panoan languages at the UNMSM were André-Marcel d’Ans and his students. d’Ans produced several publications, including an analytical study of Navarro’s Pano vocabulary (d’Ans 1970), a new classification based on lexico-statistics (d’Ans 1973, 1975) and some vocabularies (Yaminawa: d’Ans 1972a; Amawaka: d’Ans and Van den Eynde 1972).26 However, none of these were based on extensive fieldwork and contain many inaccuracies and unfortunate errors.
In the 1980s many other university academics began to take interest in the description of Panoan languages. Table 9 lists the Bachelor, Master’s, and Ph.D. theses that have been completed on Panoan linguistics by non-missionaries. As can be seen in Table 9, most of these are on Brazilian languages by students enrolled in
26 From the 1950s until the 1980s, many highly inaccurate classifications have been produced mostly by academics who did not specialize in the Panoan family; these include Mason (1950), Rivet and Loukotka (1952), McQuown (1955), Tovar (1961), Loukotka (1968); Voegelin and Voegelin (1977), Tovar and Tovar (1984), and Ruhlen (1987). The accuracy of classifications improved somewhat in the 1990s: Erikson et al. (1994), Kaufmann (1994)/Campbell (1997), Loos (1999), and Valenzuela (2003b).
34

Brazilian universities, and these complemented the SIL’s contributions on Peruvian languages. Prior to the descriptive linguistic work in Brazil, personnel from the FUNAI (the Brazilian bureau of Indian affairs) and the national museum at Rio de Janeiro collected short word lists of Brazilian languages, documenting some Panoan languages and dialects for the first time, including Marubo (Boutle 1964, Souza 1979), Matis (Souza 1979), the Brazilian dialect of Matses (Souza 1979), and Nukini (FUNAI 1981). Later, the work of Brazilian linguistics students added the Shanenawa, Shawannawa/Arara and Yaminawa dialects to the list of newly described Panoan speech varieties. Demushbo and Korubo (Korubo and Chankueshbo dialects) are the most recent languages to be documented for the first time (Fleck and Voss 2006, Oliveira 2009, Fleck in progress). Archiving: get information from Eliane and Javier.
PLACE TABLE 9 ABOUT HERE Since the publication of its first issue in 1917, the International Journal of American Linguistics has been the most prestigious academic journal for the field. As can be seen in Table 10, the first Panoan works to appear in this journal were by SIL missionaries, initially on phonological topics and then on transitivity. The next topic of interest was Panoan classification, and the latest contributions are descriptive works produced by university academics.
PLACE TABLE 10 ABOUT HERE
Priorities for Future Research A reconstruction or comparative work should be based on high quality
dictionaries and grammatical descriptions that follow modern academic standards, of
35

as many languages as possible.27 It is also important that all the major categories
(branches, groups, etc.) in the family be represented. A proto-Panoan reconstruction
should first include low-level reconstructions of the main Panoan groups, and then
mid-level reconstructions of the two branches. In a comparative study the first
priority is to include languages from the Mayoruna branch and the Nawa group, and
also Kashibo and Kasharari, and as more Nawa languages are added,
Chakobo/Pakawara, being the most divergent Nawa language, should not be left out.
Unfortunately, it is not yet possible to conduct such ideal Panoan reconstructions and
comparative studies, but the situation is rapidly improving. Full length, high quality
grammatical descriptions of Shipibo (Valenzuela 2003), Matses (Fleck 2003), and
Kashibo (Zariquiey 2012, but the rest of the Panoan languages are in need of further
description. The crucial missing piece of the puzzle is Kasharari, for which only short
word lists and phonological studies are available (Pickering 1973, Cabral and
Monserrat 1987, Lanes 2000, G. Sousa 2004, Couto 2005). Considering that this
language is in danger of extinction, by far the highest priority for Panoan linguistics is
the publication of a thorough grammatical description of this language, accompanied
by a dictionary or lengthy vocabulary.
27 A comprehensive grammar should be based on at least 9 months of field research, and a complete phonology on at least 3 months (and a combined phonology plus grammar on at least a year). There is a tendency for the first few months of field research on a previously undescribed language to include a very large number of errors, which are discovered and corrected during the later part of the field research with growing familiarity of the language. This is especially true for linguists taking on their first field study, and particularly so for certain linguistic topics (e.g., word order, distinguishing [] from [], etc.). Thus, for the most part, information from studies based on minimal time in the field cannot be used confidently. In addition to time in the field, data collection methodology and analysis are essential. Descriptions of sound field linguistic methodology include Payne (1997), Dixon (2007), and Fleck (2008b). Dictionary definitions should circumscribe the precise semantic range of words, rather than simply providing a close match in English, Spanish or Portuguese; sample sentences are helpful, but they cannot substitute semantic circumscription (Corréard 2006; Fleck 2007c).
36

It has become evident that we cannot assume that languages described under the same denomination always refer to the same language; for example, see Rivet (1920) and Aguiar (1993) for Katukina, Rivet and Tastevin (1927-9/1932) and Fleck and Krokoszyński (in progress) for Kashinawa, Fleck (2007d, in progress) for Mayoruna, Fleck (2007a) for Kulina and Marubo, Fleck and Krokoszyński (in progress) for Kapanawa, and Krokoszyński and Fleck (this volume) for Remo. Other such cases remain to be explored: for example, Ibarra (1982:120-22) noted that numerals in historical Chakobo word lists do not match each other; I add that the historical Karipuna lists differ oveall quite a lot from each other. This obviously has significant implications not only for the linguistic study of the Panoan family, but also for tracing the ethnohistory of Panoan groups. My classification of the Mainline branch as presented in this chapter is thus necessarily tentative; an absolute classification will require careful comparisons of all historical lists under the same name or similar names, and of these lists with modern languages with the same name, ideally by linguists working on these modern languages or on closely-related ones.
Another topic of interest is the teasing apart of areal vs. genetic factors contributing to similarities among Panoan languages, and between the Panoan and Takanan families (and other South American families). Kashibo is an interesting language to study in this respect: we can be sure there has been significant areal influence from Shipibo, but how old is it? Also, why does Amawaka in some ways seem to fit into the Headwaters subroup and in other ways into the Chama subgroup, while having other quite unique features?
Typological Overview As mentioned in the preceding section, I await more high-quality descriptions
of Panoan languages to attempt an extensive and thorough comparative study. It 37

would be irresponsible to present even a small-scale comparative study at this point without being explicit about its tentative status. Below I present a brief typological overview of the phonology, morphology, and syntax of the family, with careful qualification of all generalizations, as the next Panoan language to be carefully studied (especially Kasharari or Kashibo) may present counterexamples to any of these generalizations.
Phonology Loos (1999b:230) reconstructs the following phoneme inventory for proto-
Panoan: p, t, k,  ts, t, s, , , , r, m, n, w, j, h, a, i, and o. However, this inventory is probably valid only for proto-Nawa, considering all the Mayoruna languages and Kasharari have the phoneme /t/, and all the Mayoruna languages, Kasharari and Kashibo have six vowel phonemes (/a, i, , e, o and u/).
Many Panoan languages have minor instances of vowel harmony, perhaps remnants of historically more general vowel harmony. A few Panoan languages have been described as having contrastive high and low tones, specifically Chakobo (Prost 1960:8, 1962:111, 1967:64; Iggesen 2006), Kapanawa of the Tapiche River (Loos 1969:186ff), and Amawaka (Russell 1958, Russell and Russell 1959). Unlike tonal languages in the vicinity, like Tikuna, Bora, and Witoto, in all Panoan languages where they occur, these contrastive tones play only a minor role. Panoan tones appear to be recent innovations specific to these Nawa languages, rather than a proto-Panoan feature (see Loos 1999b:230), but more research into this topic is needed to make a definite statement.
Within the family, Kapanawa of the Tapiche River has attracted the most attention from phonologists (e.g., Loos 1967/1969); some of the topics of interest are syllable structure (Safir 1979, Loos 1986), nasal spreading (Safir 1982, Piggott 1992,
38

Walker and Pullum 1999), and glottal stop deletion (Elias 2004). The last of these topics, phonemic glottal stops, is one of the few phonological features in which Kapanawa of the Tapiche differs from Shipibo and Konibo (and the other Panoan languages). Nasal spreading is common to other Nawa languages (Loos 1975a, 1999b, 2006).
Morphology Panoan languages are primarily suffixing and could be called highly synthetic
due to the potentially very long words (up to about 10 morphemes), but the typical number of morphemes per word in natural speech is not large. It is the large number of morphological possibilities that is striking about Panoan languages, not the typical length of words. For example, up to about 130 different verbal suffixes express such diverse notions as causation, direction of movement, evidentiality, emphasis, uncertainty, aspect, tense, plurality, repetition, incompletion, etc., which in languages like English would be coded by syntax or adverb words.
Ergativity is unusually common in Amazonia (Gildea and Queixalós 2010), and all hitherto studied Panoan languages have been found to be morphologically ergative (Costa 1995, 1998, 2000b, 2002a; Ferreira 2000; Valenzuela 2000a, 2004, 2010b; Camargo 2002, 2005; Camargo et al. 2002; Dorigo 2002; Amarante Ribeiro and Cândido 2005b; Fleck 2005, 2006a, 2010; Zariquiey 2006), always with some alignment splits, most typically in the pronominal paradigms. Whether proto-Panoan pronouns followed an ergative, nominative, or a mixed alignment is a current hot topic in Panoan linguistics (Valenzuela 2004, Zariquiey 2006, Fleck 2010). Of additional synchronic and diachronic interest is that in all the Panoan languages the ergative case marker (-n) also marks instrumental and genitive cases, and in some languages also locative and/or vocative.
39

Matses has one of the most intricate systems in the world for coding evidentiality (Fleck 2007b). Valenzuela (2003a) found non-cognate evidential(-like) markers in several groups of the Panoan family, an interesting finding in light of evidentiality being an areal feature of Amazonia (Aikhenvald and Dixon 1998). Body-part prefixation was first recognized by Steinen (1904:37*) and has continued to be a topic of interest (e.g., Hall and Loos 1978[1973], Erikson 1989, Fleck 2006b, Amarante Ribeiro and Câdido 2008, Ferreira 2008, Zariquiey and Fleck in press). Mayoruna languages, like some North American languages, have fourth-person (i.e., third-person coreferential) pronouns (Fleck 2008a, Fleck in progress), a feature that has not been described for any Mainline language (but see Zariquiey in 2012).
Syntax Transitivity was one the first grammatical topics to attract attention in Panoan
linguistics, specifically the transitive/intransitive verb pairs that are found in Panoan languages (Shell 1957, Prost 1962, Loos 1978e). The topic of Panoan transitivity continues to attract attention in recent times (Valenzuela 1999, 2002a, 2003b). Related to transitivity, Panoan languages have the rare and interesting property of “transitivity agreement,” whereby various parts of the grammar (including adverbs, suffixes and enclitics) vary depending on whether the matrix verb is transitive or intransitive (Valenzuela 1999, 2005a, 2005b, 2009? Fleck 2010). Indeed, awareness of transitivity status of verbs is essential for the Panoan speaker, as it is almost impossible to utter a grammatically correct sentence without knowing it.
Panoan discourse is characterized by “clause chaining” (or “switchreference”): up to about 10 clauses can be linked together using suffixes that mark argument coreference (e.g., same subject, object = subject) and temporal/logical relations (e.g., ‘while,’ ‘after,’ ‘in order to’) between subordinate and matrix clauses.
40

This intricate type of clause reference is unique to Panoan languages. For detailed descriptions of clause chaining in Amawaka, Kapanawa of the Tapiche River, Shipibo, Matses, Matis and Kashinawa of the Ibuaçu River, see Sparing (1998, 2005), Loos (1999a), Valenzuela (2003:chapter 9), Fleck (2003:1132-59), Ferreira 2005:chapter 11), and Montag (2005), respectively.
Panoan languages are some of the few languages in the world where both nonsubject arguments of bitransitive verbs like give are grammatically identical (Valenzuela 1999, 2002a; Fleck 2002, 2003; Ferreira 2005). Interestingly, two of the few other languages described as having this feature are Panoan neighbors, namely Yagua (Peba-Yaguan family; Payne and Payne 1990) and Cavineña (Takanan family; Guillaume 2008), suggesting that this may be another areal feature of (western) Amazonia.
Ethnolinguistic features
Linguistic taboos The Shipibos (Morin 1998:363) and Marubos have a type of name taboo that
is common in Amazonia, where birth-given names are relatively secret and cannot be used to address people or uttered loudly when talking about a living or dead person, particularly adults; instead, relational kinship terms, teknonyms, and nicknames are commonly used. Although not adhered to so closely now, a more common phenomenon among Panoans, including the Mayorunas (sans the Matis, who have no onomastic taboos), Kashinawas of the Ibuaçu River (Kensinger 1995:236), Amawakas (Dole 1998:211-2), and Iskonawas (Whiton et al. 1964:100) is “postmortem name taboo,” whereby a person’s name or nicknames are avoided only after they die. Beyond the tactful notion that people not be reminded of recently deceased
41

relatives, some tribes (the Matses, Kulinas of the Curuçá River, and Demushbos) believe that uttering a dead person’s name might invoke their spirit which can cause harm to the speaker.
The linguistically interesting aspect of these post-mortem name taboos is their extension in some Panoan languages (such as Yaminawa: Eakin 1991:11, Townsley 1994:305-6) to word taboo; that is, where common words that are components of names or nicknames of the deceased are also prohibited. In Matses, Kulina, and Demushbo, the prohibition even extends to words that sound similar to post-mortemtabooed names or nicknames (as in some Polynesian languages; Simons 1982). “Word taboo by phonological analogy to post-mortem name taboo,” as I call it, was first reported for the Matses by Fields (1973), and has been described in detail for the Matses, Kulinas and Demushbos by Fleck and Voss (2006).
A linguistic taboo reported by the Matis is one where special substitute vocabulary is used instead of certain words that cannot be uttered while preparing curare, lest the poison result impotent (Erikson 1996:215).
In-law avoidance speech In-law avoidance speech in Shipibo-Konibo has been described by Girard
(1958:245), Morin (1998:354), Tournon (2002:201-202), and Valenzuela (2003b:1618). Parents-in-law and their sons-in-law cannot speak directly to each other, but communicate through their daughter or wife. “Even in a situation when a father-inlaw and his son-in-law travel far away and remain without contact with any other person for some time, they are not supposed to talk to each other directly and may behave as if the daughter or wife were present pretending they communicate through her” (Valenzuela 2003b:17). This avoidance speech also extends to a man’s wife’s grandfather and to his wife’s maternal aunt (Tournon 2002:201; Valenzuela
42

2003b:17-18). Older Kashibo speakers report that they once followed a similar practice (R. Zariquiey, personal communication).
Weeping lexicon When a relative dies, the Matses (and formerly the Kulinas of the Curuçá
River and the Demushbos) gather around the deceased in a house to mourn for one day and one night, by fasting, weeping and chanting. In the chants, rather than use every-day kinship terms, a separate set of kinship terms for referring to the deceased relative is used. The weeping terms in Matses, Kulina and Demushbo are very similar, and probably precede their historical separation. Older people know the full set of weeping chant terms, and when someone dies they inform others of the correct terminology to use when weeping (Fleck forthcoming a contains the complete inventory for Matses). The weeping lexicon ignores some distinctions in the everyday language, such as relative age, and incorporates other distinctions including paired ego-gender-specific terms for almost all relatives (not just for cross-relatives, as in the every-day terms), and distinctions depending on the moiety membership of the deceased person (this moiety distinction does not occur in the everyday kinship terminology28). Therefore, the weeping terms are not simply synonyms, but can be seen as composing a separate kinship classification system.
Lingua francas and pidgins Lingua francas (also known as trade languages) and pidgins (simplified lingua
francas) have been reported for Panoan speakers. As mentioned above, Pano was a lingua franca on the Ucayali River, especially at the Franciscan mission Sarayacu:
28 In the Kapishtana dialect of Kulina, each moiety has a different term for ‘father,’ but there are no other instances of moiety-specific everyday vocabulary.
43

The inhabitants of Sarayacu are divided into three distinct tribes, called Panos, Omaguas, and Yameos. They dwell in different parts of the town. Each tribe has its peculiar dialect; but they generally communicate in the Pano language. (Herndon 1954:204).
One would assume that Pano was simplified when used as a lingua franca, but this was never specified in the historical literature.
Pidgins have been reported in recent times for languages in the Headwaters subgroup. “When Cashinawas converse with Sharanawas [speakers of a dialect of Yaminawa] they are known to resort to a kind of pidgin-Pano by suppressing the use of most suffixes, especially those not shared between them” (Loos 1999b:228). Similarly, Kensinger reports that Marinawas (speakers of a dialect of Yaminawa), Kashinawas of the Ibuaçu River, and Amawakas have a type of pidgin with which they can communicate with each other (Shell 1975:25). d’Ans (1972a:1) mentions a Marinawa-based pidgin used by speakers of Yaminawa dialects. According to Déléage (personal communication), the Sharanawas and Amawakas of the Purus River area converse in a mix of the two languages.
Ceremonial languages
1850s In order to carry out their religious ceremonies, the infidels of the Ucayali River congregate occasionally in the shelter of one of their chiefs, whom the recent converts call sorcerer and the infidels Muruya. [...] and as they all sit in the most profound silence, the Muraya begins to speak in a language that none of the onlookers understand, and answering him in the same language, a second voice is heard... (Amich 1988[Pallarés and Calvo 1870]:306).29
29 My translation from the Spanish original: Para practicar sus ceremonias religiosas, los infieles del Ucayali se reunen de vez en cuando en la choza de uno de sus jefes, al que los neófitos llaman brujo y los infieles Muraya. [...] y sentados todos con el más profundo silencio, el Muraya empieza a hablar en una lengua que los circunstantes no entienden, contestándole en el mismo idioma otra voz distinta que se deja oir.
44

The above statement did not specify which Ucayali dwellers had this ceremonial language, but as mëraya is a Shipibo-Konibo and Pano word meaning ‘sorcerer/shaman’ (translated as “brujo” and “brujo-a” by Loriot et al. 1993:263 and Navarro 1903:14, respectively), we can assume the reference was to Panoans of the Chama subgroup. In any case, such ceremonial languages have been found in other Panoan cultures.
The Matses used to hold a traditional ceremony called komok (described in Romanoff et al. 2004), which involved adult men dressing as “singing spirits” in fullbody hoods made from the pounded bark of komok trees (Couratari sp., Family Lecythidaceae). These spirits chanted and talked in a special “language,” that is, the Matses consider it a distinct language, but in fact it is simply the Matses language with substituted ceremony-specific vocabulary (34 words/terms have been recovered so far and are listed in Fleck forthcoming a). Some, but not all the Mayoruna groups practiced this ceremony and had a comparable ceremonial “language.” The Sharanawas have a parallel speech variety, whereby special vocabulary, obscure to the uninitiated, is substituted for certain words in shamanic chants (Déléage 2005:361-6) and autobiographical songs (Déléage, this volume).
The Marubos also have a ceremonial speech variety that, following Marubo oral history, originated from a distinct language. According to the Marubos, the current-day Marubo ethnic group is composed of several tribes that spoke mutually intelligible Panoan languages (Melatti 1977:93, 106, 1986:30-37; Ruedas 2001:70941, 2003:37-9, 2004:30-4, this volume), and the language of one of these groups (the Shainawabo people) is what the Marubos speak now, and a second language was in part retained as a ceremonial/shamanic language called Asan ikiki by the Marubos (Cesarino 2008; Colpron and Cesarino, this volume). However, the oral history does
45

not match the linguistic facts, as Asan ikiki seems to actually be Marubo with substituted words, which may or may not originate from a sister language.
Gender-specific speech
Gender-specific language is not prominent in Panoan languages. It has only been found in interjections. Kashinawa of the Ibuaçu River and Shipibo-Konibo have two words for ‘yes’ one used by men and the other by women (Montag 1981:534, Valenzuela 2003:182). Abreu (1941[1914]:13) and Fleck (2003:743) documented, in Kashinawa of the Ibuaçu River and Matses, respectively, several exclamations (i.e., interjections of surprise, pain, astonishment, etc) used exclusively by men or by women. The most complex (and first to be recorded) case of gender-specific interjections in the family is in Pano:
My attention turned to the interjection yau that he uttered in the Pano language, and which manifested his certainty that the person in sight was a man and not a woman. Footnote to yau: Oh! Aah! Hey! Footnote to sentence: Such an interjection varies according to the gender of the individual who employs it and the gender of the individual being referred to. For example, man to man, yau! man to woman, papau! woman to man, tutuy! woman to woman, ñauñau! (Marcoy 1862-7:XII:206).30
Many Panoan kinship terms vary with respect to the gender of ego, but this does not restrict who can utter the kinship terms (other than in the vocative).
Game synonymy and pet vocative terms
Matses and Kulina of the Curuçá River (and perhaps other Panoan languages) have an unusually high level of synonymy distributed non-randomly in their lexicons.
30 My translation from the French original: J’accourus à l’interjection Yau qu’il proféra dan l’idiome Pano e qui manifestait sa certitude que l’individu en vue était un homme e non pas une femme. Footnote to Yau: Oh! ah! eh! Footnote to end of sentence: Cette interjection varie suivant le sexe de l’individu qui l’emploie et le sexe de l’individu à qui elle est adressée. Exemple : d’homme à homme yau! — d’homme à femme papau! — de femme à homme tutuy! — de femme à femme ñauñau!
46

Specifically, these languages have as many as five synonyms for most game animals. Fathers and grandfathers teach their sons and grandsons the synonym sets, and a good hunter is expected to know the full set of synonyms. While word taboos, mutual intelligibility, group identity, and incorporation of captives may have contributed to the genesis of these game synonyms, the elaboration of this phenomenon appears to be primarily the product of conscious manipulation of the lexicon to serve cultural purposes, primarily that of providing a means of publicly displaying hunting knowledge. See Fleck and Voss (2006) for a full discussion.
Several Panoan languages have paired terms for a subset of the local fauna: one term for typical reference to an animal species or genus, and a second (usually completely distinct) word for calling to the same species when tamed as a pet. These languages include Matis, Katukina, Marubo, Kashibo, and Shipibo (Erikson 1988, Lima 2002:439, Fleck and Voss 2006, Dienst and Fleck 2009). These vocative terms are typically duplicated in speech, as one calls a house cat in English (Here, kitty kitty!). As with game synonymy, it is mostly game species that have the extra terminology. Dienst (2006:341-2) describes a parallel pattern for the geographically proximate, but linguistically distant Kulinas of the Arawan family. More recently, other Arawan languages, namely Jamamadi, Paumari and Jarawara, and also Kanamari (Katukinan family), have been found to have sets of pet vocative terminology and a few pet terms have been found in dictionaries of other non-Panoan languages in this area that have not yet been researched on this topic; thus this appears to be an areal feature within south-western Amazonian Brazil (Dienst and Fleck 2009).
47

Table 1. Panoan classification by Fleck, in progress
Tally: about 18 extant languages, and about 14 documented extinct languages = 32. Languages in bold; dialects in italics; † = extinct; * = obsolescent (i.e., no longer spoken as an every-day language, but a few speakers remember it). Dialects with minor differences are listed on the same line.
I. Mayoruna branch (4 extant and 4 documented extinct languages) A. Mayo group i. Matses subgroup a. Matses (3 dialects): Peruvian Matses; Brazilian Matses †Paud Usunkid b. Korubo (2 dialects) Korubo *Chankueshbo (actually now look like separate language) c. *Kulina of the Curuçá River (3 dialects): *Kapishtana; *Mawi *Chema d. †Demushbo ii. Matis subgroup (most similar to Mainline branch) a. Matis (most divergent from other extant Mayoruna languages) b. †Mayoruna of the Jandiatuba River c. †Mayoruna of the Amazon River (2 dialects): †Settled Mayoruna of the Amazon River †Wild Mayoruna of the Amazon River B. †Mayoruna of Tabatinga (phonologically most divergent Mayoruna unit)
II. Mainline branch (about 14 extant and about 10 documented extinct languages) A. Kasharari (most divergent Mainline language) B. Kashibo (4 dialects; similar to Nawa group due to contact with Shipibo) Kashibo (Tessmann’s “Kaschinõ”); Rubo Kakataibo Nokaman (formerly thought to be extinct) C. Nawa group (subgroups ordered from most to least divergent) i. Bolivian subgroup a. Chakobo/Pakawara (2 dialects of 1 language) b. †Karipuna (may be a dialect of Chakobo/Pakawara) ii. Madre de Dios subgroup a. †Atsawaka/†Yamiaka (2 dialects of 1 language) b. †Arazaire iii. †Remo of the Blanco River iv. †Kashinawa of the Tarauacá River v. Marubo subgroup a. Marubo (of the Javari Basin) b. Katukina Katukina of Olinda; Katukina of Sete Estrelas †Kanamari c. †Kulina of São Paulo de Olivença “Central Panoan Assemblage” (subgroups vi-viii): evidently areal influence among neighbors has blurred genetic relations among these languages.
48

vi. Poyanawa subgroup a. *Poyanawa b. *Iskonawa (very close to Poyanawa, but also resembles Shipibo-Konibo-Kapanawa and Amawaka) c. *Nukini d. *Nawa (of the Môa River) e. †Remo of the Jaquirana River
vii. Chama subgroup a. Shipibo-Konibo (3 dialects of 1 language) Shipibo; Konibo (currently fused) *Kapanawa of the Tapiche River b. *Pano †Pano *Shetebo; *Piskino c. †Sensi - (see Fleck forthcoming b).
viii. Headwaters subgroup a. Kashinawa of the Ibuaçu River Brazilian Kashinawa Peruvain Kashinawa †Kapanawa of the Juruá River †Paranawa b. Yaminawa (large dialect complex) Brazilian Yaminawa Peruvian Yaminawa Chaninawa Chitonawa Mastanawa Parkenawa Shanenawa Sharanawa; *Marinawa Shawanawa (= Arara) Yawanawa *Yaminawa-arara (not same as Shawanawa/Arara) †Nehanawa c. Amawaka Peruvian Amawaka (intermediate between this subgroup and Chama subgroup, perhaps as a result of areal contact) †Nishinawa (= Brazilian Amawaka) †Yumanawa (also very similar to Kashinawa of the Ibuaçu R) d. †Remo of the Môa River (resembles Amawaka) e. †Tuchiunawa (resembles Yaminawa dialects)
49

Table 2. Tentative classification of possibly Panoan languages/dialect lacking linguistic data.
Ethnonyms that lack accompanying linguistic data are placed here into the categories proposed in the classification in Table 1, based on historical reports, of mutual intelligibility or presented as dialects, factions, or subtribes of another language/ethnic group. Ethnonyms are followed by published sources of information on affiliation or mutual intelligibility (not necessarily the first source that mentions the name). See Appendix C for locations.
I. Mayourna branch Chirabo - probably a Mayoruna faction (Rivet & Tastevin 1921:453). Korugo - “Maiorumas Corugos” (Zárate 1904 [1739]:393). Marubo of Maucallacta - Mayoruna subtribe (Castelnau 1850-9:V:40, Raimondi 1862:100, etc.; see Fleck 2007a for more sources and discussion). Maya (of the Quixito River) - partially mutually intelligible with Matses (Anonymous 1978, Erikson 1994:22). Mayo - Panoan, possibly Mayoruna (Tastevin 1924b:424). Possibly the same as the Maya of the Quixito R, but no way be sure. Pisabo - Mayoruna subtribe (Grubb 1927:83).
II. Mainline branch B. Aino - Kashibo subtribe (Tessmann 1930:128). Barinawa - Kashibo branch (Távara 1905[1868]:425, Tessmann 1930:128). Buninawa - Kashibo subtribe (Ordinaire 1887:302, Távara 1905[1868]:425, Tessmann 1930:128). Chashono - Kashibo subtribe (Tessmann 1930:128). Choromawa - Kashibo subtribe (Távara 1905[1868]:425). Hunino - Kashibo subtribe (Tessmann 1930:128). Inono - Kashibo subtribe (Tessmann 1930:128). Isunobo - Kashibo dialect (Wistrand 1969:18). Kamaigohuni - Kashibo subtribe (Tessmann 1930:128). Kanabae - Kashibo dialect (Wistrand 1969:18). Naibo - Kashibo subtribe (Tessmann 1930:128). Naitabohuni - Kashibo subtribe (Tessmann 1930:128). Puchanawa - Kashibo subtribe (Ordinaire 1887:302). Ruino - Kashibo subtribe (Tessmann 1930:128). Shirino - Kashibo subtribe (Tessmann 1930:128). Shokeno - Kashibo subtribe (Tessmann 1930:128). Shuchanawa - Kashibo subtribe (Távara 1905[1868]:425). Tonano - Kashibo subtribe (Tessmann 1930:128). Tsalguno - Kashibo subtribe (Tessmann 1930:128). Winano - Kashibo subtribe (Tessmann 1930:128). Komabo - same as Kashibo (Marqués 1931[1800]:119, Steinen 1904:22). Inuaka - Komabo dialect (Velasco 1988[1788-9]:546). Kuinua - Komabo dialect (Velasco 1988[1788-9]:546). Ruanawa - Komabo dialect (Velasco 1988[1788-9]:546). Zepa - Komabo dialect (Velasco 1988[1788-9]:546). C. Nawa group i. Bolivian subgroup a. Kapuibo - Pakawara division (Cardús 1886:291).
50

Sinabo of the Mamoré River - Pakawara division (Cardús 1886:291). ii. Madre de Dios subgroup
a. Tiatinawa - dialect similar to Yamika (Stiglich 1908:427). Yaguarmayo - Yamiakas of the Yaguarmayo River (Stiglich 1908:427).
v. Marubo subgroup c. Kiraba - descendants of Kulinas of São Paulo de Olivença (Coleti 1975 [1771]:II:321, Fleck 2007a).
vi. Poyanawa subgroup b. Awabakebo - part of Iskonawa confederation (Whiton et al. 1964:102). Hawanbakebo - part of Iskonawa confederation (Whiton et al. 1964:102). Inubakebo - part of Iskonawa confederation (Whiton et al. 1964:102). Isubenebakebo - part of Iskonawa confederation (Whiton et al. 1964:102). Naibakebo - part of Iskonawa confederation (Whiton et al. 1964:102). Runubakebo - part of Iskonawa confederation (Whiton et al. 1964:102). Tsinubakebo - part of Iskonawa confederation (Whiton et al. 1964:102). Waribakebo - same dialect as Iskonawa; Whiton et al. 1964:102)). Yawabakebo - part of Iskonawa confederation (Whiton et al. 1964:102). e. Yaya - Nawa subtribe (Hassel 1905:52, Stiglich 1908:428). Punhamunawa - could be understood with difficulty by Poyanawas (Oppenheim 1936:152-3).
vii. Chama subgroup a. Awanawa - Branch of Shipibos (Velasco 1981(1788-9):546, Markham 1910:81, Steward and Métraux 1948:567). Barbudo - Same as Shipibo, Shetebo and Kapanawa (Figueroa 1904:115). Chai - Shipibo dialect (Velasco 1988[1788-9]:546). Kusabatai - Manamabobo dialect (Velasco 1988[1788-9]:547). Makonawa - Barbudo faction (Figueroa 1904:122). Manamanbobo - Shipibo dialect (Richter in Maroni 1988:281, 291; Veigl 1785:63). Mawishi - Konibo horde (Bates 1863:379). Pachikta - Manamabobo dialect (Velasco 1988[1788-9]:547). Pahenbakebo - Clan of Kapanawa of the Tapiche River speaking a distinct dialect (Loos & Loos 1998:9). Sinabo of the Ucayali basin - Shipibo subtribe (Stiglich 1908:426, Rivet & Tastevin 1921:472, Grubb 1927:84; also given as a synonym of Shipibo). Shipinawa - Shipibo dialect (Velasco 1988[1788-9]:546). Turkaguane - Konibo faction (Maroni 1988[1889-92]:284). Tawakua - Manamabobo dialect (Velasco 1988[1788-9]:547). Uniwepa - Konibo faction (Magnin in Maroni 1988:474). Zaminawa - Konibo horde (Bates 1863:379).
51

b. Chakaya - Speak same language as Shipibos and Shetebos (Marcoy:1869:I:683), Shetebo faction (Marcoy 1869:?:??? [2001:II:463-4]).
Iltipo - Pano dialect (Hervás 1800:263). Manannawa - Pano faction (Richter in Maroni 1988:294). Yawabo - Shetebo faction (Rodríguez 2004-5[1870]:529), Panoan
(Magnin in Maroni 1988:474, Maroni 1988[1889-92]:111; Castlenau 1850-9:IV:387). c. Inubo - Sensi faction (Carvallo 1906[1818]:342). Runubo - Sensi faction (Carvallo 1906[1818]:342). Kasca - Sensi faction (Carvallo 1906[1818]:342). Puinawa - Same language as Panos, Shipibos, etc. (Stiglich 1908:421-2), same as Shetebo (Tessmann 1928:2, Steward and Métraux 1948:55960). But see Plaza’s 1813 classification where Puinawa is classified as non-Panoan (Lehnertz 1974:451), and Carvallo (1906[1918]:348) and Plaza and Cimini (1907[1841]:81) who explictly say it is distinct from the other known or Panoan languages. Ordinaire (1887:316) maintains that it is derived from Kokama. Southern Remo - Mutually undestandable with Chama languages (Krokoszyński and Fleck, this volume). Hisisbakebo - Southern Remo faction (Amich 1988[Pallarés & Calvo 1870]:418). Sakaya - Southern Remo subtribe (Grubb 1927:100, Mason 1948:267). viii. Headwaters subgroup a. Tushinawa - Belong to Kashinawa “clan” (Tastevin 1926:53, though not sure which Kashinawa). The large geographic separation (see Appendix C) suggests that these are probably two separate groups (with no indication whether the Jutaí group is Panoan). b. Aninawa - Possibly same as Yaminawa (Rivet and Tastevin 1921:451). . Deenawa - Former Yaminawa subgroup (Townsley 1994:249). Mashonawa - Yaminawa subgroup (Ribeiro & Wise 1978:194). Morunawa - Understood by Yaminawas (Ribeiro & Wise 1978:143). Shaninawa - Extinct Yaminawa subgroup of which some survivors live among the Sharanawas (Townsley 1994:250). Shishinawa - Extinct Yaminawa subgroup of which few survivors live among the Yaminawas of the Purus River and the Parkenawas (Townsley 1994:250). c. Arawa - Amawaka branch (Stiglich 1908:402). Biubakeu - Amawaka faction (Maroni 1988[1889-92]:296). Espino - probalby Amawaka branch (Stiglich 1908:416). Inubakeu - Amawaka faction (Maroni 1988[1889-92]:296). Yuminawa - Amawaka subtribe (Hassel 1905:52, Stiglich 1908:428). Yura - Amawaka subtribe (Hassel 1905:53, Stiglich 1908:426).
III. Other ethnonyms said to be of Panoan languages/dialects but with no further clues as to their classification. The citation directly following the ethnonym is the author(s) that associated it with the Panoan family. Awanateo (Rivet & Tastevin 1921:452, “with doubt Panoan”). Binabo (Steward and Métraux 1948:567). Binannawa (Steinen 1904:21).
52

Chunti (Steward & Métraux 1948:567). Diabo (Steward & Métraux 1948:567). Eskinawa (Tastevin 1929:12). Isunawa (Steward & Métraux 1948:567). Kamarinigua (Rivet & Tastevin 1921:455, “very probably Panoan”). Kontanawa (Loukotka 1968: 172). Kurunawa (Carvalho 1931:248, “verified that they speak a Panoan dialect”;
Tastevin 1929:12). Kustanawa (Loukotka 1968:169). Mochobo (Steward and Métraux 1948:555). Nianawa (Steward and Métraux 1948:555). Ormiga (Steward and Métraux 1948:567). Pakanawa (Reich & Stegelmann 1903:137, Steinen 1904:22). Pitsobo (Castelnau 1850-9:IV:387). Rununawa (Tastevin 1929:12). Soboibo (Steinen 1904:26). Tiuchunawa (Tastevin 1929:13). Trompetero (Steward and Métraux 1948:567). Zurina (Mason 1950:269).
IV: In category III, except for Kurunawa, Pakanawa, and Pitsobo, all these ethnonyms are assumed by the cited author to be Panoan evidently based only on the ethnonyms ending in -bo or -nawa and/or geographic location (most of these authors never even visited Amazonia, and therefore they just as well could be Panoan exonyms for non-Panoans). Based on such clues, one could add the following, which lack linguisitc afiliation in the literature, as possibly Panoan: Bamunawa (Tastevin 1926:51). Buinawa (Tastevin 1926:51). Bitinawa (Tastevin 1925:415). Chipanawa (Figueroa 1904[1661]:164). Hsunawa (Tastevin 1925:414, mixed with Kashinawa). Isaknawa (Dueñas 1792:175). Kayubo (Stiglich 1908:406). Komanawa (Rodríguez 2004-5[1780]:II:110, Córdova 1957:221, 222). Michanawa (Whiton et al. 1964:100, Iskonawa enemies). Panatawa (Dueñas 1792:181, captives of Panos). Pimisnawa (Whiton et al. 1964:100, Iskonawa enemies). Suyabo (Dueñas 1792:175). Takanawa (Tastevin 1925:415). Tsawesbo (Erikson 1999:113, descendants live among the Matis) Uniabo (Taboada 1859[1796]:132). Unibo (Viegl: 1875:106).
Note: this table excludes obvious errors, such as Aguano, Chamikuro, Jakaria, Pama(na), Maparina, Urarina and Panau, Piro. Note: excluded from Tables 1 and 2 are many denominations for moieties, marriage sections, or co-residential “clans,” which typically end with -bo, -nawa, bake, huni, or variants or combinations of these. As subcategories of ethnonyms/language names, Table 1 includes only documented regional dialects, and Table 2 only terms stated to be dialects, subtribes, factions or, as far as I could tell, non-co-residential “clans.”
53

Table 3. Inter-family homonymy.

Geographic location is provided for names of non-neighboring languages; the earliest references are given for the less-known cases.

============================================================

Denomination

Family Sources

------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Arara (Pará) a

Cariban

Arara (Mato Grosso) a Tupian

Arasa (cf. Arazaire)b Takanan Nordenskiöld (1905:275-6)

Arasairi (cf. Arazaire)b Harakmbut Aza (1933, 1935, n.d.)

Arawá c

Arawan Stiglich (1908)

Atsahuaca b

Takanan Farabee (1922:162)

Chama (= Ese’eja) Takanan Firestone (1955)

Kanamari d

Katukinan

Kanamari, Kanamirimd Arawakan Martius (1867), Rivet & Tastevin (1919-24)

Karipuna

Tupian

Kasharari, Cacharary Arawakan Ehrenreich (1891:58), Masô (1919)

Katukina e

Katukinan

Katukinarú e

Tupian Church (1898)

Kulina, Curina f

Arawan

Kunibo, Kuniba

Arawakan Rivet & Tastevin (1919-24); Nimuendajú &

Bentes (1923)

Mayoruna g

Arawakan Tessmann (1930)

Pacaguara, Pakaguara h Arawakan Nusser (1890), Rivet & Tastevin (1919-24),

Castillo (1929:123)

Yamiaca, Yamiacob Takanan Cipriani (1902:187-9), Barranca (1914:5-8)

Yamiacab

mix i

Anonymous (1901)

Yura (Andean)

isolate

------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Grouped by family (excluding non-neighboring languages):

Arawakan (5): Kanamari, Kasharari, Kunibo, Mayoruna, Pakaguara

Takanan (4): Arasa, Atsahuaca, Chama, Yamiaka

Katukinan (2): Katukina, Kanamari

Tupian (2):

Karipuna, Katukinarú

Arawan (2):

Kulina, Arawá

Harakmbut (1): Arasairi

============================================================

a See Rivet & Tastevin (1921:451-2) for Arara (= Shawannawa) homonymy.

b See Lyon (1975) for discussion of Arazaire, Atsawaka, and Yamiaka homonymy.

c Though no linguistic material is available for the reportedly (Peruvian) Panoan

group called Arawa, it is not likely a misidentification of the Arawan Arawá, as

this latter group was Brazilian and extinct by the time Stiglich made his

obseveration that the Arawas were a branch of the Amawakas.

d See Rivet & Tastevin (1921:456-7) for Kanamari homonymy.

e See Rivet (1920) and Aguiar (1993) for discussion of Katukina homonymy;

Katukinarú looks like a hoax.

f See Fleck (2007a) for discussion of Kulina homonymy.

g A.k.a Moríke; see Fleck (2007d) for discussion of Mayourna homonymy.

54

h See Montaño (1987:16-17) for discussion of Pakawara homnymy. i Contains a mix of Panoan words and words from other local non-Panoan languages;
clearly a hoax.
55

Table 4. Proposed affiliations of Pano-Takanan with other languages and/or

families.

============================================================

Author; Stock name (if given)

Languages/ Location

Families

------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Schuller (1913); Carib-Aruac

Arawakan South America

Rivet (1924), Rivet & Loukotka (1952)

Arawakan South America

Cariban

S. & C. America

Swadesh (1959, 1962); Macro-Kechua

Moseten

Bolivia

Yuracare Bolivia

Chon

Southern Chile

Kechuan Andes

Cayuvava Bolivia

Yaruro

Venezuela

(many more)

Suárez (1969, 1973); Macro-Pano-Takanan Moseten

Bolivia

Yuracare Bolivia

Chon

Southern Chile

Greenberg (1960, 1987); Macro-Panoan

Moseten

Bolivia

Mataco

Argentina-Bolivia

Lule-Vilela Argentina

Guaicuru Argentina-Brazil,

Paraguay

Charruan Uruguay-Argentina

Lengua

Paraguay

Key (1978), Key & Clairis (1978)

Moseten

Bolivia

Mapuche Chile, Argentina

Chon

Southern Chile

Kaweskar Southern Chile

Migliazza (1982, 1988); Macro Pano-Takanan Moseten

Bolivia

Yuracare Bolivia

Yanomami Venezuela-Brazil

Wistrand (1991)

Uto-Aztecan U.S.A., Mexico

============================================================

56

Table 5. Published Panoan linguistic works by Franciscans.

============================================================

Language/ Approximate Pages of Date of

Collector/

dialect

entries in grammar preparation Publication

vocabulary notes

of manuscript

------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Konibo

3300

15

1800

Marqués (1903/1931)

Pano

1600

-

1800

Marqués (1903/1931)

Shipibo

3100

1810-2

Anonymous (Steinen 1904)

Shipibo

2500

}9a

1877

Anonymous (Steinen 1904)

Chakobo 36

-

?

Cardús (1886)

Pakawara 57

2

1881-2

Armentia (1887)

Shipibo

3800

-

?

Armentia (1898)

Pano

3000

23

1903

Navarro (1903/1927)

Shipibo

2000

9

?

Alemany (1906/1927)

Konibo

2400

-

1896?b

Anonymous (1927)

============================================================

a Steinen (1904) combined the two anonymous Franciscans’ Shipibo grammar notes.

b Erikson et al. (1994) give this date and furthermore give the author’s name as

Delgado, Eulogio (who wrote a Campa vocabulary).

57

Table 6. Publications of the 1800s containing Panoan linguistic data, including

collector (if different from author), nationality of collector, and year when the

information was collected.

============================================================

Language or dialect Entries Publication/Collector Nationality Collection

of collector date

------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Sensi

12 Smyth & Lowe (1836) British

1835

Pakawara

23 d’Orbigny (1838)

French

1830-3

ibid

52 Heath (1883)

American 1880-1

ibid

57 Armentia (1887)

Spanish 1881-2

Pano

94 Castelnau (1851)

French

1846-7

Settled Mayoruna

54

ibid

ibid

1847

Wild Mayoruna

80

ibid (by Melville)

ibid

ibid

Konibo

119 Marcoy (1864)

French

1846

Mayoruna of Tabatinga 137 Martius (1867) (by Spix) Bavarian 1820

Kulina of Olivença

243 ibid (by Spix)

ibid

ibid

Karipuna

162 ibid (by Natterer)

Austrian 1829

Kanamari

5

Chandless (1866, 1869) British

1864-7

Chakobo

36 Cardús (1886)

Spanish 1883-4

Shipibo

3800 Armentia (1898)

Spanish 18??(his

biography in Tacana monograph y ARmentia.

============================================================

Note: Martius (1967) also published Castelnau’s Pano and Mayoruna lists.

58

Table 7. Languages and dialects that became known for the first time during the first

third of the 20th century, including number of entries in the lexica.

============================================================

Language/dialect

Entries

Publications between 1900 and 1933

containing new Panoan data

------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Yaminawa

71

Reich & Stegelmann (1903)

Amawaka

84

Reich & Stegelmann (1903)a

ibid

335

Farabee (1922)

ibid

39

Tessmann (1930)

Yamiaka

46

Nordenskiöld (1905)

ibid

118

Créqui-Monfort & Rivet (1913)

Atsawaka

49

Nordenskiöld (1905)

ibid

223

Créqui-Monfort & Rivet (1913)

Arazaire

133

Llosa (1906b)

Kashinawa of the Ibuaçu R. 1779

Abreu (1914)

Katukina

16

Rivet (1920)

ibid

317

Rivet & Tastevin (1927-29/1932)

Kashinawa of the Tarauacá R. 129

Rivet & Tastevin (1927-29/1932)

Kapanawa of the Juruá R. 397

Rivet & Tastevin (1927-29/1932)

Nawa

39

Rivet & Tastevin (1927-29/1932)

Remo of the Blanco R.

179

Leuque (1927)

Shetebo

33

Tessmann (1929)

Kapanawa of the Tapiche R. 32

Tessmann (1930)

Kashibo (Kashibo dialect) 220

Tessmann (1930)

Kakataibo (Kashibo dialect) 30

Tessmann (1930)

Rubo (Kashibo dialect)

30

Tessmann (1930)

Nokaman (Kashibo dialect) 228

Tessmann (1930)

Poyanawa

383

Carvalho (1931)

Tuchiunawa

127

Carvalho (1931)

Remo of the Jaquirana R.

109

Carvalho (1931)

============================================================

a Evidently through some type of error, this Amawaka list was labelled “Kaschinaua.”

59

Table 8. Languages studied in detail by the SIL, and the principal missionaries who

studied them.

============================================================

Language/

Country Missionary

Start date Theses

dialect

on language

------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Shipibo

Peru

Lauriault, Erwin 1938

Loriot, James

1950s?

Eakin, Lucille

1968

Kashibo

Peru

Shell, Olive

1947

Ph.D. 1965

Wistrand, Lila

1958

M.A. 1968

Ph.D. 1969

Amawaka

Peru

Russell, Robert

1953

M.A. 1965

Russell, Dolores 1953

Hyde, Richard

1960s?

Hyde, Sylvia

1960s?

Sparing, Margareth 1985

Kapanawa of

Peru

Loos, Eugene

1954

Ph.D. 1967

the Tapiche R.

Loos, Betty

1954

Kashinawa of Peru

Kensinger, Kenneth 1955

the Ibuaçu R.

Cromack, Gail

1965

M.A. 1967

Cromack, Robert 1965

Ph.D. 1968

Montag, Richard 1969

M.A. 1992

Montag, Susan

1969

Ph.D. 1998

Chakobo

Bolivia

Prost, Gilbert

1956

Prost, Marian

1956

Matses

Peru

Fields, Harriet

1969

Kneeland, Harriet 1969

Sharanawa

Peru

Scott, Eugene

1960s?

Peru

Scott, Marie

1960s?

Yaminawa

Peru

Faust, Norma

1975

============================================================

60

Table 9. Languages that have been the subject of linguistics theses by academics.

============================================================

Language/dialect Theses

Degree

University

------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Shipibo

Guillen (1974)

Master’s UNMSM, Peru

Kashibo

Cortez (1980)

Bachelor UNMSM, Peru

Kashinawa

of the Ibuaçu R. Camargo (1987)

Bachelor U. Paris, France

Katukina

Barros (1987)

Master’s UNICAMP, Brazil

Katukina

Aguiar (1988)

Master’s UNICAMP, Brazil

Kashinawa

of the Ibuaçu R. Camargo (1991)

Ph.D.

U. Paris, France

Marubo

Costa (1992)

Master’s UFRJ,

Brazil

Matses

Carvalho (1992)

Master’s UFRJ,

Brazil

Poyanawa

Paula (1992)

Master’s UNPE,

Brazil

Shawannawa

Cunha (1993)

Master’s UFPE,

Brazil

Katukina

Aguiar (1994a)

Ph.D.

UNICAMP, Brazil

Shipibo-Konibo García (1994)

Bachelor UNMSM, Peru

Panoan family Cortez (1996)

Master’s UNMSM, Peru

Shipibo-Konibo Valenzuela (1997) M.A.

U. Oregon, U.S.A.

Shanenawa

Cândido (1998)

Master’s UNICAMP, Brazil

Shipibo-Konibo Elias (2000)

Bachelor UNMSM, Peru

Marubo

Costa (2000)

Ph.D.

UFRJ,

Brazil

Panoan family Lanes (2000)

Master’s UFRJ,

Brazil

Matis

Spanghero (2000) Master’s UNICAMP, Brazil

Matis

Ferreira (2001a)

Master’s UNICAMP, Brazil

Matses

Dorigo (2001)

Ph.D.

UFRJ,

Brazil

Yawanawa

Garcia (2002)

Ph.D.

UFG,

Brazil

Matses

Fleck (2003)

Ph.D.

Rice U., U.S.A.

Shipibo-Konibo Valenzuela (2003b) Ph.D.

U. Oregon, U.S.A.

Shanenawa

Cândido (2004)

Ph.D.

UNICAMP, Brazil

Yawanawa

Paula (2004)

Ph.D.

UNICAMP, Brazil

Yaminawa-arara Souza (2004)

Master’s UNICAMP, Brazil

Kasharari

Garcia (2004)

Master’s UNICAMP, Brazil

Nukini

Okidoi (2004)

Bachelor UFG,

Brazil

Matis

Spanghero (2005) Ph.D.

UNICAMP, Brazil

Matis

Ferreira (2005)

Ph.D.

UNICAMP, Brazil

Panoan family Zariquiey (2006)

Master’s PUCP,

Peru

Kapanawa of the

Tapiche R. Elias (2006)

Ph.D.

Rutgers U., U.S.A.

Korubo

Oliveira (2009)

Master’s UnB

Brazil

Kashibo

Valle (2009)

Bachelor UNMSM Peru

Pano

Gomes (2010)

Master’s UNICAMP Brazil

Yaminawa

Couto (2010)

Master’s UFPE

Brazil

Kashibo

Zariquiey (2012)

Ph.D.

La Trobe U., Australia

Yaminawa-arara Souza (in progress) Ph.D.

UFG,

Brazil

============================================================

61

Table 10. Articles published in the International Journal of American Linguistics.

============================================================

Language

Citation

Affiliation

Topic

------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Shipibo

Lauriault (1948)

SIL

phonology

Amawaka

Osborn (1948)

SIL

phonology

Kashibo

Shell (1950)

SIL

phonology

Kashibo

Shell (1957)

SIL

grammar: transitivity

Chakobo

Prost (1962)

SIL

grammar: transitivity

Panoan family Suárez (1973)

IIIS of Oaxaca

classification

Panoan family Key (1978)

U. of California classification

Panoan family Kensinger (1981) Bennington College literature review

Pano

Parker (1994)

SIL

phonology

Marubo

Ruedas (2002)

Tulane U.

sociolinguistics

Matses

Fleck (2006b)

La Trobe U.

grammar: prefixation

Matses

Fleck (2008a)

La Trobe U.

grammar: pronouns

Kapanawa

Elias (2009)

Stony Brook U. phonology

Shipibo-Konibo Valenzuela (2010a) Chapman U.

grammar: applicatives

Matses

Munro et al. (in press) Stanford U., et al. grammar: reported

speech

Kashibo

Zariquiey & Fleck La Trobe U.,

grammar: prefixation

(in press)

U Oregon

============================================================

62

Appendix A: Index of common denomination synonyms, variants, and
homonyms.
Principal names of languages and dialects are in bold and italic, respectively (as in Table 1). Principal ethnonyms claimed to be Panoan but for which no linguistic data exist are underlined (as in Table 2). Entries for principal names are followed by their location in in the classification in Table 1 or Table 2 (if in Table 2, “T2” will precede the numeration), followed by any spelling/pronunciation variants (“var”), synonyms (“syn”), and intra-family homonyms (“hom”); for inter-family homonymy see Table 3. Bibliographic references follow synonyms and some spelling variants. Accents are ignored here, as they are inconsitently applied in the literature. still need to aphabetize
Panoan (family). var/hom: Pano (Pano/pano is the name of the family in Spanish, Portuguese and French, and has occasionally been used in English instead of “Panoan”), Pana. syn: Nawa (Tastevin 1924b, Villarejo 1959).
Pana. see Panoan, Pano.
Mayoruna (I., generic or uncertain references). var: Majuruna, Mangeroma, Mayiruna, Mayruna, Mayuruna, Mayuzuna, Moyoruna. syn: Pelado (Maroni 1988[1889-92]:267), Marubo, Mayo. hom: Barbudos, Matses (see).
Majuruna. see Mayoruna. Mangeroma. see Mayoruna. Mayiruna. see Mayoruna. Mayruna. see Mayoruna. Mayuzuna. see Mayoruna. Moyoruna. see Mayoruna. Pelado. see Mayoruna, Pano. Sometimes given as subroup of Pano, following
Hervás (1800:263). Mayo. see Mayoruna.
Matses (I.A.i.a.). syn: Mayoruna (Fields 1963), Capanahua salvaje (Fields 1963); hom: Paud Usunkid.
Capanahua salvaje. see Matses. Paud Usunkid (I.A.ia, dialect of Matses). syn: Matsés (Fields 1970), Shëbimbo,
Shapaja (both syn from Fleck in progress). Shëbimbo. see Paud Usunkid. Shapaja. (Spanish translation of shëbin). see Paud Usunkid. Peruvian Matses (I.A.i.a). Brazilian Matses. (I.A.i.a). Korubo (I.A.i.b). var: Corubo. syn: Cacetero. Corubo. see Korubo. Cacetero. see Korubo. Chankueshbo (I.A.i.b, dialect of Korubo). var: Chankuëshbo. syn: Pinsha (Villarejo
1979). Chankuëshbo. see Chankueshbo. Pinsha. (local Spanish translation of chankuësh) var Pinche. see Chankueshbo. Pinche. var of Pinsha. see Chankueshbo. Kulina of the Curuçá River (I.A.i.c). var: Kulina do Curuçá. syn: Kulina-Pano.
hom: Kulina of São Paulo de Olivença.
63

Kulina do Curuçá. see Kulina of the Curuçá River. Kulina-Pano. see Kulina of the Curuçá River. Kapishtana (I.A.i.c, dialect of Kulina of the Curuçá River). syn: Kapishto (Fields
1970), Tonnadbo, Cumala (both syn from Fleck in progress), Grillo (Villarejo 1979). Kapishto. var: Capishto. see Kapishtana, Mawi. Capishto. see Kapishto. Grillo. see Kapishtana, Mawi. Mawi (I.A.i.c, dialect of Kulina of the Curuçá River). syn: Cumala, Dëis, Kapishto, Tonnadbo, (all four syn from Fleck in progress), Grillo (Villarejo 1979), Marubo (Fields 1970). Cumala. (Spanish translation of tonnad). see Kapishtana, Mawi. Dëis. see Mawi. Tonnadbo. see Kapishtana, Mawi. Chema (I.A.i.c, dialect of Kulina of the Curuçá River). syn/hom: Dëmushbo (Fleck in progress). Demushbo (I.A.i.d). var: Dëmsuhbo. syn: Remo (Fields 1963; Krokoszyński and Fleck, this volume). hom: Chema. Dëmushbo. see Demushbo. Matis (I.A.ii.a). var: Matšese (Souza 1979). Matšese. see Matis. Mayoruna of the Jandiatuba River (I.A.ii.b). var: Maioruna, Magirona (both from Alviano 1957). syn: Impetineri (Rivet and Tastevin 1921). Maioruna. see Mayoruna of the Jandiatuba River. Magirona. see Mayoruna of the Jandiatuba River. Mayoruna of the Amazon River (I.A.ii.c). Settled Mayoruna of the Amazon River (I.A.ii.c). var: Mayoruna civilisé (18509:V:299), Mayoruna domestica (Martius 1867:II:238). Wild Mayoruna of the Amazon River (I.A.ii.c). var: Mayoruna fera (Martius 1867:II:238), Mayoruna sauvage (Castelnau 1850-9:V:300). Mayoruna civilisé. see Settled Mayoruna of the Amazon River. Mayoruna domestica. see Settled Mayoruna of the Amazon River. Mayoruna fera. see Wild Mayoruna of the Amazon River. Mayoruna sauvage. see Wild Mayoruna of the Amazon River. Mayoruna of Tabatinga (I.B). Maxuruna (Martius 1867, II:236). Maxuruna. var: Mashoruna. see Mayoruna of Tabatinga. Mashoruna. var of Maxuruna. see Mayoruna of Tabatinga.
Kasharari (II.A). var: Kaxarari, Kaxarirí, Cacharary. Kaxarari. see. Kasharari. Kaxariri. see Kasharari. Cacharary. see. Kasharari.
Kashibo (II.B). var: Cachibo, Cacibo, Caschibo, Cachivo, Cashibo, Cashivo, Casibo, Casigua (Stiglich 1908:404), Caxivo. Kaschibo, Kassibo, syn: Uni (Frank 1987), Carapacho (Smyth and Lowe 1836:203; Steinen 1904:22, Stiglich 1908:404; Markham 1910:88; but see Amich 1988[Pallarés & Calvo 1870]:333, who would suggest they are a distinct group), Calliseca (see footnote 1), Haqueti (Tessmann 1930:127; though Velasco 1988[1788-9]:547 called this a Manannabobo dialect).
64

Cachibo. see Kashibo. Cacibo. see Kashibo. Caschibo. see Kashibo. Caschivo. see Kashibo. Cashibo. see Kashibo. Cashivo. see Kashibo. Casibo. see Kashibo. Caxivo. see Kashibo. Kaschibo. see Kashibo. Kasshibo. see Kashibo. Uni. var: Oni (Valenzuela 2010b). see Kashibo. Oni. var of Uni. see Kashibo. Carapacho. var: Carapache. see Kashibo. Carapache. see Carapacho. Haqueti. var: Aqueti (Espinoza 1955:583), Hagueti (Velasco 1988[1788-9]:547) see
Kashibo. Aqueti. var of Haqueti. see Kashibo. Hagueti. var of Haqueti. see Kashibo. Kakataibo (II.B, dialect of Kashibo). var: Cacataibo. Cacataibo. see Kakataibo. Kaschibo (II.B, dialect of Kashibo). var: Kaschinõ (Tessmann 1930:124, 128). Kaschinõ. see Kashibo. Nokaman (II.B, dialect of Kashibo). Rubo (II.B. dialect of Kashibo). var: Rounõ (Tessmann 1930:128), Ruubu (Wistrand
1998:113). Rounõ. see Rubo. Ruubu. see Rubo.
Chakobo (II.C.i.a, co-dialect of Pakawara). var: Chacobo, Tsakobo. Chacobo. see Chakobo. Tsakobo. see Chakobo. Pakawara (II.C.i.a, co-dialect of Chakobo). var: Pacaguara, Pacahuara, Pacavára,
Pakaguara. Pacaguara. see Pakawara. Pacahuara. see Pakawara. Pacavara. see Pakawara. Pakaguara. see Pakawara. Karipuna (II.C.i.b). var: Caripuna, syn: Jaun-avo (Martius 1867:II:240), E’loé
(Barbosa 1947). Caripuna. see Karipuna. E’loé. see Karipuna.
Atsawaka (II.C.ii.a, co-dialect of Yamiaka). var: Atsahuaca. Atsahuaca. see Atsawaka. Yamiaka (II.C.ii.a, co-dialect of Atsawaka). var: Yamiaca. syn: Auñeiri (Stiglich
1908:402). Yamiaca. see Yamiaka. Auñeiri. see Yamiaka. Arazaire (II.C.ii.b). var: Aratsaira. Aratsaira. see Arazaire.
65

Remo of the Blanco River (II.C.iii). var: Rhemu (Oppenheim1971:168). hom: Nukini (autodenomination, Oppenheim (1936a:151).
Kashinawa of the Tarauacá River (II.C.iv). var: Kašinawa du P. Tastevin (Rivet & Tastevin 1927:819). hom: Kashinawa of the Ibuaçu River.
Kašinawa du P. Tastevin. see Kashinawa of the Tarauacá River.
Marubo of the Javari Basin (II.C.v.a). var: Maruba, Marubiu. syn: Chainawa (Kennell 1976, 1978). hom: Marubo of Maucallacta, Mawi.
Marubiu. see Marubo of the Javari Basin. Katukina (of the Gregório River) (II.C.v.b). var: Catuquina, Cataquina. syn:
Waninawa (Tastevin 1924a, Loukotka 1968:172). hom: Shanenawa (=Katukina de Feijó), Shawannawa. Catuquina. see Katukina. Cataquina. see Katukina. Waninawa. see Katukina. Katukina of Olinda (II.C.v.b, dialect of Katukina). Katukina of Sete Estrelas (II.C.v.b, dialect of Katukina). Kanamari (II.C.v.b, dialect of Katukina). var: Canamari, Canamary, Canawary (the latter is a frequently reproduced typo on page 188 of Chandless 1866). Canamari. see Kanamari. Canamary. see Kanamari. Canawary. see Kanamari. Kulina of São Paulo de Olivença (II.C.v.c). var: Culino, Colino, Collina, Culina, Curina. hom: Kulina of the Curuçá River. n.b. Rivet & Tastevin (1921:458) give Karunawa as a synonym for Arawan Kulina, not for (either) Panoan Kulina, despite the obvious Panoan origin of the ethnonym. Culino. see Kulina of Sào Paulo de Olivença. Colino. see Kulina of Sào Paulo de Olivença. Collina. see Kulina of Sào Paulo de Olivença. Culina. see Kulina of Sào Paulo de Olivença. Curina. see Kulina of Sào Paulo de Olivença. Karunawa. see Kulina of Sào Paulo de Olivença.
Poyanawa (II.C.vi.a). var: Poianaua, Poianawa, Poyanaua. syn: Kuyanawa, (Rivet & Tastevin 1921:465).
Poianaua. see Poyanawa. Poianawa. see Poyanawa. Poyanaua. see Poyanawa. Kuyanawa. var: Cuyanawa, Kuyanaua. see Poyanawa. Cuyanawa. var of Kuyanawa. see Kuyanawa. Kuyanaua. var of Kuyanawa. see Kuyanawa. Iskonawa (II.C.vi.b). var: Isconahua, Iscobaquebo, Iskunaua, Iskunawa. Isconahua. see Iskonawa. Iscobaquebo. see Iskonawa. Iskunawa. see Iskonawa. Iskunaua. see Iskonawa, Yawanawa.
66

Nukini (II.C.vi.c). var: Nucuini (Oppenheim 1936a:151), Nukuini, Inukuini (Rivet and Tastevin 1921), syn. Abakabu (Tastevin ms.i).
Nucuini. see Nukini, Remo of the Blanco River. Nukuini. see Nukini. Inukuini. see Nukini. Abakabu. see Nukini. Nawa (II.C.vi.d). var: Nahua, Nagua. hom: Parkenawa, Panoan. Nahua. see Nawa. Nagua. see Nawa. Remo of the Jaquirana River (II.C.vi.e). var: Rhemu, Remu (both from Carvalho
1931). Rhemu. see Remo of the Jaquirana River, Remo of the Blanco River. Remu. see Remo of the Jaquirana River.
Shipibo (II.C.vii.a, co-dialect of Konibo). var: Cepeo, Cepibo, Chipaeo, Chepeo, Chipeo, Chipibo, Cipibo, Schipibo, Sepibo, Sepivo, Shepegua (Stiglich 1905:30), Shipebo, Shipeo, Sipibo, Sipivo, Ssipibo, Xipibo, Zipivo. syn: Calliseca, Chama (see footnote 1 for references to these two synonyms; Payanso (Myers 1990:8, speculation based on geography and dress).
Cepeo. see Shipibo. Cepibo. see Shipibo. Chepaeo. see Shipibo. Chepeo. see Shipibo. Chipeo. see Shipibo. Chipibo. see Shipibo. Cipibo. see Shipibo. Schipibo. see Shipibo. Sepibo. see Shipibo. Sepivo. see Shipibo. Shepegua. see Shipibo. Shipebo. see Shipibo. Shipeo. see Shipibo. Sipibo. see Shipibo. Sipivo. see Shipibo. Ssipibo. see Shipibo. Xípibo. see Shipibo. Zipivo. see Shipibo. Calliseca. var: Caliseca, Kaliseka. see Shipibo, Kashibo, Konibo. Caliseca. var of Calliseca. see Shipibo, Kashibo, Konibo. Kaliseka. var of Calliseca. see Shipibo, Kashibo, Konibo. Chama. superordinate term used to refer to Shipibo, Konibo, and often also Shetebo;
less frequently it is a synonym for Shipibo. var: Tschama (Tessmann 1929). Tschama. see Chama. Payanso. see Shipibo. Konibo (II.C.vii.a, co-dialect of Shipibo). var: Conebo, Conibo, Conigua (Stiglich
1905:341), Cuniba, Cunibo, Cunio (Figueroa 1904[1661]:164), Cunivo, Curiveo (Rodríguez 1684:388), Kunibo. syn: Chama (see footnote 1), Manoa (Smyth and Lowe 1836:203; Markham 1910:96), Calliseca (see footnote 1), Pariache (Myers 1974:141, speculation based on geography). Conebo. see Konibo.
67

Conibo. see Konibo. Conigua. see Konibo. Cuniba. see Konibo. Cunibo. see Konibo. Cunio. see Konibo. Cunivo. see Konibo. Curiveo. see Konibo. Kunibo. see Konibo. Manoa. see Konibo, Pano, Shetebo. Pariache. see Konibo. Kapanawa of the Tapiche River (II.C.vii.a. dialect of Shipibo-Konibo). var: Capacho,
Capanagua, Capanahua, Capanaua, Capanawa, Kapanahua. syn. Buskipani (Carvallo 1906[1818]:346). hom: Kapanawa of the Juruá River. Capacho. see Kapanawa of the Tapiche River. Capanahua. see Kapanawa of the Tapiche River, Kapanawa of the Juruá River. Capanaua. see Kapanawa of the Tapiche River, Kapanawa of the Juruá River. Capanagua. see Kapanawa of the Tapiche River, Kapanawa of the Juruá Rive.. Capanawa. see Kapanawa of the Tapiche River, Kapanawa of the Juruá River. Kapanahua. see Kapanawa of the Tapiche River. Buskipani. var: Busquipani. Busquispani. var of Buskipani. see Kapanawa of the Tapiche River. Pano (II.C.vii.b). var: Pana, Panobo (Tessmann 1930), Panavarro (d’Ans 1973), Huariapano (Parker 1992), Wariapano. syn: Pelado, Manoa (Dueñas 1791:172, Tessmann 1930:106), Cashiboyano (Tessmann 1930:106). hom: Panoan. Panobo. see Pano. Panavarro. see Pano. Huariapano. var: Wariapano. see Pano. Wariapano. var of Huariapano. see Pano. Cashiboyano. see Pano. Shetebo (II.C.vii.b. dialect of Pano). var: Cetevo, Cheteo, Gitipo, Jitipo, Schitebo, Schitipo, Setebo, Setevo, Setibo, Settebo, Shetegua (Stiglich 1905:313), Sitibo, Sitivo, Ssetebo, Xetebo, Xitipo. syn: Chama (see footnoet 1 for references), Manoa (Dueñas 1991:172, Steinen 1904:25), Manoita (Sobreviela 1791a:95, 97). Cetevo. see Shetebo. Cheteo. see Shetebo. Gitipo. see Shetebo. Setebo. see Shetebo. Jitipo. see Shetebo. Schitebo. see Shetebo. Schitipo. see Shetebo. Setebo. see Shetebo. Setevo. see Shetebo. Setibo. see Shetebo. Settebo. see Shetebo. Sitibo. see Shetebo. Sitivo. see Shetebo. Shetegua. see Shetebo. Ssetebo. see Shetebo. Xetebo. see Shetebo.
68

Xitipo. see Shetebo. Manoita. see Shetebo. Manoyta. var of Monoita. see Shetebo. Piskino (I.C.vii.b, dialect of Pano). var: Pisquibo, Piquino. Pisquibo. see Piskino. Pisquino. see Piskino. Sensi (I.C.vii.c.). var: Senci, Senči, Senchi, Sensivo, Sentci, Senti, Shensivo, Ssensi,
Tenti (Mason 1950:263), Tsönsi (Tessmann 1930:107). Senci. see Sensi. Senči. see Sensi. Sensivo. see Sensi. Sentci. see Sensi. Senti. see Sensi. Shensivo. see Sensi. Ssensi. see Sensi. Tenti. see Sensi. Tsönsi. see Sensi.
Kashinawa of the Ibuaçu River (II.C.viii.a.). var: Cachinaua, Cashinahua, Catsinaua, Caxinaua, Kachinaua, Kaschinaua, Kashinaua, Kasinaua, Kasinawa, Kašinawa, Katsinawa syn: Huni Kuin, Hǝunawa (Tastevin ms.g), Sheminaua (Schmidt 1926:228)
Cachinaua. see Kashinawa of the Ibuaçu River. Cashinahua. see Kashinawa of the Ibuaçu River. Catsinaua. see Kashinawa of the Ibuaçu River. Caxinaua. see Kashinawa of the Ibuaçu River. Kachinaua. see Kashinawa of the Ibuaçu River. Kaschinaua. see Kashinawa of the Ibuaçu River. Kashinaua. see Kashinawa of the Ibuaçu River. Kasinaua. see Kashinawa of the Ibuaçu River. Kasinawa. see Kashinawa of the Ibuaçu River. Kašinawa. see Kashinawa of the Ibuaçu River. Katsinawa. see Kashinawa of the Ibuaçu River. Huni Kuin. var: Junikuin. see Kashinawa of the Ibuaçu River. Junikuin. var of Huni Kuin. see Kashinawa of the Ibuaçu River. Sheminaua. see Kashinawa of the Ibuaçu River. Hǝunawa. see Kashinawa of the Ibuaçu River. Kapanawa of the Juruá River (II.C.viii.a, dialect of Kashinawa of the Ibuaçu
River). var: Capanagua, Capanahua, Capanaua, Capanawa., Kapanaua. hom: Kapanawa of the Tapiche River. Kapanaua. see Kapanawa of the Juruá River. Paranawa (II.C.vi.b, dialect of Kashinawa of the Ibuaçu River). var: Paranaua. Paranaua. see Paranawa. Yaminawa (II.C.viii.b). var: Jaminaua, Jaminawa, Yabinawa, Yambinawa,
Yaminahua. syn: Pano-Purús (d’Ans 1973). Jaminaua. see Yaminawa. Jaminawa. see Yaminawa. Yabinawa. see Yaminawa. Yambinawa. see Yaminawa. Yaminahua. see Yaminawa.
69

Pano-Purús. see Yaminawa. Yaminawa of the Purus River (II.C.viii.b). syn: Mainawa, Choshunawa (both syn.
from Townsley 1994:250; see also Chandless 1866:113 and Rivet & Tastevin 1921:465 for more on Mainawa). Mainawa var: Mainagua, Mainahua, Mainaua, Mai-i-naua. see Yaminawa of the Purus River. Mainagua. var of Mainawa. see Yaminawa of the Purus River. Mainahua. var of Mainawa. see Yaminawa of the Purus River. Mainaua. var of Mainawa. see Yaminawa of the Purus River. Mai-i-naua. var of Mainawa. see Yaminawa of the Purus River. Choshunawa. var: Choshunahua. see Yaminawa of the Purus River. Choshunahua. var of Choshunawa. see Yaminawa of the Purus River. Yaminawa of the Juruá River (II.C.viii.b). syn: Bashonawa, Dishinawa (both syn. from Townsley 1994:250). Bashonawa. var: Bashonahua. see Yaminawa of the Juruá River. Bashonahua. var of Bashonawa. see Yaminawa of the Juruá River. Dishinawa. var: Dishinahua. see Yaminawa of the Juruá River. Dishinahua. var of Dishinawa. see Yaminawa of the Juruá River. Yaminawa of the Iaco River (II.C.viii.b). syn. Shaonawa (Townsley 1994:249). Shaonawa. var: Chaunaua (Tastevin 1925:415), Shaodawa, Shaonahua. see Yaminawa of the Iaco River. Chaunaua. var of Shaonawa. see Yaminawa of the Iaco River. Shaodawa. var of Shaonawa. see Yaminawa of the Iaco River. Shaonahua. var of Shaonawa. see Yaminawa of the Iaco River. Chitonawa (II.C.viii.b, dialect of Yamianawa). var: Chitodawa, Chitonahua. Chitodawa. see Chitonawa. Chitonahua. see Chitonawa. Marinawa. (II.C.viii.b, dialect of Yaminawa). var: Marinahua, Marinaua. Marinahua. see Marinawa. Marinaua. see Marinawa. Mastanawa (II.C.viii.b, dialect of Yaminawa). var:, Bastanaua, Bastanawa (Tastevin 1926:50), Mastanahua, Nastanawa (Loukotka 1968:170). Bastanawa. see Mastanawa. Bastanaua. see Mastanawa. Mastanahua. see Mastanawa. Nastanawa. see Mastanawa. Parkenawa (II.C.viii.b, dialect of Yaminawa). syn: Nawa, Yora, Yura, Yoranahua. var: Parquenahua. Parquenahua. see Parkenawa. Yoranahua. see Parkenawa. Shanenawa (II.C.viii.b, dialect of Yaminawa). var: Chandenawa, Chanenawa, Saninawa, Šahnindawa, Schahnindaua. syn: Katukina (de Feijó). Chandenawa. see Shanenawa. Chanenawa. see Shanenawa. Saninawa. see Shanenawa. Šahnindawa. see Shanenawa. Schahnindaua. see Shanenawa. Sharanawa (II.C.viii.b, dialect of Yaminawa). var: Sharanahua, Charanawa, Xaranaua. Sharanahua. see Sharanawa.
70

Charanahua. see Sharanawa. Shawannawa (II.C.viii.b, dialect of Yaminawa). var: Šawánawá, Sawanaua. syn:
Arara (Rivet & Tastevin 1921:452-footnote), Ararawa (Rivet & Tastevin 1921:452), Aranawa (Loukotka 1968:172, probably a typo), Katukina (Tastevin 1925:415). Sawanaua. see Shawannawa. Šawánawá. see Shawannawa Arara. see Shawannawa. Ararawa. see Shawannawa. Aranawa. see Shawannawa. Šawánawá. see Shawanawa. Yawanawa (II.C.viii.b. dialect of Yaminawa). var: Yawanaua. syn: Iskunawa (Tastevin ms.f.; not certain if meant to be synonym of sub-group of Yawanawa). Yawanaua. see Yawanawa. Chaninawa (II.C.viii.b. dialect of Yamianawa). var: Čaninawa, Chandinahua, Tchaninawa, Tyaninawa (Tastevin 1926:34[map], 50). Čaninawa. see Chaninawa. Chandinawa. see Chaninawa. Tchaninawa. see Chaninawa. Tyaninawa. see Chaninawa. Yaminawa-arara (II.C.viii.b. dialect of Yamianawa). Nehanawa (II.C.viii.b, dialect of Yamianawa). var: Nohanaua (Tastevin 1925:49, 1926:415). Nohanaua. see Nehanawa. Amawaka (II.C.viii.c). var: Amaguaca, Amahuaca, Amahuaco, Amajauca, Amenguaca (Maroni 1988[1889-92]:111), Amjemhuaco (Hervás 1800:263), Amjenguaca (Velasco 1981[1788-9]:546), Amouaca (Castelnau 1950-9:IV:377), Andahuaca (Sagols 1901:364), Hámue-huáca (Marqués 1931:197). syn: Impeniteri, Maspo (both syn accoriding to Stiglich 1908:401, 419). hom: Nishinawa, Yumanawa. Amaguaca. see Amawaka. Amahuaca. see Amawaka. Amahuaco. see Amawaka. Amajuaca. see Amawaka. Amenguaca. see Amawaka. Amjemhuaco. see Amawaka. Amjenguaca. see Amawaka. Amouaca. see Amawaka. Andahuaca. see Amawaka. Hámue-huáca. see Amawaka. Impetineri. var: Epetineri, Hepetineri, Ipetineri,. see Amawaka, Mayoruna of the
Jannditatuba River. Hepetineri. var of Impetineri. see Amawaka. Ipetineri. var of Impetineri. see Amawaka. Epetineri. var of Impetineri. see Amawaka. Maspo. var Maspa. see Amawaka. Maspa. var of Maspo. see Amawaka. Nishinawa (II.C.viii.b, dialect of Amawaka). var: Nishidawa, Nishinahua, Nišinawa.
syn: Amawaka (Tastevin 1926:50). Nishidawa. see Nishinawa.
71

Nishinahua. see Nishinawa. Nišinawa. see Nishinawa. Yumanawa (II.C.viii.b, dialect of Amawaka). var: Yumbanawa. syn. Amawaka
(Tastevin 1926:50), Papavo (see). Yumbanawa. see Yumanawa. Papavo. see Yumanawa (Tastevin 1925:415, 1926:50 said Papavo was used by non-
Indians to refer specifically to Yumanawas, while Grubb 1927:101 said nonIndians used Papavo to refer to several pacific ethnic groups in the area of the upper Tarauacá and Jordão Rivers).
Remo of the Môa River (II.C.viii.d). var: Rïmo (Loos & Loos 1973-4). Rïmo. see Remo of the Môa River.
Tuchiunawa (II.C.viii.e). var: Tutxiuanaua, Tutoriunaua (Figuêiredo 1931:245, probably a typo).
Tutxiuanaua. see Tuchiunawa. Tutoriuanaua. see Tuchiunawa.
Chirabo (T2:I). var: Čirabo. Čirabo. see Chirabo, Schiroba (Veigl 1785:106). Korugo (T2:I). var: Corugo, Maioruma Corugo. Corugo. see Korugo. Maioruma Corugo. see Korugo. Marubo of Maucallacta (T2:I). var: Marova, Maruba, Marugo, Moruba. syn:
Mayoruna (Fleck 2007a). hom: Marubo of the Javari Basin. Marova. see Marubo of Maucallacta. Maruba. see Marubo of the Javari Basin, Marubo of Maucallacta. Marugo. see Marubo of Maucallacta. Moruba. see Marubo of Maucallacta. Maya (T2:I uncontacted; Erikson 1994:22). syn: Quixito. hom: Mayo. Quixito. see Maya. Mayo (T2:I). var: Maya (Tastevin 1924b:424). hom: Mayoruna. Pisabo (T2:I). var: Pisabu, Pisahua, Pissabo. Pisabu. see Pisabo. Pisahua. see Pisabo. Pissabo. see Pisabo.
Ruino - (T2:II.B). var: Ruinõ. Ruinõ. see Ruino. Chashono - (T2:II.B). var: Tšažnõ. Tšažnõ. see Chashono. Naibo - (T2:II.B). Naitabohuni - (T2:II.B). Winano - (T2:II.B). var: Winanõ. Winanõ. see Winano. Aino - (T2:II.B). var: Ainõ. Ainõ. see Aino. Shokeno - (T2:II.B). var: Šokenõ. Šokenõ. see Shokeno. Inono - (T2:II.B). var: Inonõ.
72

Inonõ. see Inono. Shirino - (T2:II.B). var: Širinõ. Širinõ. see Shirino. Tonano - (T2:II.B). var: Tonanõ. Tonanõ. see Tonano. Hunino - (T2:II.B). var: Huninõ. Huninõ. see Hunino. Kamaigohuni - (T2:II.B). Tsalguno - (T2:II.B). var: Tsalgunõ. Tsalgunõ. see Tsalguno. Barinawa (T2:II.B). var: Bari-nagua, Warinõ. Bari-nagua. see Barinawa. Warinõ. see Barinawa. Buninawa (T2:II.B). var: Buninahua, Buni-nagua, Buninõ. Buninahua. see Buninawa. Buni-nagua. see Buninawa. Buninõ. see Buninawa. Choromawa (T2:II.B). var: Choromagua. Choromagua. see Choromawa. Kanabae (T2:II.B). var: Canabaë. Canabaë. see Kanabae. Komabo (T2:II.B). var: Comabo, Comavo, Comobo, Cumabo, Cumabu, Cumavo.
syn: Univitza (Richter in Maroni 1988:286, though elsewhere, on pages 297 & 301, Univitzas are listed as a separate entity). Comabo. see Komabo. Comavo. see Komabo. Comobo. see Komabo. Cumabo. see Komabo. Cumabu. see Komabo. Cumavo. see Komabo. Univitza. see Komabo. Inuaka (T2:II.B). var: Inuaca. Inuaca. see Inuaka. Isunobo (T2:II.B). var: Isunoobu. Isunoobu. see Isunobo. Kuinua (T2:II.B). var: Cuinúa. Cuinúa. see Kuinua. Puchanawa (T2:II.B). var: Puchanahua. Puchanahua. see Puchanawa. Ruanawa (T2:II.B). var: Ruanababa (Velasco 1988[1788-9]:546), Ruanagua. Ruanababa. see Ruanawa. Ruanagua. see Ruanawa. Shirino (T2:II.B). var: Ssirino. Ssirino. see Shirino. Shuchanawa (T2:II.B). var. Shuschanagua. Shuschanagua. see Shuchanawa. Zepa (T2:II.B).
Kapuibo (T2:II.C.i). var: Capuibo. Capuibo. see Kapuibo.
73

Sinabo of the Mamoré River (T2:II.C.i). var: Sinabu, Schenábu (Martius 1867:I:416). syn: Gritones (Métraux 1948:449). hom: Shipibo (Stiglich 1908:423, 426).
Sinabu. see Sinabo of the Mamoré River, Sinabo of the Ucayali basin. Schenábu. see Sinabo of the Mamoré River. Gritones. see Sinabo of the Mamoré River.
Tiatinawa (T2:II.C.ii.a). var: Tiatinagua Tiatinagua. see Tiatinawa. Yaguarmayo (T2:II.C.ii.a).
Kiraba (T2:II.C.v.c). var: Quiraba, Quirabae (plural) Quiraba. see Quiraba. Quirabae. see Quiraba.
Awabakebo (T2:II.C.vi.b). var: Awabakëbo. Awabakëbo. see Awabakebo. Hawanbakebo (T2:II.C.vi.b). var: Jawanbakëbo. Jawanbakëbo. see Hawanbakebo. Inubakebo (T2:II.C.vi.b). var: Inubakëbo. Inubakëbo. see Inubakebo. Naibakebo (T2:II.C.vi.b). var: Naibakëbo. Naibakëbo. see Nabakebo. Runubakebo (T2:II.C.vi.b). var: Runubakëbo. Runubakëbo. see Runubakebo. Tsinubakebo (T2:II.C.vi.b). var: Tsinubakëbo. Tsinubakëbo. see Tsinubakebo. Isubenebakebo (T2:II.C.vi.b). var: Isubënëbakëbo. Isubënëbakëbo. see Isubenebakebo. Waribakebo (T2:II.C.vi.b). var: Waribakëbo. Waribakëbo. see Waribakebo. Yawabakebo (T2:II.C.vi.b). var: Yawabakëbo. Yawabakëbo. see Yawabakebo. Yaya (T2:II.C.vi.e). Punhamumanawa (T2:II.C.vi). var: Punhamumanaua, Puyamanawa (Mason 268),
Puyumanawa (Steward & Métraux 1948:555). Puyamanawa. see Punhamumanawa. Puyumanawa. see Punhamumanawa.
Awanawa. var: Aguanaco (Markham 1910:81), Aguanagua, Aguanaga (Velaco 1981(1988-9):546), Haguanahua (Magnin in Maroni 1988:474).
Aguanaco. see Awanawa. Aguanagua. see Awanawa. Aguanaga. see Awanawa. Haguanaga. see Awanawa. Barbudo (T2:II.C.vii.a). syn: Mayoruna of the Huallaga River (Figueroa 1904:111);
Dallus (Figueroa 1904:111). Mayourna of the Huallaga River. see Barbudo. Dallus. see Barbudo. Chai (T2:II.C.vii.a). Kusabatai (T2:II.C.vii.a). var: Cusabatay
74

Cusabatay. see Kusabatai. Makonawa (T2:II.C.vii.a). var: Maconagua. Maconagua. see. Makonawa. Manamanbobo (T2:II.C.vii.a). var: Manamabobo (Rickter in Maroni 1988:281, 291),
Mananabobo (Magnin in Maroni 1988:474). Manamabobo. see Manamanbobo. Mananabobo. see Manamanbobo. Mawishi (T2:II.C.vii.a). var: Mauishi. Mauishi. see Mawishi. Pachicta. see Pachikta. Pahenbakebo (T2:II.C.vii.a). var: Pahenbaquebo. Pahenbaquebo. see Pahenbaquebo. Sinabo of the Ucayali basin (T2: II.C.vii.a). var: Sinabu. hom: Sinabo of the
Mamoré River. Shipinawa (T2:II.C.vii.a). var: Chepenagua (Velasco 1988[1788-9]:546), Chipinawa (Tastevin 1919 :146), Sipinawa (Tastevin 1919:149), Šipinawa Chepenagua. see Shipinawa. Chipinawa. see Shipinawa. Sipinawa. see Shipinawa. Šipinawa. see Shipinawa. Tawakua (T2:II.C.vii.a). var Taguacúa. Taguacúa. see Tawakua. Turkaguane (T2:II.C.vii.a). var: Turcaguane, Turcaguano. Turcaguane. see Turkaguane. Turcaguano. see Turkaguane. Uniwepa (T2:II.C.vii.a). var: Unihuepa. Unihuepa. see Uniwepa. Zaminawa T2:II.C.vii.a) var: Zaminaua. Zaminaua. see Zaminaua. Chakaya. (T2:II.C.vii). var: Chacaya, Čakaya. Chacaya. see Chakaya. Čakaya. see Chakaya. Iltipo (T2:II.C.vii.b). Manannawa (T2:II.C.vii.b). var: Manamanahua, Mananabua (Velasco 1988[17889]:547), Mananava (Maroni 1988[1889-92]:294), Mananagua (Veigl 1785:63), Manava (Maroni 1988[1889-92]:111). Manamanahua. see Manannawa. Mananabua. see Manannawa. Mananava. see Manannawa. Mananagua. see Manannawa. Manava. see Manannawa. Yawabo (T2:C.vii.b). var: Jaobo, Jawabo, Jawabu, Yaobo, Yauavo, Yaubo. Jaobo. see Yawabo. Jawabo. see Yawabo. Jawabu. see Yawabo. Yaobo. see Yawabo. Yauavo. see Yawabo. Yaubo. see Yawabo. Inubo (T2:II.C.vii.c). var: Inobu, Inubu, Ynubu. Inobu. see Inubo.
75

Inubu. see Inubo. Ynubu. see Inubo. Runubo (T2:II.C.vii.c). var: Runubu. Runubu. see Runubo. Kaska (T2:II.C.vii.c). var: Casca. Casca. see Kaska. Puinawa (T2:II.C.vii). var: Puinagua, Puynagua, Puy-nahua. syn: Hotentot (Amich
1988[Pallarés & Calvo 1870]:299; Leceta in Izaguirre 1922-9:IX:41, Izaguirre XII:437). Puinagua. see Puinawa. Puynagua. see Puinawa. Puy-nahua. see Puinawa. Hotentot. see Puinawa. Otentot. see Hotentot. Southern Remo (T2:II.C.vii). var: Rhemo, Rheno, Rimbo (Castelnau 1859:364). hom: Demushbo. Rhemo. see Southern Remo. Rheno. see Southern Remo. Rimbo. see Southern Remo. Remo. see Remo of the Blanco River, Remo of the Jaquirana River, Remo of the Môa River, Southern Remo. Hisisbakebo (T2:II.C.vii). var: Hisisbaquebo, Isis baquebu (Amich 1988[Pallarés & Calvo 1870]:418). Hisisbaquebo. see Hisisbakebo. Isis baquebu. see Hisisbakebo Shunuman (T2:II.C.vii). var: Schunuman Schunuman. see Shunuman. Sakaya (T2:II.C.vii). var: Sacaya, Sacuya, Sakuya, Sayaca (Mason 1948:266; probably a misprint of Sacaya), Shacaya (Estrella 1905:91). Sacaya. see Sakaya. Sacuya. see Sakaya. Sakuya. see Sakaya. Sayaca. see Sakaya. Shakaya. see Sakaya.
Tushinawa (T2:II.C.viii.a). var: Tuchinawa, Tuchinaua, Tochinawa, Tošinawa, Tušinawa,
Tošinawa. see Tushinawa. Tušinawa. see Tushinawa. Tuchinawa. see Tushinawa. Tuchinaua. see Tushinawa. Tochinawa. see Tushinawa. Aninawa (T2:II.C.viii.b). Deenawa (T2:II.C.viii.b). var: Deenahua. Deenahua. var: Deenawa. Mashonawa (T2:II.C.viii.b). var: Machonawa, Masrodawa, Masronahua (note: the
Panoan pronunciation would have a retroflex sh). Machonawa. see Mashonawa. Masrodawa. see Mashonawa. Masronahua. see Mashonawa.
76

Morunawa (T2:II.C.viii.b). var: Morunahua. Morunahua. see Morunawa. Shaninawa (T2:II.C.viii.b). var: Shaninahua. Shaninahua. see Shaninawa. Shishinawa (T2:II.C.viii.b). var: Shishinahua. Shishinahua. see Shishinawa. Arawa (T2:II.C.viii.c). var: Araua, Aragua. Araua. see Arawa. Aragua. see Arawa. Biubakeu (T2:II.C.viii.c). var: Viuvaqueu. Viuvaqueu. see Biubakeu. Espino (T2:II.C.viii.c). Inubakeu (T2:II.C.viii.c). var: Inuvaqueu. Inuvaqueu. see Inubakeu. Yuminawa (T2:II.C.viii.c). var: Yuminahua, Yuminagua. Yuminagua. see Yuminawa. Yuminahua. see Yuminawa. Yura (T2:II.C.viii.c). var: Yora. hom: Parkenawa. Yora. var of Yura. see Parkenawa, Yura.
Awanateo (T2:III). var: Auanateo, Avantiu (Rivet & Tastevin 1921:452), Hahuanateo (Magnin in Maroni 1988:474).
Auanateo. see Awanateo. Avantiu. see Awanateo. Hahuanateo. see Awanateo. Binabo (T2:III). var: Binabu, Viabu. Binabu. see Binabo. Viabu. see Binabo. Binannawa (T2:III). var: Binanawa, Binannaua Binanawa. see Binannaua. Binannaua. see Binannaua. Chunti (T2:III). Diabo (T2:III). var: Diabu. Diabu. see Diabo. Isunawa (T2:III). var: Isnagua (typo in Girbal 192X:161), Isunagua, Ysunagua, Isnagua. see Isunawa. Isunagua. see Isunawa. Ysunagua. see Isunawa. Kamariniwa (T2:III). var: Camarinigua. Camarinigua. see Kamariniwa. Kontanawa (T2:III). var: Contanawa, Kontanua. Contanawa. see Kontanawa. Kontanaua. see Kontanawa. Kurunawa (T2:III). var: Coronaua, Koronawa. syn Kununawa (Tastevin 1929:12). Coronawa. see Kurunawa. Koronaua. see Kurunawa. Kustanawa (T2:III). var: Kustanaua, Custanawa. Custanawa. see Kustanawa. Kustanaua. see Kustanawa. Mochobo (T2:III). var: Mochovo, Mochubu.
77

Mochovo. see Mochobo. Mochubu. see Mochobo. Nianawa (T2:III). var: Niamagua, Nianagua, Niaragua. Niamagua. see Nianawa. Nianagua. see Nianawa. Niaragua. see Nianawa. Ormiga (T2:III). Pakanawa (T2:III). var: Pacanaua. Pacanaua. see Pakanawa Pitsobo (T2:III). var: Pichabo, Pichobo, Pičabo, Pičobo, Pitsobu. Pichobo. see Pitsobo. Pichabo. see Pitsobo. Pičabo. see Pitsobo. Pičobo. see Pitsobo. Pitsobu. see Pitsobo. Soboibo (T2:III). var: Soboyobo. Soboyobo. see Soboibo. Trompetero (T2:III). Zurina (T2:III).
Bamunawa (T2:IV). var: Vamunawa. Vamunawa. see Bamunawa. Bitinawa (T2:IV). var: Biti naua. Biti naua. see Bitinawa. Buinawa (T2:IV). var: Vuinawa. Vuinawa. see Buinawa. Chipanawa (T2:IV). var: Chipanagua. Chipanagua. see Chipanawa. Eskinawa (52:IV). Hsunawa (T2:IV). var: Hsu-naua. Hsu-naua. see Hsunawa. Isaknawa (T2:IV). var: Ysacnagua. Ysacnagua. see Isaknawa. Kununawa (T2:IV). var: Kununaua. Kununaua. see Kununawa. (fix as syn of Kurunawa) Kayubo (T2:IV). var: Cayubo. Cayubo. see Kayubo. Komanawa (T2:IV). var: Camunagua, Comanagua, Comanahua, Comunagua. Camunahua. see Komanawa. Comanahua. see Komanawa. Comanagua. see Komanawa. Comunahua. see Komanawa. Michanawa (T2:IV). var: Michanahua. Michanahua. see Michanawa. Panatawa (T2:IV). var: Panatagua. Panatagua. see Panatawa. Pimisnawa (T2:IV). var: Pimisnahua. Pimisnahua. see Pimisnawa. Rununawa (T2:IV). Suyabo (T2:IV). var: Suabu, Suyabu.
78

Suabu. see Suyabo. Suyabu. see Suyabo. Takanawa (T2:IV). var: Takanaua. Takanaua. see Takanawa. Tiuchunawa (T2:IV). var: Tyuchunaua. Tyuchunaua. see Tiuchunawa. Tsawesbo (T2:IV). var: Tsawësbo. Tsawësbo. see Tsawesbo. Uniabo (T2:IV). var: Uniabu. Uniabu. see Uniabo. Unibo (T2:IV).
79

Appendix B: Linguistic data available for Panoan languages and dialects.
The present appendix provides a current list of available first-hand data for the Panoan languages. For the extinct (†) languages (bold) and dialects (italic), all original sources are listed, along with some notable reproductions of these. For the extant languages and dialects, all original sources preceding 1950 are listed, along with a selection of the more useful (relative to the available materials for that language or dialect) post-1950 sources containing original or previously unpublished linguistic data. Order of entries follows Table 1.
Matses Peruvian Matses - Fields (1970) 452-entry lexicon Fields (1973) grammatical study Jakway (1975) 357-entry lexicon collected by H. Fields in 1970 and 1975 Fields & Wise (1976) phonology Kneeland & Fields (1976) phonology Kneeland (1973, 1982, 1996) grammatical topics Kneeland (1979) pedagogical grammar and a 750-entry vocabulary Fleck (1997), Harder & Fleck (1997), Fleck & Harder (2000), Fleck et al. (1999), Fleck et al. (2002), Fleck & Voss (2006), Voss & Fleck (in press) folk classification and/or ethnolinguistics Fleck (2001, 2002, 2005, 2006a, 2006b, 2006c, 2007b, 2008a, 2010) grammatical studies Fleck (2003) 125-page phonology and grammar Fleck (2007d, in progress) ethnohistory/linguistics Fleck (forthcoming a) 4000-entry dictionary Ludwig et al. (2010), Munro et al. (in press) grammatical studies Bazilian Matses - Souza (1979) 243-entry lexicon Carvalho (1992) 185-page grammar sketch Dorigo (1995, 2002), Dorigo & Costa (1996), Costa & Dorigo (2005) grammatical studies Dorigo (2001) 247-page phonology †Paud Usunkid - Fields (1970) 283-entry lexicon Fleck (in progress) 20-word list collected from Fields’ late informant’s husband partial reproduction: Jakway (1975) 33 entries copied from Fields
Korubo Korubo - Oliveira (2009) 119-page phonology Fleck (in progress) 22-word list collected from Matis *Chankueshbo - Fleck (in progress) phonology, grammar, and 400-word lexicon Fleck & Voss (2006) 25 animal names
*Kulina of the Curuçá River - Fleck (in progress) phonology, grammar, and 400word lexica of all three dialects
Fleck (2010) grammatical study Add SIL document and note it is mixed with Matis Fleck (2007a) historical and lexical study, 242-entry lexicon *Kapishtana - Fields (1970) 404-entry lexicon and 85 elicited sentences partial reproduction: Jakway (1975) 156 entries copied from Fields *Mawi - Fields (1970) 124-entry lexicon (called “Marubo” by Fields) Coutinho (1998) 60 words
80

Fleck & Voss (2006) 51 animal names *Chema - Fields (1970) 283-entry lexicon and 22 elicited sentences
partial reproduction: Jakway (1975) 37 entries copied from Fields †Demushbo - Fleck (in progress) phonology, grammar and 400-word lexicon
Fleck & Voss (2006) 25 animal names Fleck (2010) grammatical study Matis - Souza (1979) 340-entry lexicon Ferreira (2000) grammatical study Spanghero (2000a/2001) 143-page phonology Spanghero (2000b) phonology Ferreira (2001a/2001b) 171-page grammar sketch Ferreria (2005) 216-page grammar Ferreira (2008) gramamtical study Spanghero (2005) 1530-entry dictionary and lexical study Fleck & Voss (2006) 43 animal names Fleck (2010) comparative grammatical study Fleck (in progress) comparative phonology and grammar Dienst & Fleck (2009) 98 animal names †Mayoruna of the Jandiatuba River - Alviano (1957:44-56) 503-word lexicon complete reproduction: Fleck (in progress) reproduction and phonology †Mayoruna of the Amazon River †Settled Mayoruna - Castelnau (1850-9:V:299-300) 54-word list complete reproductions: Martius (1867:II:238); Fleck (in progress) reproduction
and phonology. †Wild Mayoruna - Castelnau (1850-9:V:300-301) 80-word list collected by M.
Deville complete reproductions: Martius (1867:II:238-9); Fleck (in progress)
reproduction and phonology. †Mayoruna of Tabatinga (“Maxuruna”) - Martius (1867:II:236-7) 137-word lexicon
collected by Spix complete reproduction: Fleck (in progress) reproduction and phonology. Kasharari - Pickering (1973) 72-word list collected in 1962 Cabral & Monserrat (1987) 7-page phonological analysis and 141-entry lexicon
(though most are Portuguese borrowings) Lanes (2000) 164-word list Sousa (2004) 99-page phonology including a 378-word lexicon Couto (2005) detailed phonology
Kashibo Kashibo - Tessmann (1930:154-5) 220-word list plus 272 terms in the ethnographic text Shell (1950) phonology Shell (1957, 1973/1975) grammatical studies Shell (1959, 1987) ca. 2100-entry vocabulary Wistrand (1968) 81-page grammatical study Wistrand (1971, 1978) grammatical studies Wistrand (1969) 359-page folklore text study Wistrand (1984) ca. 350 animal and ca. 190 plant names Cortez (1980) phonology (have not been able to obtain it)
` Frank (1993) 13 unparsed texts Valle (2009) 119-page grammatical study
81

Zariquiey (2012) full-length phonology and grammar Zariquiey & Fleck (in press) grammatical study partial repproductions: Key (2000) compiled a 648-entry lexicon based on Shell
(1959, 1987). Kakataibo - Tessmann (1930:154) 30-word list Rubo - Tessmann (1930:154) 30-word list Nokaman - Tessmann (1930:184-7) 228-word list plus 139 terms in the
ethnographic text Zariquiey
Chakobo/Pakawara Chakobo - Cardús (1886:315) 36-word list Nordenskiöld (1911:230-40) 78-entry lexicon Hanke (1956) 360-entry lexicon and phonological notes Prost (1960, 1967b) phonology plus 104-/66-entry lexica Prost (1962) grammatical study Prost (1965/1967a) tagmemic grammar Prost (1970) includes vocabulary? (do not have it) Zingg (1998) ca. 5000-entry dictionary with 44-page grammar sketch Valenzuela (2005a) grammatical study Valenzuela & Iggesen (2007) phonological-grammatical study Iggesen (in progress) full-length phonology and grammar complete reproduction: Créqui-Montfort & Rivet (1913) of Cardús and Nordenskiöld partial reproductions: Pauly (1928:138) 27 words copied from Cardús; Key (2000) 839-entry lexicon compiled from various unpublished microfiche by Prost; Montaño (1987) copied 60 words from Prost (1960) and 48 words and frases from Prost (1970). Pakawara - Orbigny (1838:I:164, II:263) 23-word list and brief phonological notes Heath (1883) 52-word list Armentia (1887) 57-word list and 2 pages of grammatical notes Armentia (1888) (have not been able to obtain it) Armentia (1905:114) 20-word list, same ast 1887? Créqui-Montfort & Rivet (1913) reproduction of Orbigny, Heath, and Armentia, plus an unpublished lexicon collected by Orbigny (= 414 words total from Orbigny) East (1969-70) word lists and phonological study (do not have it) East & East (1969) word list (do not have it, but see reproduction in Key) complete reproductions: Cardús (1886:326) of Orbigny; Rivet (1910:20-4) of Orbigny, Heath, and Armentia; Keller (1974a:170/1974b:141) of Orbigny (n.b.: Keller called it “Maropa/(Pakaguara)” in the German edition, but only “Maropa” in the English edition); Ricketson (1943) English translation of Créqui-Montfort & Rivet partial reproductions: Orton (1876) copied 8 words (and the Maropa mistake) from Keller; Key (2000) 93-entry lexicon copied from East, and also, separately coded, many entries copied from Orbigny, Heath, Armentia and Créqui-Montfort & Rivet.
†Karipuna - Martius (1867:II:240-2) 162-word list collected by Natterer ca. 1829 Pauly (1928:142-3) 24-word list Castillo (1929:135-7) 181-word lexicon Barbosa (1947:163-174) 502-word lexicon collected in 1927
82

Hanke (1949:7-12) 168-word lexicon, phonological notes, and lexical comparison
complete reproduction: Montaño (1987) of Castillo and Pauly partial reproductions: Keller (1874a:132/1874b:112) copied 50 words from
Martius; Orton (1876) copied 9 words from Keller †Atsawaka/Yamiaka
†Atsawaka - Nordenskiöld (1905:275-6/1906:526-7) 49-word lexicon Créqui-Monfort & Rivet (1913:46-78) reproduction of above plus unpublished list collected by Nordenskiöld = 223 words total
†Yamiaka - Nordenskiöld (1905:275-6/1906:526-7) 46-word list Créqui-Monfort & Rivet (1913:46-78) reproduction of above plus an unpublished list collected by Nordenskiöld = 118 words total partial reproduction: Rivet (1910:225-6) copied 26 words from Nordenskiöld
†Arazaire - Llosa (1906b) 133-word lexicon complete reproductions: Rivet (1910:227-36) of Llosa; Créqui-Monfort & Rivet (1913:46-78) of Llosa.
†Remo of the Blanco River - Leuque (1927:538-40) list of 179 words and phrases †Kashinawa of the Tarauacá River - Tastevin (ms.c) 144-entry lexicon
partial reproductions: 125 entries in Tastevin ms. b; 128 entries in Rivet & Tastevin (1927-9, 1932)
Marubo (of the Javari Basin) - Boutle (1964) 162-entry lexicon Fields (1970) 310-entry lexicon; 121-entry lexicon collected by H. Scheltamo Souza (1979) 332-word list Silva (1952) word list (have not been able to obtain it) Kennell (1976, 1978) phonology and grammar Costa (1992) 287-page phonology and grammar sketch Costa (2000a) 261-page phonology Costa (1995, 1998, 2000b, 2002a) grammatical studies Costa (2002b) phonological study Costa & Dorigo (2005) grammatical study Dorigo & Costa (1996) grammatical study Soares et al. (2000) phonological study Ruedas (2002) sociolinguistic study Fleck & Voss (2006) list of 49 animal names Fleck (2007a) comparative Marubo-Kulina vocabulary Dienst & Fleck (2009) 129 animal names partial reproduction: Jakway (1975) 156-entry lexicon copied from Fields
Katukina - Rivet (1920) 16-word list Rivet & Tastevin (1927-9/1932) 317 words Tastevin ms. h. ca. 1320-entry lexicon, transcription and translation of 1 myth, collected in 1923. Hall (1976) 59 words compiled by Hall from Katukina readers Barros (1987) 112-page phonological study Aguiar (1988) 78-page grammatical study Aguiar (1994a) 430-page phonology and grammar including 983-entry lexicon Aguiar (2001) grammatical study Lanes (2000) 163-word list Key (2000) 1058-entry lexicon collected by G. R. Kennell, Jr. Lima (2002) >100 animal names in tables and text
Katukina de Olinda - Aguiar (1993) 30-word list
83

Katukina de Sete Estrelas - Aguiar (1993) 30-word list †Kanamari - Chandless (1866:118) 4-word list
Chandless (1869:302) 1 word Anonymous (1965) 76-word list complete reproduction: Rivet & Tastevin (1927-29/1932) of Chandless (1866) †Kulina of São Paulo de Olivença (“Culino”) - Martius (1867:II:242-4) 243-word
list collected by Spix in 1820 complete reproduction: Fleck (2007a) reprodcution and ethnohistory. *Poyanawa - Tastevin ms.e. ca. 1450-entry lexicon collected in 1922 Tastevin ms.h. ca. 1040-entry lexicon Carvalho (1931:239-245) 383-entry lexicon Paula (1992) 133-page phonology and grammar including a 267-entry lexicon partial reproduction: Figueirêdo (1939:103) 31 words copied from Carvalho *Iskonawa - Russell (1960) 602-entry lexicon Kensinger (1961) 689-entry lexicon Whiton (1964) 64-word list and an additional 25 words in the text Loos & Loos (1971) list of 824 words and phrases, text with 35 sentences Krokoszyński (2007) 136-entry lexicon *Nukini - Tastevin (ms.i) 15-word list from a man who worked with them 1902-1906 FUNAI (1981) 24-word list Okidoi (2004) 101-page phonology including a 693-entry lexicon (most entries
are phonological variants; the actual number of lexemes is ca. 210) Aguiar (2004) 139-entry lexicon *Nawa - Chandless (1869:305) 1 word Rivet & Tastevin (1927-9/1932) list of 39 verbs Montagner (2002:110-111) 38-word list †Remo of the Jaquirana River - Carvalho (1929/1931:254-6) 109-word list partial reproduction: Figueirêdo (1939:204-5) 20 words copied from Carvalho
Shipibo-Konibo Shipibo - Armentia (1898:43-91) ca. 3800-entry vocabulary Carrasco (1901:205-11) 167-word list collected in 1846 Steinen (1904:32-128) 2513- and 3108-entry vocabularies with 9 pages of combined grammatical notes prepared by two unknown Franciscans in 1877 and 1810-2 Alemany (1906) 2046-word vocabulary and 14/9 pages of grammatical notes Tessmann (1929) 369-word vocabulary and 24 pages of grammatical notes complete reproduction: Izaguirre (1927) of Alemany Konibo - Marcoy (1862-7:X:182/1969:I:674-5) 119-word list Carrasco (1901:205-11) 167-word list collected in 1846 Marqués (1903, 1931:117-195) ca. 3300-entry vocabulary and 15 pages of grammatical notes prepared in 1800 Reich & Stegelmann (1903) 29-word list Farabee (1922:88-95) 464-entry lexicon and conjugation paradigms for 4 verbs Anonymous (1927) 2400-entry vocabulary Tessmann (1929) 395-word vocabulary and 24 pages of grammatical notes Shipibo-Konibo (post-1940) - Lauriault (1948) phonology Faust (1973) pedagogical grammar Guillen (1974) lexical study (have not been able to obtain it) Weisshar & Illius (1990) 25-page grammar Loriot et al. (1993) ca. 5200-entry dictionary with 55-page grammar sketch
84

García (1994) 77-page phonology García (1993) 10 unparsed texts Valenzuela (1997) 134-page grammatical study Valenzuela (1998, 1999, 2002a, 2002b, 2003a, 2005b, 2010a, 2010b)
grammatical studies Valenzuela et al. (2001) phonological study Valenzuela (2003b) 1029-page phonology and grammar Elias (2000) 158-page phonological study partial reproduction: Key (2000) 917-entry lexicon compiled using Loriot et al. Kapanawa of the Tapiche River - Tessmann (1930:157) 32-word list Anonymous (1955) 66-word list (cited by Aguiar 1994c:99). Loos (1963) discourse study Loos (1967/1969) 233-page transformation grammar and phonological study Loos (1976a, 1999a) grammatical studies Loos (1986) phonological study Loos & Loos (1998/2003) ca. 4400-entry dictionary with 43-page grammar
sketch Hall & Loos (1978[1973]) grammatical study Hall & Loos (1980[1976]) 21 unparsed texts in 2 volumes, 175 and 261 pages Hall (1981/1986) discourse study Jakway (1975) 344-entry lexicon collected by E. Loos in 1971 Elias (2006) 274-page phonological study Elias (2009) phonological study Fleck & Krokoszyński (in progress) lexical comparison and ethnohistory *Pano †Pano - Castelnau (1850-9:V:292-3, 301-2) 94-word lexicon and brief
grammatical notes Cardús (1886:324) 42-word lexicon, some appear to be copied from Castelnau,
but others are original, perhaps from some unpublished manuscript Navarro (1903) ca. 3000-entry vocabulary with 23 pages of grammatical notes Tessmann (1930:120-4) 261-word list plus 208 terms in the ethnographic text Marqués (1901/1931:198-228) ca. 1600-entry vocabulary prepared in 1800 Shell (1965/1975b) original lexical data included in cognate sets Parker (1992) 626-word lexicon, 230 sentences, and 2 short texts Parker (1994) phonology Gomes (2009) 151-page morphology (based on Navarro (1903) and Parker
(1992) complete reproductions: Martius (1867:II:298-9) of Castelnau; Izaguirre (1927)
of Navarro; d’Ans (1970) of Navarro partial reproduction: Pauly (1928:138) 10 words copied from Cardús (and 2
from an unknown source) *Shetebo - Tessmann (1928:230/1929:241-2, 246) 35-word list
Tessmann (1930:104-105) 7 terms in the Chama ethnographic text Loriot et al. (1993) 4 Shetebo forms included in Shipibo dictionary Marcoy (1862-7:XII:206) 4 interjections (see footnote 16 for alleged Shetebo lexica) *Pisquino - Loriot et al. (1993) 14 Pisquino forms included in Shipibo dictionary †Sensi - Smyth & Lowe (1836:229) list of 12 star/constellation names Tessmann (1930:188-9) 35-word list complete reproduction: Fleck (forthcoming b) of Smyth & Lowe and Tessmann
85

Kashinawa of the Ibuaçu River Brazilian Kashinawa - Abreu (1914/1941) 1779-entry vocabulary, 22-page phonology/grammar, text collection of 5926 sentences Tastevin ms.a. ca. 2000 entry lexicon, collected in 1924 Tastevin ms.g. 510-entry lexicon, collected in 1924 Carvalho & Sobrinho (1929) 540-entry vocabulary (have not seen it yet). Camargo (1987) 88-page phonology and grammar sketch Camargo (1991) 448-page phonology and grammar Camargo (1995) ca. 2800-entry lexicon Camargo (1998, 2000, 2002, 2003, 2005) grammatical studies Lanes (2000) 164-word list collected by E. Camargo partial reproduction: Rivet & Tastevin (1927-29/1932) published 248 words from Abreu Peruvian Kashinawa - Kensinger (1963) phonology Cromack (1967/1976) 158-page narrative text study Cromack (1968) 381-page discourse study, Swadesh 100 word list d’Ans & Cortez (1973) study of color terms Montag (1978[1973]) grammatical study Montag (1979/2004) pedagogical grammar Montag (1981) ca. 6000-entry dictionary with 59-page grammar sketch Montag (1992) 171-page folklore text study †Kapanawa of the Juruá River - Rivet & Tastevin (1927-9, 1932) 397 words partial reproduction: Fleck & Krokoszyński (in progress) lexical comparison study †Paranawa - Tastevin (ms.g) ca. 350-entry list collecte in 1924 reproduction: Loukotka (1963:34) 34 word-list fromTastevin
Yaminawa Chitonawa - Lord (1996) 206-entry lexicon Mastanawa - Tastevin (ms.g) ca. 440-entry mixed Mastanawa-Chaninawa list Manus (1959) 270-word list Loos (1976b) list of 966 words and phrases and 15 pages of texts partial reproduction: Loukotka (1963:35) 30-word list from Tastevin Chaninawa - Tastevin (ms.g) ca. 440-entry mixed Mastanawa-Chaninawa list Manus (1959) 152-word list partial reproduction: Loukotka (1963:35) 30-word list from Tastevin †Nehanawa - Tastevin (ms.f) ca. 430-entry list collecte in 1924 partial reproduction: Loukotka (1963:34) 22-word list from Tastevin Parkenawa - Faust (1984) 171-entry lexicon Lord (1996) 205-entry lexicon Instituto Lingüístico de Verano (1997a, 1997b, 2001, 2005) readers. Shanenawa - Aguiar (1993) 22-word list Cândido (1998) 139-page phonology including a 20-entry lexicon Cândido (2004) 264-page grammar including a 361-entry lexicon Cândido (2004b) phonological study Cândido (2004c, 2005a, 2005b) grammatical studies Cândido & Amarante Ribeiro (2008) grammatical study Amarante Ribeiro & Cândido (2005b) grammatical study Amarante Ribeiro & Cândido (2009) color terms Lanes (2000) 162-word list Sharanawa - Manus (1959) combined Sharanawa-Marinawa 391-word list
86

Frantz (1973) grammatical study Scott & Frantz (1978[1973], 1974) grammatical studies Loos (1975a) phonological study Jakway (1975) 365-entry lexicon collected by E. Scott in 1971 Scott (2004) ca. 3000-entry vocabulary Marinawa - Manus (1959) combined Sharanawa-Marinawa 392-word list Pike & Scott (1962) phonological study Shawannawa - Cunha (1993) 174-page phonology and grammar Lanes (2000) 158-word list Peuvian Yaminawa - d’Ans (1972a) ca. 700-entry lexicon Jakway (1975) 80-entry lexicon collected by E. Scott in 1969 Key (2000) 1129-entry lexicon collected by I. Shive Faust & Loos (2002) 174-page grammar sketch Eakin (1991) pedagogical grammar Loos (2006) phonological study Brazilian Yaminawa - Reich & Stegelmann (1903) 71-entry list Tastevin ms. h. ca. 600-entry lexicon Boutle (n.d.) 39-word list Landin (1972) 278-entry lexicon Lanes (2000) 163-word list Couto (2010) 221-page phonology complete reproduction: Rivet & Tastevin (1927-29/1932) of Reich &
Stegelmann Yaminawa-arara - Souza (2004) 85-page phonology including 125-word list
Sousa (in progress) grammar Yawanawa - Tastevin (ms.f) ca. 250-entry list colleted in 1924 (labelled
“Yawanawa-Iskunawa”) Garcia (2002) 166-page phonological and morphological study Paula (2004) 302-page phonology and grammar, including a 528-entry lexicon Lanes (2000) 163-word list reproduction: Loukotka (1963:35) 26-word list from Tastevin
Amawaka Amawaka - Reich & Stegelmann (1903) 83-entry list (called it “Kashinawa”) Farabee (1922:110-4) list of 305 words and 30 phrases Tessmann (1930:172) 39-word list plus 135 terms in the ethnographic text Osborn (1948) phonology d’Ans (1972b) 766 botanical and zoological terms d’Ans & Van den Eynde (1972) 1502-entry lexicon Hyde (1980) ca. 2500-entry vocabulary Hyde (1978[1973]) grammatical study Russell (1958) phonology Russell & Russel (1959) phonology Russell (1965/1975) 112/108-page transformational grammar Sparing (1998) grammatical study Sparing (2007) 82-page grammar sketch complete reproduction: Rivet & Tastevin (1927-29/1932) of Reich & Stegelmann’s “Kaschinaua” lexicon partial reproduction: Rivet & Tastevin (1927-29/1932) published 78 words from Farabee †Nishinawa - Tastevin (ms.f) ca. 200-entry list collected in 1924
87

reproduction: Loukotka (1963:34) 21-word list from Tastevin †Yumanawa - Tastevin (ms.g) ca. 230-entry list collected in 1924
reproduction: Loukotka (1963:34) 26-word list from Tastevin †Remo of the Môa River -Loos (1973-4) 2 lists of 70 and 81 words and phrases †Tuchiunawa - Carvalho (1931:249-252) 127-word list collected in 1923
Linguistic studies on the Panoan family in general (Unlike the above entries in this appendix, the following list does not exclude studies based solely on second-hand data.)
linguisitc synopses and internal classifications - Grasserie 1890 classification Brinton (1891) Panoan language inventory Steinen (1904) Panoan language inventory Rivet (1924) classification (have not seen it yet) Schmidt (1926) classification Rivet & Tastevin (1927-9/1932) classification Loukotka (1935, 1939, 1968) classifications Mason (1950) classification Rivet & Loukotka (1952) classification McQuown (1955) classification (following Mason) Tovar (1961), Tovar & Tovar (1984) classifications Shell (1965/1975) classification based on reconstruction Voegelin & Voegelin (1977) classificaiton Ruhlen (1987) classificaiton Migliazza & Campbell (1988) synopsis (following Shell and d’Ans) Bright (1992) classification (following Ruhlen), language inventory Kaufman (1994) classification Campbell (1997) classification (same as Kaufman 1994) Loos (1999) synopsis, classification Valenzuela (2003b) synonpsis, classificaion Solís (2003:168-174) synopsis Adelaar (2004:418-22) synopsis Amarante Ribeiro (2006) classification Fleck (2006d) synopsis Fleck (2007a) classification
comparisons and reconstructions - Grassierie (1890) phonological comparison Rivet (1910) lexical comparison Créqui-Monfort & Rivet (1913) lexical, phonological & grammatical comparisons Hestermann (1919) orthographic comparison Rivet & Tastevin (1927-9/1932) lexical comparison Shell (1965/1975) reconstruction of seven Peruvian Panoan languages Loos (1970, 1975b, 1976a, 1978c, d, e; 1999b; 2005) grammatical comparisons Ibarra (1982) lexical comparison of languages of the Bolivian subroup Aguiar (1994b) grammatical comparison Valenzuela (2000, 2003a) grammatical comparisons Lanes (2000) phonological & lexical comparison of Brazilian Panoan languages Lanes (2002) acoustic analysis of Panoan vowels González (2005) phonological comparison Zariquiey (2006) reconstruction of Panoan pronouns Amarante Ribeiro & Cândido (2005c, 2008) lexical/grammatical comparisons
88

Ferreira (2008) gramamtical comparison bibliographies - Steinen (1904:21*-26*) list of sources of linguistic data available
for each Panoan language Abreu (1941[1914]) discussion of thithterto available Panoan linguistic sources Hestermann (1910, 1913) bibliographical notes on Panoan linguistics Rivet & Tastevin (1927-9/1932) bibliography of (almost) all sources of Panoan
linguistic data available at the time Kensinger (1983/1985) annotated Panoan ethnographic and linguistic
bibliography Chavarría (1983) annotated Panoan and Takanan bibliography Frank (1987) annotated Kashibo bibliography Aguiar (1994c) annotated bibliography for all Panoan topics Erikson et al. (1994) nearly exhuausive annotated bibliography for all Panoan
topics (internet updates) Fabre (1998) bibliography for all Panoan and Tanakan topics (internet updates) Erikson (2000) annotated bibliography for all topics on the Mayoruna branch
89

Appendix C: Geographic locations of Panoan languages and dialects
The present appendix gives location information for all the Panoan languages/dialects for which linguistic information is available (Part 1) and for all ethnonyms puported to be designate Panoan speakers (Part 2). Order of entries in Part 1 follows the order in Table 1, and those in Part two follow Table 2. For extant languages/varieties, current locations are given, followed by historical locations, if different from current location. For extinct languages/dialects the earliest location I have found is given. Abbreviations: af = affluent of (i.e., tributary of); l = lower (course of X River); lb = left bank (facing downstream); m = middle; R = River; rb = right bank; u = upper. Depending on length restrictions, this appendix will either accompany or be replaced by maps, or it may be combined with Appendix A.
Part 1: Matses - Javari (Yavarí) & Jaquirana (Yaquerana) Rs & their afs, Peru & Brazil.
Peruvian Matses - lb of Javari-Jaquirana R, Gálvez R (lb af Javari R), Chobayacu Creek (lb af Jaquirana R), Peru.
Bazilian Matses - rb of Javari R, both banks of Jaquirana R, Curuçá R (rb af Javari R), Lobo Creek (rb af Jaquirana R), Brazil & one village in Peru.
†Paud Usunkid - rb of l Curuçá R (rb af Javari R), Brazil. Korubo - l Ituí R (lb af l Itacoai R), Brazil.
Korubo - rb of l Ituí R. *Chankueshbo - lb of l Ituí R. *Kulina of the Curuçá River - m Curuçá R, Brazil. *Kapishtana - rb of m Curuçá R *Mawi - rb of m Curuçá R. *Chema - lb of m Curuçá R. †Demushbo - Brazil, possilby Quixito R (lb af Itacoaí R, in turn lb af l Javari R). Matis - m Ituí R (lb af l Itacoai R), Brazil. †Mayoruna of the Jandiatuba River - Jandiatuba R (rb af Amazon R), Brazil, to
where they purportedly migrated from Ucayali R (Peru) via the Javari basin (Alviano 1957:43). †Mayoruna of the Amazon River - Amazon & l Javari Rs, Peru & Brazil. †Settled Mayoruna - town of Cochiquinas (rb of Amazon R), Peru (Castelnau 1850-9:V:40, 299). †Wild Mayoruna - mouth of Itacoaí R (lb af Javari R, near its confluence with Amazon R), Brazil (Castelnau 1850-9:V:53, 300). †Mayoruna of Tabatinga - near town of Tabatinga (lb of Amazon R), Brazil (Martius 1867:II:236, Spix & Martius 1823-31:III:1188). Kasharari - Abunã R (lb af u Madeira R), Marmelo R (lb af Abunã R), & Curuquetê R (rb af Ituxi R, rb af Purus R), Brazil. Kashibo - Pachitea & Aguaitía Rs (lb afs Ucayali R) & their afs, & Inuya R (rb af l Urubamba R), Peru. Kashibo - Pachitea R, Aguaitía R, Sungaroyacu R (lb af u Pachitea R), & Shamboyacu R (lb af u Aguaitía R), Peru (Zariquiey 2012). Kakataibo - San Alejandro R (rb af Aguaytía R), Peru (Wistrand 1969:15). Rubo - u Aguaitía R, Peru (Wistrand 1969:15). Nokaman - headwaters of Inuya R (Tessmann 1930:172), Zariquiey
90

Chakobo/Pakawara - Beni & Mamoré Rs (which join to form the Madeira R) & their afs, Bolivia.
Chakobo - Ivon R (lb af Beni R) & Yata R (lb af Mamoré R), Boliva Pakawara - confluence of Beni & Mamoré R (d’Orbigny 1839); Beni R (Heath
1883); Beni R, Mamoré R, l Madre de Dios R, u Madeira R & Abunã R (lb af u Madeira R) (Créqui-Monfort & Rivet (1913:21); in recent times uncontacted Pakawaras reported in Chakobo territory (O. Iggesen, personal communication). †Karipuna - u Madeira R (Martius 1867:I:416, Keller 1874a, Pauly 1926:142, Castillo 1929:136, Barbosa 1947:163), Bolivia & Brazil. †Atsawaka/Yamiaka - area of Inambari & Tambopata Rs (both rb afs Madre de Dios R), Peru. †Atsawaka - Carama or Atsahuaca R (lb af Tambopata R) & u Chaspa R (rb af Inambari R), Peru (Nordenskiöld (1905:272). †Yamiaka - near mouth of Yaguarmayo R (rb af Inambari R) (Nordenskiöld 1905:271), upper Inambari R. (Stiglich 1905:428), Peru. †Arazaire - Marcapata/Arasa R. (lb af Inambari R), Peru (Llosa 1906a:pp). †Remo of the Blanco River - Blanco R (rb af Tapiche R), Peru (López 1913, Salvador 1972); possibly extended to Brazilian side of Javari R (Krokoszyński & Fleck, this volume). †Kashinawa of the Tarauacá River - Tarauacá R (af Envira R, rb af u Juruá R). Marubo - u Curuçá R (rb af Javari R), u Ituí R (lb af l Itacoaí R, lb af l Javari R), Brazil. Katukina - u Juruá R area, Brazil. Katukina de Olinda - Gregório R (af u Juruá R), Brazil (Aguiar 1993). Katukina de Sete Estrelas - between Campinas R (rb af u Juruá R) & Vai-Bem R
(af Liberdade R, in turn rb af u Juruá R), Brazil (Aguiar 1993). †Kanamari - South of u Purus R above Rixala R (Chandless 1866); vicinity of
town of Feijó (on Juruá R) (Anonymous (1965), Brazil. †Kulina of São Paulo de Olivença - Jandiatuba, Acuruí, & Cumatiá Rs (all rb afs
Amazon R in the vicinity of the town of São Paulo de Olivença), Brazil (Fleck 2007a). *Poyanawa - u Môa R (lb af Juruá R), Brazil. *Iskonawa - u Utuquinía R; in 1962 relocated to the l Callaría R (both rb af Ucayali R), Peru (Whiton et al. 1964:100, Krokoszyński & Fleck, this volume). *Nukini - u Môa R (lb af Juruá R), Brazil. *Nawa - Mu or Liberdade R (Chandless 1966:305), u Juruá & Môa Rs (Rivet & Tastevin 1921:map), Môa R (Montagner 2002). †Remo of the Jaquirana River - Batã R (rb af Jaquirana R), Brazil (Carvalho 1931).
Shipibo/Konibo Shipibo - originally (1600) reported on m Aguaitía R, and later (1700s) also on the m Pisqui R (both lb af m Ucayali R); by 1800s they were along m Ucayali R & l & m af both banks of m Ucayali, especially the Aguaitía, Pisqui, Cushibatay, Tamaya, & Callería R, Peru. Konibo - Pachitea R & u Ucayali R above mouth of Pachieta R, Peru. Shipibo-Konibo (post-1940)- m & u Ucayali R & its tributaries, between the towns of Orelhana & Bolognesi, Peru. Kapanawa of the Tapiche River - Maquía R (Aristio 1794), Guanache R (Castelnau 1850-9:IV:377); u Tapiche & Buncuya R (the latter rb af Guanache R, the other three are rb af l Ucayali R), Peru.
*Pano
91

†Pano - Lakes Cashiboya & Cruz Muyuna (both on rb of Ucayali R) & Manoa/Cushibatay R area.
*Shetebo - m Manoa or Cushibatay R (lb af Ucayali R); later also along the m Ucayali R at and near Sarayacu; currently living among Shipibo-Konibos.
*Piskino Pisqui R (lb af Ucayali R); currently living among Shipibo-Konibos. †Sensi - Chunuya Creek (rb af Ucayali R; Carvallo 1906[1818]:342), Lake Cruz
Muyuna (rb of Ucayali R; Tessmann 1930:188), Peru.
Kashinawa of the Ibuaçu River †Kashinawa of the Ibuaçu River - Basins of u Juruá & u Purus Rs, Peru & Brazil. †Kapanawa of the Juruá River - several rb afs u Juruá R (Rivet & Tastevin 1921:457-8, Fleck & Krokoszyński in progress), Brazil. †Paranawa - Muru R , (rb af Tarauacá R, lb af Envira R, rb af u Juruá R) (Loukotka 1963:33); Teixeira Stream, (rb af u Muru R) (Tastevin 1925:414), Brazil. †Nishinawa - Jordão R ((lb af u Tarauacá R, lb af Envira R, rb af u Juruá R), Brazil (Loukotka 1963:33). †Yumanawa - Serrano R (rb af u Juruá R, Tastevin 1925:415), u Ibuya R (lb af u Envira R, rb af u Juruá R); Tastevin 1926:34, 49); Muruzinho R (lb af u Muru R, rb af Tarauacá R, lb af Envira R) (Loukotka 1963:33), Brazil.
Yaminawa Chaninawa - u Xinani R (lb af u Envira R, rb af u Juruá R; Tastevin 1926:34, 49); Valparaiso, Libertade & Humaitá R (Loukotka 1963:33); among Sharanawas (Ribeiro & Wise 1978:176), Brazil. Chitonawa - headwaters of Envira R (rb af u Juruá R), Peru. Marinawa - headwaters of Furnaya R (af u Envira R, rb af u Juruá R) & divide between Envira & Purus Rs (Linhares 1913 apud Rivet & Tastevin 1921:466, Tastevin 1925:415, Carvalho 1931:249), Bazil; u Purus R at mouth of Curanja R (Pike & Scott 1962), Peru. Mastanawa - Tarauacá R (Tastevin 1926:50); u Jordão R (lb af u Tarauacá R, lb af Envira R, rb af u Juruá R) (“Nastanawa”; Loukotka 1968:170), Brazil; u Purus near international border (Loos 1976, Ribeiro & Wise 1978:176), Peru. †Nehanawa - Matapá or Bernardo Creek (af Jordão, lb af u Tarauacá R, lb af Envira R, rb af u Juruá R),) & Laurita or Papavos Creek, near headwaters of Tarahuacá R, originally from lb af Envira R (Tastevin 1925:415; 1926:34, 49); l Jordão R (Loukotka 1963:33), Brazil. Shanenawa - Riozinho R (af u Envira, rb af u Juruá R); Reich & Stegelmann 1903:133), Brazil. Sharanawa - Purus R, Peru & Brazil, also in Bolivia (Scott 2004:9). Shawannawa - u Juruá & Humayta Rs (af u Juruá R) (Linhares 1913, Sombra 1913, apud Rivet & Tastevin 1921), u Gregório R (Tastevin 1925:415), Brazil. Yaminawa of the Purus River - mostly on u Purus R & its afs & a few in headwaters of Juruá R, Peru & Brazil. Yaminawa of the Juruá River - u Juruá R & its afs, Brazil. Yaminawa of the Iaco River - Iaco R (= Yaco R, rb af m Purus R), Brazil. (Landin 1972, Townsley 1994:249); possibly same dialect spoken on u Acre R (rb af m Purus R) at the Bolivia-Brazil border. Yaminawa-arara - lb of Bagé R (rb af Tejo R, rb af u Juruá R (Souza 2004:4), Brazil.
92

Yawanawa - Muru R (rb af Tarauacá R, lb af Envira R, rb af u Juruá R) area (Tastevin 1925:415), Valparaiso, Libertade & Humaitá Rs (Loukotka 1963:33), Brazil.
Parkenawa - u Manu R (in Manu national park) and headwaters of nearby rivers, Peru (purported 20th century migration from Purus-Juruá headwaters).
Amawaka - currently, Sepahua, Purús, Curiuja, Curanja, Yuruá, u Ucayali & Las Piedras Rs, Peru & supposedly uncontacted Amawakas on the u Purus in Brazil (Sparing 2007); Liberdade R (rb af Juruá R), Brazil (Rodrigues 1986:pp); historically at similar locations in Peru & af u Purus & Juruá R, Brazil (Rivet & Tastevin 1921:450).
†Nishinawa - Jordão R (lb af u Tarauacá R, lb af Envira R, rb af u Juruá R), Brazil (Loukotka 1963:33).
†Yumanawa - Serrano R (rb af u Juruá R, Tastevin 1925:415), u Ibuya R (lb af u Envira R, rb af u Juruá R; Tastevin 1926:34, 49); Muruzinho R lb af u Muru R, rb af Tarauacá R, lb af Envira R, rb af u Juruá R (Loukotka 1963:33), Brazil.
†Remo of the Môa River - u Môa R (lb af Juruá R), Brazil (Loos & Loos 1973-4). †Tuchiunawa - mouth of Progresso Stream (af u Envira R, rb af u Juruá R), Brazil
(Carvalho 1931:249).
Part 2: Chirabo - between Tahuayo R (rb af Amazon R) & Yavarí Mirim R (lb af Javari R),
Peru (Vacas 1906 apud Rivet & Tastevin 1921:453), between Tapiche (rb af u Ucayali R) and Yavari or upland areas of Cochiquinas R (rb af Amazon R) and Ylinué R. Korugo - Tabayay R (rb af Amazon R), Peru (Zárate 1904 [1739]:393). Marubo of Maucallacta - town of Maucallacta (rb Amazon R), Cochiquinas R (rb af Amazon R), and area south thereof Peru (Ijurra 1905 [1849-50]:365, Castelnau 1850-9:V:40). Maya - Quixito R (lb af Itacoaí R, rb af Javari R), Brazil (Anonymous 1978). Mayo - lb of u Itacoaí R (rb af Javari R), Brazil (Tastevin 1924b:424). Pisabo - Gálvez R (lb af Javari R), Peru. (Grubb 1927:83). Barinawa - between Pachitea & Aguaitía Rs, Peru (Távara 1905[1868]:425). Buninawa - from banks of Pachitea R (lb af u Ucayali R) fled to the valleys of the Aguaitía & Pisqui Rs (lb af m Ucayali R), Peru (Ordinaire 1892:198). Choromawa - between Pachitea & Aguaitía Rs, Peru (Távara 1905[1868]:425). Kanabae - l Aguaytía R (lb af m Ucayali R), Peru (Wistrand 1969:15). Komabo - east of u Ucayali R (Maroni 1988[1889-92]:112), Taraba/Apurimac R, above the Ene R (Amich 1988[1854]:119), Peru. Inuaka - Maynas missions, Peru (Velasco 1988[1788-9]:546). Isunobo - Sungaroyacu R (af Pachitea R, lb af u Ucayali R), Peru (Wistrand 1969:15). Kuinua - Maynas missions, Peru (Velasco 1988[1788-9]:546). Puchanawa - from banks of Pachitea R (lb af u Ucayali R) fled to the valleys of the Aguaitía & Pisqui R (lb af m Ucayali R), Peru (Ordinaire 1892:198). Ruanawa - west of u Ucayali R, Peru (Dueñas 1792:175). Shirino - Kashibo territory (see above), Peru (Tessmann 1930:624). Shuchanawa - between Pachitea & Aguaitía Rs, Peru (Távara 1905[1868]:425). Zepa - Maynas missions, Peru (Velasco 1988[1788-9]:546). Kapuibo - Biata R (lb af Beni R, af u Madeira R), Bolivia (Créqui-Montfort & Rivet 1913:21) check Cardús 1886:291.
93

Sinabo of the Mamoré River - u Mamoré R (af u Madeira R), Boliva (CréquiMontfort & Rivet 1913:21) check Cardús 1886:291.
Tiatinawa - Beni R (, Bolivia (Stiglich 1908:427). Yaguarmayo - Yaguarmayo R (rb af Inambari R) (Stiglich 1908:427). Shipinawa - u Liberdade & u Valparaiso R (rb afs of Juruá R), Brazil (Linhares 1913,
apud Rivet & Tastevin 1921:472), between the u Liberdade & u Juruá Rs (Tastevin 1919 :146). Kiraba - north of u Amazon R (Coleti 1975 [1771]:II:321). Awabakebo - u Utuquinía R-u Môa R area; 1 went to live with the Iskonawas. (Whiton et al. 1964:102). Hawanbakebo - Capua & Amua Streams (af ?) (Whiton et al. 1964:102). Inubakebo - u Utuquinía R-u Môa R area (Whiton et al. 1964:102). Isubenebakebo - u Utuquinía R-u Môa R area (Whiton et al. 1964:102). Naibakebo - u Utuquinía R-u Môa R area (Whiton et al. 1964:102). Runubakebo - u Utuquinía R-u Môa R area (Whiton et al. 1964:102). Tsinubakebo - u Utuquinía R-u Môa R area; 5 went to live among the Iskonawas (Whiton et al. 1964:102) Waribakebo - u Utuquinía R-u Môa R area (Whiton et al. 1964:102)). Yawabakebo - Yumaiya R (af?) (Whiton et al. 1964:102). Yaya - lb of Juruá R, Brazil (Hassel 1905:52). Punhamunawa - Hubuya R (rb af u Tapiche R), Peru (Oppenheim 1936:152-3). Awanawa - Ucayali R (Figueroa 1904[1661]:164), east of m Ucayali R (Dueñas 1792:175), Peru. Barbudo - inland from [left bank of] l Huallaga R (rb af Marañón R, Peru (Figueroa 1904:115). Chai - Ucayali R., upriver from the Kokamas (Rogríguez 1684:163). Kusabatai - Maynas missions, Peru (Velasco 1988[1788-9]:546), prossibly along the Cushibatay R (lb af Ucayali R). Makonawa - area of Huallaga R (rb Marañón R), Peru (Figueroa 1904:122). Manamanbobo - originally near the Pachitea R (lb af u Ucayali R) and later moved south, Peru (Richter in Maroni 1988:291). Mawishi - headwaters of the Juruá R, Brazil? (Bates 1863:379, possibly refers to Arawakan Kuniba). Pachikta - Maynas missions, Peru (Velasco 1988[1788-9]:546). Pahenbakebo - among Kapanawas of the Tapiche River, Peru (Loos & Loos 1998:9). Sinabo of the Ucayali basin - inland east of Ucayali R, Peru (Dueñas 1792:175), Pisqui R. (Stiglich 1908:426). Tawakua - Maynas missions, Peru (Velasco 1988[1788-9]:546). Turkaguane - north of Konibos along the Ucayali R (Richter in Maroni 1988:290). Uniwepa. Ucayali R, Peru (Magnin in Maroni 1988:474). Zaminawa. Headwaters of the Juruá R, Brazil? (Bates 1863:379, possibly refers to Arawakan Kuniba). Chakaya - between the Ucayali & Tapiche Rs (Marcoy 1869:II:234). Iltipo - Peru (Hervás 1800:263). Manannawa - inland from Ucayali R, later reduced at mission on Taguacoa Stream (between Huallaga & Ucayali Rs), Peru (Richter in Maroni 1988:295). Yawabo - 20 leagues east of Ucayali R (Castelnau 1850-9:IV: 377), Acuria/Aturia stream (right-bank af of the u Juruá R) (Linhares 1913, apud Rivet & Tastevin 1921: 475). Inubo - east of Ucayali R (Carvallo 1906[1818]:342).
94

Runubo - east of Ucayali R (Carvallo 1906[1818]:342). Kasca - east of Ucayali R (Carvallo 1906[1818]:342). Puinawa - Deseada Island (seprated from lb Ucayali R by the Puinahua Canal), Peru
(Carvallo 1906[1818]:348). Southern Remo - Tamaya, Callaría, & Abujao Rs (rb afs m Ucayali R), Peru
(Krokoszyński & Fleck, this volume). Hisisbakebo - Callaría R (rb af Ucayali R), Peru (Amich 1988[Pallarés & Calvo
1870]:418). Sakaya - Tamaya R (rb af Ucayali R), Peru (Amich 1988[1854]:334). Tushinawa - Humayta R (af of u Muru R, rb af Tarauacá R, lb af Envira R, rb af u
Juruá R) & Furnaya (af of u Envira R) (Linhares 1913, apud Rivet & Tastevin 1921:473), between Muru & Enviira Rs (Tastevin 1926:50); Jutaí R (rb af m Amazon R; Castelnau 1851:V:85), Brazil. Aninawa - u Envira R (rb af u Juruá R), Brazil (Linhares 1913). Deenawa - originally from the Envira R (rb af u Juruá R), a few among the Yaminawas of the Juruá R and the Shaonawas (Townsley 1994:249). Mashonawa - Envira R (rb af u Juruá R), Brazil (Tastevin 1926:49). Morunawa - u Juruá R, Peru? (Townsley 1994:250), headwaters of Envira R (rb af u Juruá R), possibly presently in Brazil (Ribeiro & Wise 1978:143). Shaninawa - originally from the Envira R (rb af u Juruá R), some among Sharanawas, Peru & Brazil? (Townsley 1994:250). Shishinawa - a few among the Yaminawas of the Purus R and the Parkenawas, Peru & Brazil? (Townsley 1994:250). Arawa - Chivé Stream in Madre de Dios, Peru (Stiglich 1908[1889-92]:402). Biubakeu - Imiria R (af Tamaya R, rb af m Ucayali R), Peru (Maroni 1988[188992]:296). Espino - Inland west of u Curumahá R (lb af u Purus R), Brazil (Chandless 1866:106). Inubakeu - Imiria R (af Tamaya R, rb af m Ucayali U), Peru (Maroni 1988[188992]:296). Yuminawa - rb afs of the u Juruá R (Villanueva 1902:426-7). Yura - Pique-Yacu, Torolluc & neighboring afs u Juruá R (Villanueva 1902:426). Awanateo - right bank of Javari R, Brazil (Fritz 1922[1707]::map), between headwaters of Tapiche R (rb af l Ucayali R) & Javari R, Peru (Veigl’s map in Chantre 1901). Binabo - east of m/l Ucayali R, Peru (Dueñas 1792:175, Girbal 1791:70/192X:161). Binannawa - Envira R (rb af u Juruá R), Brazil (Tastevin 1926:50). Chunti - east of m/l Ucayali R, Peru (Dueñas 1792:175). Diabo - east of m/l Ucayali R, Peru (Dueñas 1792:175, Girbal 1791:70/192X:161). Isunawa - east of m/l Ucayali R, Peru (Dueñas 1792:175, Girbal 1791:70/192X:161). Kamarinigua - Camarinigua or Cumaria R (rb af u Ucayali R), Peru (Sobreviela 1791b), Kontanawa - u Tarauacá R (lb af Envira R, rb af u Juruá R) (Tastevin 1919:146), between u Envira R & Muru R (rb af Tarauacá R) (Tastevin 1925:415; 1926:34, 49), Brazil. Kurunawa - Envira R (rb af u Juruá R), Brazi (Tastevin 1926:50); headwaters of Curanja & Curanjinha R (lb af u Purus R), Peru, & between the headwaters of the Envira & Purus R, Brazil (Carvalho 1931:248). Kustanawa - u Purus R, above Curanja R (lb af u Purus R), Brazil (Schultz & Chiara 1955:199).
95

Mochobo - west of u Ucayali R (Sobreviela 1791b), near Unini, Inua & other af of u Ucayali upriver from the Konibos (Richter in Maroni 1988:286), Mazarobeni R (af Ene R) (Amich 1988[1854]:120), Peru.
Nianawa - east of m Ucayali R, Peru (Dueñas 1792:175, 181). Ormiga - east of m Ucayali R, Peru (Dueñas 1792:175). Pakanawa - headwaters of Envira R (rb af u Juruá R), Brazil (Reich & Stegelmann
1903:137). Pitsobo - rb of Ucayali R (Castelnau 1850-9:IV:387); on small af of Ucayali between
the Coingua/Coenhua & Camariniguaa/Cumaría Rs (rb afs u Ucayali R) (Sobreviela 1791b), Peru. Soboibo - on small af of Ucayali between the Coingua/Coenhua & Camarinawa/Cumaría R (rb afs u Ucayali R), Peru (Sobreviela 1791b) Trompetero - east of m Ucayali R, Peru (Dueñas 1792:175). Zurina - south of Amazon R below Cuchiguara R (Markham 1859:107 identified this as the Purus R), Peru (Acuña 1641:30. Bamunawa - u Juruá area, Brazil (Tastevin 1926:51). Buinawa - u Juruá area, Brazil (Tastevin 1926:51). Bitinawa - Muru R (rb af Tarauacá R, lb af Envira R, rb af u Juruá R) area, Brazil (Tastevin 1925:415). Chipanawa - Ucayali R, Peru (Figueroa 1904[1661]:164). Eskinawa - u Juruá area, Brazil (Tastevin 1926:51). Hsunawa - Muru R (rb af Tarauacá R, lb af Envira R, rb af u Juruá R) area, Brazil (Tastevin 1925:414). Isaknawa - east of m Ucayali R, Peru (Dueñas 1792:175). Kununawa - between Muru (rb af Tarauacá R, lb af Envira R, rb af u Juruá R) & Envira R), Brazil (Tastevin 1925:415, 1926:50). Kayubo - Yacaré & Yacaré-Mirim (af?), Brazil (Stiglich 1908:406). Komanawa - Province of Panataguas (i.e., western Pampas de Sacrametno), Peru (Córdova 1957:221, 222; check: Izaguirre I:123-6). Michanawa - u Utuquinía R-u Môa R area (Whiton et al. 1964:100). Panatawa - captives of Panos, Peru (Dueñas 1792:181). Pimisnawa - u Utuquinía R-u Môa R area (Whiton et al. 1964:100). Rununawa - u Juruá area, Brazil (Tastevin 1926:51). Suyabo - east of m Ucayali R, Peru (Dueñas 1792:175). Takanawa - Muru R (rb af Tarauacá R, lb af Envira R, rb af u Juruá R) area, Brazil (Tastevin 1925:415). Tiuchunawa - headwaters of Jurupari or Yuraya R (rb af l Taraucá R), Brazil (Tastevin 1925:415). Tsawesbo - probably near current Matis territory, Brazil (Erikson 1999:113). Uniabo. Amazonian Peru (Taboada 1859[1796]:132). Unibo. , between Tapiche (rb af u Ucayali R) and Yavari or upland areas of Cochiquinas R (rb af Amazon R) and Ylinué R.
96

References (highlighted entries are ones I have not yet been able to obtain)
Abreu, João Capistrano de. 1914. Rã-txa hu-ni ku-i: A lingua dos Caxinauás do Rio Ibuaçu, Afluente do Muru, Prefeitura de Tarauacá. Rio de Janeiro: Typographia Leuzinger.
Abreu, João Capistrano de. 1941. Rã-txa hu-ni ku-i: A lingua dos Caxinauás do Rio Ibuaçu, Afluente do Muru, Prefeitura de Tarauacá (revised second edition). Rio de Janeiro: Livraria Briguiet.
Adelaar, Willem F. H. 2004. The Languages of the Andes. Cambridge: Cabridge University Press.
Adelung, Johann Christoff. 1817. Mithridates oder allgemeine Sprachenkunde. Berlin: Vierter Theil.
Acuña, Chrstoval de. 1641. Nvevo Descvbrimiento del Gran Rio de las Amazonas. Madrid: Imprenta del Reyno.
Aguiar, Maria Suelí de. 1988. Elementos de Descrição Sintática para uma Gramática do Katukina. Master’s thesis, Universidade Estadual de Campinas, Campinas, SP, Brazil.
Aguiar, María Sueli de. 1993. “Os grupos nativos ‘Katukina.” Amazonía Peruana, 23:141-152.
Aguiar, Maria Suelí de. 1994a. Análise Descritiva e Teórica do Katukina-Pano. Ph.D. dissertation, Universidade Estadual de Campinas, Campinas, SP, Brazil.
Aguiar, Maria Suelí de. 1994b. “Classificação das língua Pano.” In Ana Fernández Garay and José Pedro Viegas Barros (eds.), Actas: Segundas Jornadas de Lingüística Aborígen, 279-284. Buenos Aires, Universidad de Buenos Aires.
Aguiar, Maria Suelí de. 1994c. Fontes de Pesquisa e Estudo da Família Pano. Campinas, São Paulo. Editora da Universidade Estadual de Campinas.
Aguiar, Maria Sueli de. 2001. “Estudos do sintagma nominal Katukina-Pano.” In Ana Suelly Arruda Câmara Cabral and Aryon Dall’Igna Rodrigues (eds.), Línguas Indígenas Brasileiras: Fonologia, Gramática e História, Atas do I Encontro Internacional do Grupo de Trabalho sobre Línguas Indígenas da ANPOLL, Volume II, 121-7. Belém, Pará: Editora Universitária UFPA.
Aguiar, Maria Sueli de. 2004. Pesquisar para Conhecer a Língua Nukini. Unpublished manuscript, Goiânia.
Aikhenvald, Alexandra A. 2007. “Languages of the Pacific Coast of South America.” In O. Miyaoka, O. Sakiyama and M. Krauss (eds.), Vanishing Languages of the Pacific, 183-205. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Aikhenvald, Alexandra Y. and R. M. W. Dixon. 1998. “Evidentials and areal typology: A case study from Amazonia.” Language Sciences, 20:241-57.
Alemany, Agustín. 1906. Vocabulario de Bolsillo Castellano-Shipibo. Lima: Tip. Del Colegio Apostólico de P. F. Del Peru.
Alemany, Agustín. 1927. “Castellano-shipibo y elementos de gramatica.” In Bernardino Izaguirre (ed.), Historia de las Misiones Franciscanas en el Oriente del Peru, Tomo 13, Producciones en Lenguas Indígenas de varios Misioneros de la Orden, 283-348. Lima: Imprenta Arguedas.
Alviano, Fidelis de. 1957. “Ensaios da Língua dos índios Magironas ou Maiorunas do Rio Jandiatuba.” Revista do Instituto Histórico e Geográfico Brasileiro, 237, 43-60.
97

Amarante Ribeiro, Lincoln Almir. 2003. “Uma proposta de método quantitivo aplicado à análise comparativa das línguas Pano e Tacana.” LIAMES (Línguas Indígenas Americanas), 3:135-47.
Amarante Ribeiro, Lincoln Almir. 2006. “Uma proposta de clasificação interna das línguas da família pano.” Investigações: Lingüística e Teoría Literária (Universidade Federal de Pernambuco, Recife), 19(2):157-182.
Amarante Ribeiro, Lincoln Almir, and Gláucia Vieira Cândido. 2005a. “Empéstimos na língua Shanenawa (Pano).” Revista do Museu Antropológico (Goiânia), 8(1):51-59.
Amarante Ribeiro, Lincoln Almir, and Gláucia Vieira Cândido. 2005b. “A marca de transitividade em nomes na língua Shanenawa - Pano.” In Coletânea de Artigos: III Seminário de Iniciação Científica e I Jornada de Pesquisa de Pós-Graduação da UEG. Anápolis: Universidade Estadual de Goiás.
Amarante Ribeiro, Lincoln Almir, and Gláucia Vieira Cândido. 2005c. “Uma descrição do sistema numérico da família Pano.” MOARA, 24:96-108.
Amarante Ribeiro, Lincoln Almir, and Gláucia Vieira Cândido. 2008. “A formação de palavras a partir de morfemas monossilábicos nominais e bases verbais em línguas indígenas da família Pano: Prefixação ou incorporação nominal?” Veredas On Line (UFJF), 1:129-145.
Amarante Ribeiro, Lincoln Almir, and Gláucia Vieira Cândido. 2009. “O universalismo semântico cognitivo em um estudo sobre termos básicos referentes a cores na língua indígena Shanenawa.” Ciências & Cognição (UFRJ), 13:152162.
Amich, José. 1854. Compendio Histórico de los Trabajos, Fatigas, Sudores y Muertes que los Ministros Evangélicos de la Seráfica Religión han Padecido por la Conversión de las Almas de los Gentiles, en las Montañas de los Andes, Pertenecientes a las Provincias del Perú. Paris: Librería de Rosa y Bouret.
Amich, José. 1988[1854, 1870]. Historia de las Misiones del Convento de Santa Rosa de Ocopa. Iquitos, Peru: CETA.
Anonymous. 1901. “Los salvajes de San Gabán.” Boletín de la Sociedad Geográfica de Lima, 11:353-356.
Anonymous. 1927. “Diccionario cunibo-castellano y castellano-cunibo conservado entre los documentos de San Luis de Shuaro, incompleto y de autor ignorado.” In Bernardino Izaguirre (ed.), Historia de las Misiones Franciscanas en el Oriente del Peru, Tomo 13, Producciones en Lenguas Indígenas de varios Misioneros de la Orden, 391-474. Lima: Imprenta Arguedas.
Anonymous. 1955. Capanahua short comparative list. Unpublished list in archive of the National Museum at Rio de Janeiro.
Anonymous. 1965. Canamari of Feijó. Unpublished word list in the archives of Eugene Loos.
Anonymous. 1978. “Atração pelos botões.” Revista de Atualidade Indígena, 8(11):16-24.
Aristio. 1794. “Prosiguen los viajes del Padre misionero Fray Narciso Girbal.” Mercurio Peruano, 11:276-284.
Armentia, Nicolás. 1886. Diario del Viaje al Madre de Dios. La Paz.. Armentia, Nicolás. 1887. “Navegación del Madre de Dios.” Biblioteca Boliviana de
Geografia e Historia (La Paz), 1-2:43-91. Armentia, Nicolás. 1888 Vocabulario de los dialectos Tacana, Araona, Pacaguara,
Cavineño y Shipibo. Unpublished manuscript.
98

Armentia, Nicolás. 1898. “Idioma schipibo.” Boletín de la Sociedad Geográfica de la Paz, 1(1): 43-91.
Armentia 1905 Armentia, Nicolás. 2006. “Navegación del Madre de Dios. In William Miller et al.
Exploraciones de los Ríos del Sur, 461-619. Iquitos, Peru: CETA. Aza, José Pio. 1933. “La tribu arasairi y su idioma.” Misiones Dominicanas del
Perú, 77:139-144. Aza, José Pio. 1935. “Vocabulario arasiri o mashco.” Misiones Dominicanas del
Perú, 90:190-193. Aza, José Pio. 1936. Vocabulario Español – Arasairi. Lima: Sanmarti y Cia. Barbosa, J. 1947. "Vocabulario dos Índios Caripuna (E’loé) do rio Madeira.” In
Comissão de Linhas Telegráficas Estrategicas de Mato-Grosso ao Amazonas (“Comissão Rondon”), Conselho Nacional de Protecão aos Indios, Publicação N°2, Anexo N°5: História Natural, Etnografia pelo General Candido Mariano da Silva Rondon, Imprensa Nacional, Rio de Janeiro. Barranca, José Sebastián. 1914. “Yamiaco.” Boletín de la Sociedad Geográfica de Lima, 30: 5-8. Barros, Luizete Guimarães. 1987. A Nasalização Vocálica e Fonologia Introdutória à Língua Katukína (Páno). Master’s thesis, Universidade Estadual de Campinas, Campinas, SP, Brazil. Biedma, Manuel, et al. 1989. La Conquista Franciscana del Alto Ucayali. Iquitos, Peru: CETA. Boutle, Philip Ernest. 1964. Formulário dos Vocabulários Padrões para Estudos Comparativos Premiliminares nas Línguas Indígenas Brasileiras: Marubo. Manuscript at the National Museum in Rio de Janeiro. Boutle, Philip Ernest. n.d. Jaminawá - Seringal Santa Cruz - Rio Juruá. Unpublished list in the archives of Eugene Loos. Bright, William. 1992. International Encyclopedia of Linguistics. Oxford: Oxford University Press. Brinton, Daniel Garrison. 1891. The American Race. New York: N.D.C. Hodges. Cabral, Ana Suely Arruda Câmara. 1995. Contact-induced Language Change in the Western Amazon: The Non-genetic Origin of the Kokama Language. Unpublished Ph.D. dissertation, University of Pittsburg, Pittsburg. Cabral, Ana Suely Arruda Câmara and Ruth Monserrat. 1987. Actualização Léxicosemântica de Línguas Indígenas: Documentação da Língua Kaxarari. Relatório CNPq/FNPM (unpublished report) Camargo, Eliane. 1987. Esquisse Linguistique sur le Kashinawa, Langue de la Famille Pano. Bachelor (diplome d’etudes approfondies) thesis, Université de Paris-Sorbonne (Paris IV) Paris. Camargo, Eliane. 1991. Phonologie, Morphologie et Syntaxe: Etude Descriptive de la Langue Caxinaua (Pano). Ph.D. dissertation, Université de Paris-Sorbonne (Paris IV), Paris. Camargo, Eliane. 1995. “Léxico Caxinauá-Português.” Chantiers Amérindia, 19/20 (supplement 3). Camargo, Eliane. 1998. “La structure actancielle du caxinaua.” La Linguistique, 34:137-150. Camargo, Eliane. 2000. “‘Mío’, ‘ser mío’: Relación de pertenencia y atribución en Cashinahua.” In Luis Miranda (ed.), Actas del I Congreso de Lenguas Indígenas de Sudamérica, volume 1, 207-217. Lima: Universidad Ricardo Palma.
99

Camargo, Eliane. 2002. “Cashinahua personal pronouns in grammatical relations.” in Mily Crevels, Simon van de Kerke, Sérgio Meira and Hein van der Voort (eds), Current Studies on South American Languages. Leiden: Universiteit Leiden.
Camargo, Eliane. 2003. “Construções adjetivais e participais em Caxinauá (PANO).” LIAMES (Línguas Indígenas Americanas), 3:39-51.
Camargo, Eliane. 2005. “Manifestações da ergatividade em caxinauá (pano).” LIAMES (Línguas Indígenas Americanas), 5:55-88.
Camargo, Eliane, Raquel Costa, and Carmen Dorigo. 2002. “A Manifestação da ergatividade cindida em línguas Pano.” In Ana Suelly Arruda Câmara Cabral and Aryon Dall’Igna Rodrigues (eds.), Línguas indígenas brasileiras: Fonologia, gramática e história, atas do I encontro internacional do grupo de trabalho sobre línguas indígenas da ANPOLL, Volume II, 70-71. Belém: Editora Universitária UFPA.
Campbell, Lyle. 1997. American Indian Languages: The Historical Linguistics of Native America. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Cândido, Gláucia Vieira. 1998. Aspectos Fonológicos da Língua Shanenawá (Pano). Master’s thesis, Universidade Estadual de Campinas, Campinas, SP, Brazil.
Cândido, Gláucia Vieira. 2004a. Descrição Morfossintática da Língua Shanenawá (Pano). Ph.D. dissertation, Universidade Estadual de Campinas, Campinas, SP, Brazil.
Cândido, Gláucia Vieira. 2004b. “O processo de harmonia nasal na língua Shanenawa-Pano.” Estudos Lingüísticos, 33:989-994.
Cândido, Gláucia Vieira. 2004c. “O sistema pronominal pessoal da língua Shanenawa (Pano).” In Denize Elena Garcia da Silva (ed.), Atas do II Encontro Nacional do Grupo de Estudos de LInguagem do Centro-Oeste: Integração Lingüística, Étnica e Social (2003:Goiânia), volume 2, 551-556. Brasília: Oficina Editorial do Instituto de Letras da UnB.
Cândido, Gláucia Vieira. 2005a. “Construções relativas na língua Shanenawa (Pano).” Estudos Lingüísticos, 34:575-579.
Cândido, Gláucia Vieira. 2005b. “Processos de composição na língua Shanenawa.” In Lúcia Maria Pinheiro Lobato et al. (eds.), Annais do IV Congresso Internacional da ABRALIN (Brasília), 1021-1030. (on-line publication).\
Cândido, Gláucia Vieira and Lincoln Almir Amarante Ribeiro. 2009. “Evidencialidade na língua Shanenawa (Pano).” Estudos Lingüísticos (São Paulo), 38: 223-232.
Cardús, José. 1886. Las Misiones Franciscanas entre los Infieles de Bolivia: Descripción del Estado de ellas en 1883 y 1884. Barcelona: Librería de la Inmaculada Concepción. (need page 291)
Carrasco, Francisco. 1901. “Principales palabras del idioma de las cuatro tribus de infieles que siguen.” Boletín de la Sociedad Geográfica de Lima, 11:205-211.
Carvalho, Carmen Teresa Dorigo de. 1992. A Decodificação da Estrutura Frasal em Matsés (Pano). Master’s thesis, Universidade Federal do Rio de Janeiro, Rio de Janeiro.
Carvalho, João Braulino de. 1931. “Breve Notícia Sobre os Indígenas que Habitam a Fronteira do Brasil com o Peru Elaborada pelo Médico da Comissão, Dr. João Braulino de Carvalho, e Calcada em Observações Pessoais.” Boletim do Museu Nacional (Rio de Janeiro), 7:225-256.
Carvalho, João Braulino de and Manoel Mauricio Sobrinho. 1929. Os Caxinauás. Rio de Janeiro: Empreza Graphica Paulo, Pongetti & Cia.
100

Carvallo, Paulo Alonso. 1906 [1818]. “Misiones del rrío Ucayali” In Victo M. Maúrtua, Juicio de Límites entre el Perú y Bolivia: Prueba Peruana, volume 12, 339-355. Barcelona, Imprenta de Henrich y Comp.
Castelnau, Francis de. 1850-9. Expédition dans les Parties Centrales de l'Amérique du Sud, de Rio de Janeiro à Lima, et de Lima au Para; Exécutée par Ordre du Gouvernement Français Pendant les Années 1843 à 1847, 14 Volumes. Paris: P. Bertrand.
Castillo, Marius del. 1929. El corazón de la América Meridional, Volume 1. Barcelona.
Cesarino, Pedro Niemeyer. 2008. A Poética da Morte e do Mundo entre os Marubo da Amazônia Ocidental. Ph.D. dissertation, Universidaded Federal do Rio de Janeiro, Rio de Janeiro.
Chambers, J. K. and Peter Truggill. 1980. Dialectology. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Chandless, William. 1866. “Ascent of the River Purus.” Journal of the Royal Geographical Society, 36:86-118.
Chandless, William. 1869. “Notes on a journey up the River Juruá.” Journal of the Royal Geographical Society, 39:296-311.
Chantre y Herrera, José. 1901. Historia de las Misiones de la Compañia de Jesús en el Marañon Español, 1637-1767. Madrid: Imprenta de A. Avrial.
Chavarría Mendoza, Maria. 1973. Esbozo Fonológico del Ese-éxa o “Huarayo” (Tacana). Bachelor thesis, Universidad Nacional Mayor de San Marcos, Lima.
Chavarría Mendoza, María C. 1983. Bibliografía Pano-Tacana. Documento de Trabajo No. 47. Lima: Universidad Nacional Mayor de San Marcos, Centro de Investigación de Lingüística Aplicada.
Church, George Earl. 1898. “Notes on the visit of Dr. Bach to the Katukinarú Indians of Amazonas.” The Geographical Journal, 12:63-67.
Cipriani, César A. 1902. “Traducción de algunos vocablos castellanos al dialecto de los Haauñeirosó ó Yamiacas.” In Vías del Pacífico al Madre de Dios, Junta de Vias Fluviales, 187-189. Lima: Imprenta de “El Lucero” Baquijano.
Coleti, Giandomenico. 1975[1771]. Diccionario Histórico-Geográfico de la América Meridional. Bogota: Banco de la Republica. (translation of Italian original).
Corréard, M. H. 2006. “Bilingual Lexicography.” In Keith Brown (ed.), The Encyclopedia of Language and Linguistics, 2nd Edition, volume 7, 787-791. Elsevier: Oxford.
Cortez Mondragon, María. 1980. Esbozo Fonológico del Cacataibo, Grupo Cashibo, Pano. Bachelor thesis, Universidad Nacional Mayor San Marcos, Lima.
Cortez Mondragon, María. 1996. Panamericanismos en Lenguas Pano. Masters thesis, Universidad Nacional Mayor San Marcos, Lima.
Costa, Raquel Guimaraes Romankevicius. 1992. Padrões rítmicos e maracação de caso em Marubo (Pano). Master’s thesis, Universidade Federal de Rio de Janeiro.
Costa, Raquel Guimarães Romankevicius. 1995. “Manifestaciones de la ergatividad en Marubo (Pano).” Actas: II Jornadas de Lingüística Aborigen (Buenos Aires): 205-223..
Costa, Raquel Guimarães Romankevicius. 1998. “Aspects of ergativity in Marubo (Panoan).” The Journal of Amazonian Languages, 1(2):50-103.
Costa, Raquel Guimaraes Romankevicius. 2000a. Aspetos da fonologia Marubo (Pano): Uma visão não-linear. Ph.D. dissertation, Universidade Federal de Rio de Janeiro, Rio de Janeiro
101

Costa, Raquel Guimarães Romankevicius. 2000b. “Case marking in Marubo (Panoan): A diachronic approach.” Proceedings from the Third Workshop on American Indigenous Languages. Santa Barbara Papers in Linguistics (University of California), Volume 10:3-15
Costa, Raquel (Guimarães Romankevicius). 2002a. “Ergatividade cindida em Marubo (Pano).” In Ana Suelly Arruda Câmara Cabral and Aryon Dall’Igna Rodrigues (eds.), Línguas Indígenas Brasileiras: Fonologia, Gramática e História, Atas do I Encontro Internacional do Grupo de Trabalho sobre Línguas Indígenas da ANPOLL, Volume II, pp. 89-101. Belém, Pará: Editora Universitária UFPA.
Costa, Raquel Guimarães Romankevicius. 2002b. “Interações entre restrições em Marubo (Pano).” Revista da ABRALIN, 1:11-34.
Costa, Raquel (Guimaraes Romankevicius) and Carmen Dorigo. 2005. “A expressão da posse em Marúbo e Matsés (Páno).” In Aryon Dall’Igna Rodrigues and Ana Suelly Arruda Câmara Cabral (eds.), Novos Estudos sobre Línguas Indígenas, 6983. Brasília: Editora UnB.
Coutinho. Walter Jr. 1998. Relatório de Identificação e Delimitação da Terra Indígena Vale do Javari. Unpublished FUNAI report.
Couto, Alexandre. 2005. Ortografia Kaxarari: Uma proposta. Porto Velho: Summer Institute of Linguistics (unpublished manuscript).
Couto, Cláudio André Cavalcanti. 2010. Análise Folológica do Saynáwa (Pano) - A língua dos índios da T. I. Jamináwa do Igarapé Preto. Master’s thesis, Universidade Federal de Pernambuco, Recife, Brazil.
Créqui-Montfort, G. de and P. Rivet. 1913. “Linguistique bolivienne: Les dialectes pano de Bolivie.” Le Muséon, 14 (new series):19-78.
Créqui-Montfort, G. de and P. Rivet. 1921. “La famille linguistique Takana (part2 or 4).” Journal de la Société de Américanistes de Paris, 13:281-301.
Cromack, Gail W. 1967. Cashinawa ‘spirit’ narratives and their cultural context. M.A. thesis, The Hartford Seminary Foundation, Hartford.
Cromack, Gail W. 1976. Narraciones Cashinahuas sobre ‘Espíritus’ y su Contexto Cultural. Datos Etnolingüísticos 51. Lima: Instituto Lingüístico de Verano.
Cromack, Robert. 1968. Language Systems and Discourse Structure in Cashinawa. Ph.D. dissertation, The Harford Seminary Foundation, Hartford.
Cunha, Carla Maria. 1993. A Morfossintaxe da Língua Arara (Pano). Master’s thesis, Universidade Federal de Pernambuco, Recife, Brazil
d’Ans, André-Marcel. 1970. Materiales para el estudio del grupo lingüístico Pano. Lima, Peru: Universidad Mayor de San Marcos.
d’Ans, André-Marcel. 1972a. Léxico Yaminahua (Pano). Lima: Universidad Nacional Mayor de San Marcos.
d’Ans, André-Marcel. 1972b. “Repertorios etno-botánico y etno-zoológico amahuaca (pano).” Revista del Museo Nacional (Lima), 38:352-384.
d’Ans, André-Marcel. 1973. “Reclasificación de las lenguas pano y datos glotocronológicos para la etnohistoria de la Amazonía peruana.” Revista del Museo Nacional (Lima), 39: 349-369.
d’Ans, André-Marcel. 1975. “Etude glottochronologique de neuf languages Pano.” In Atti del XL Congresso Intenationale degli Americanisti, Volume III: Linguistica—Folklore—Storia americana—Sociologia, 87-97. Geneva: Casa Editrice Tilgher.
d’Ans, André-Marcel. 1982. L’Amazonie Péruvienne Indigène. Paris: Payot.
102

d’Ans, André-Marcel and María Cortez M. 1973. Términos de Colores Cashinahau (Pano). Lima: Universidad Nacional Mayor de San Marcos.
d’Ans, André-Marcel and Els Van den Eynde. 1972. Léxico Amahuaca (Pano). Lima: Universidad Nacional Mayor de San Marcos.
Déléage, Pierre. 2005. Le Chamanisme Sharanahua: Enquête sur l’apprentissage et l’épistémologie d’un rituel. Ph.D. dissertation, Ecole des Hautes Etudes en Sciences Sociales, Paris.
Derbyshire, Desmond C. 1987. “Morphosyntactic areal characteristics of Amazonian languages.” International Journal of American Linguistics, 53:311-326.
Dienst, Stefan. 2005. “The innovation of s in Kulina and Deni.” Anthropological Linguistics, 47:424-441.
Dienst, Stefan. 2006. A Reference Grammar of Kulina. Ph.D. dissertation, La Trobe University, Bundoora, Australia.
Dienst, Stefan and David W. Fleck. in press. “Pet vocatives in south-western Amazonia.” Anthropological Linguistics.
Dixon, R. M. W. 2007. “Field linguistics: A minor manual.” Sprachtypologie und Universalienforschung, 60(1): 12-31.
Dixon, R. M. W. and Alexandra Y. Aikhenvald. 1999. “Introduction.” In R. M. W. Dixon and Alexandra Y. Aikhenvald (eds.), The Amazonian Languages, 1-21. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Dole, Gertrude E. 1998. “Los Amahuaca.” In Fernando Santos and Frederica Barclay (eds.), Guía Etnográfica de la Alta Amazonía, Volume 3, 125-273. Quito: Ediciones Abya-Yala.
d’Orbigny, Alcide. 1839. L’Homme Américain (de l’Amérique Meridionale) Considéré sous ses Rapports Physiologiques et Moraux, 2 volumes. Paris: PitoisLevrault et C.e.
Dorigo (de Carvalho), Carmen Teresa. 1995. “Las marcas de tiempo y aspecto en la lengua Matsés (Pano).” Actas II Jornadas de Lingüística Aborigen (Buenos Aires): 235-249.
Dorigo (de Carvalho), Carmen Teresa. 2001. Fonologia Matsés: Uma Análise baseada em Restrições. Ph.D. dissertation, Universidad Federal do Rio de Janeiro, Brazil.
Dorigo (de Carvalho), Carmen Teresa. 2002. “Ergatividade cindida em Matsés (Pano).” In Ana Suelly Arruda Câmara Cabral and Aryon Dall’Igna Rodrigues (eds.), Línguas Indígenas Brasileiras: Fonologia, Gramática e História, Atas do I Encontro Internacional do Grupo de Trabalho sobre Línguas Indígenas da ANPOLL, Volume II, 102-111. Belém, Pará: Editora Universitária UFPA.
Dorigo, Carmen Teresa and Raquel Guimaraes Romankevicius Costa. 1996. “Aspectos de la Negación en Matsés y Marubo (Pano).” In II Jornadas de Etnolingüistica, Jornadas de Antropología de la Cuenca de la Plata, Etnolingüística, Tomo 1, 213-220. Rosario (Argentina): Universidad Nacional de Rosario.
Dorigo, Carmen Teresa and Raquel Guimaraes Romankevicius Costa. 2005. “A expressão da posse em Marúbo e Matsés (Páno).” In Aryon Dall’Igna Rodrigues and Ana Suelly Arruda Câmara Cabral (eds.), Novos Estudos sobre Línguas Indígenas, 69-83. Brasília: Editora UnB.
Dueñas, Juan. 1792. “Carta y diario de Fr. Juan Dueñas.” Mercurio Peruano, 6: 165-186.
Eakin, Lucille. 1991. Lecciones pare el Aprendizaje del Idioma Yaminahua. Yarinachocha, Peru: Instituto Lingüístico de Verano.
103

East, Guy. 1969-70. Pacaguara: análisis fonológico, vocabulario y frases, datos fonológicos, frases útiles para conversaciones, textos misceláneos, fonológicas misceláneos, words and phrases, Información de Campo, 197-8, 200-3, 227 (microfiches, Boliva: Instituto Lingüístico de Verano).
East, Guy and Jeanne East. 1969?. “Lista de palabras Pakaguara.” Información de Campo, 189 (microfiche, Boliva: Instituto Lingüístico de Verano).
Ehrenreich, Paul. 1891. “Beiträge zur Völkerkunde Brasiliens.” Veröffentlichungen aus dem Königlichen Museum für Völkerkunde, 2:1-80.
Elias Ulloa, José. 2000. El Acento en Shipibo. Bachelor (licenciatura) thesis, Universidad Mayor Nacional de San Marcos, Lima.
Elias Ulloa, José. 2004. “Quantity (in)sensitivity and underlying glottal-stop deletion in Capanahua.” Coyote Papers XIII, Special Volume Dedicated to the Indigenous Languages of the Americas (University of Arizona Working Papers in Linguistics), Tania Granadillo, Meghan O’Donnell, and Stacey Oberly, editors, pp. 15-30
Elias Ulloa, José. 2006. Theoretical Aspects of Panoan Metrical Phonology: Disyllabic Footing and Contextual Syllable Weight. Ph.D. dissertation, Rutgers University, New Brunswick, New Jersey.
Elias-Ulloa, José. 2009. “The distribution of laryngeal segments in Capanahua.” International Journal of American Linguistics, 75:159-206.
Erikson, Philippe. 1988. “Apprivoisement et habitat chez les Amerindiens Matis (langue Pano, Amazonas, Brésil).” Anthropozoologica, 9:25-35.
Erikson, Philippe. 1989. “Les Matis de la tête aux pieds et du nez aux fesses.” In ML. Beffa and R. Hamayon (eds.), Les Figures du Corps, pp. 287-295. Paris : Publications du Laboratoire d'Ethnologie et de Sociologie Comparative de l'Université de Paris X-Nanterre.
Erikson, Philippe. 1990. Les Matis d’Amazonie: Parure du Corps, Identité Ethnique et Organisation Sociale. Ph.D. dissertation, Université de Paris X-Nanterre.
Erikson, Philippe. 1992. “Uma singular pluralidade: A etno-história Pano.” In Manuela Carneiro da Cunha,. (ed.), História dos Indios no Brasil, 239-252. São Paulo: Companhia Das Letras.
Erikson, Philippe. 1993. “Une nébuleuse compacte : le macro-ensemble pano. ” L’Homme, 33(2-4) :45-58.
Erikson, Philippe. 1994. “Los Mayoruna.” In Fernando Santos and Frederica Barclay (eds.), Guía Etnográfica de la Alta Amazonía, Volume 2, 1-127. Quito: Ediciones Abya-Yala.
Erikson, Philippe. 1996. La Griffe des Aïeux. Marquage du Corps et Démarquage Ethnique chez les Matis d'Amazonie. Paris : Editions Peeters.
Erikson, Philippe. 1999. El Sello de los Antepasados: Marcado del cuerpo y demarcación étnica entre los Matis de la Amazonía. Quito: Abya-Yala.
Erikson, Philippe. 2000. “Bibliografía anotada de Fuentes con interés para la etnología y etnohistoria de los Pano setentrionales (Matses, Matis, Korubo…).” Amazonía Peruana, 27: 231-287.
Erikson, Philippe and Eliane Camargo. 1996. “Caxinauá mais guère amazoniennes. Qui sont-elles ? Les devinettes transcrites par Capistrano de Abreu.” Journal de la Société des Américanistes, 82 :193-208.
Erikson, Philippe, Bruno Illius, Kenneth Kensinger, and Maria Sueli de Aguilar. 1994. “Kirinkobaon kirika (‘Gringo’s Books’): An annotated Panoan bibliography.” Amerindia 19, Supplement 1.
104

Espinoza Pérez, Lucas. 1955. Contribuciones Lingüísticas y Etnográficas sobre algunos Pueblos Indígenas del Amazonas Peruano. Madrid: Consejo Superior de Investigaciones Científicas, Instituto Bernardino de Sahagun.
Estrella, Raimundo. 1905[1871]. “Exploración de los rios Urubamba i Ucayali por don Raimundo Estrella.” In Carlos Larrabure i Correa, ed. Colección de Leyes, Decretos, Resoluciones i Otros Documentos Oficiales Referentes al Departamento de Loreto, Volume 3, pp. 77-93. Lima: Imprenta de “La Opinión Nacional.”
Fabre, Alain. 1998. Manual de las Lenguas Indígenas Sudamericanas II. München: Lincom Europa/online publication.
Farabee, William C. 1922. Indian Tribes of Eastern Peru. Papers of the Peabody Museum of Archaeology and Ethnology, Harvard University, Volume 10. Cambride, Massachusetts.
Faust, Norma. 1973. Lecciones para el Aprendizaje del Idioma Shipibo-Conibo. Lima: Instituto Lingüístico de Verano.
Faust, Norma. 1984. Parquenahua word list. Unpublished manuscript in the archives of Eugene Loos.
Faust, Norma and Eugene E. Loos. 2002. Gramática del Idioma Yaminahua. Lima: Instituto Lingüístico de Verano.
Ferreira, Rogério Vicente. 2000. “Um ensaio sobre a ergatividade na língua Matis (Pano).” In Luis Miranda (ed.), Actas: I Congreso de Lenguas Indígenas de Sudamérica, Volume 1, 259-264. Lima: Universidad Ricardo Palma.
Ferreira, Rogério Vicente. 2001a. Língua Matis: Aspetos Descritivos da Morfossintaxe. Master’s thesis, Universidade Estadual de Campinas, Campinas, SP, Brazil.
Ferreira, Rogério Vicente. 2001b. Língua Matis (Pano): Aspetos Descritivos da Morfossintaxe. Munchen: Lincom Europa.
Ferreira, Rogério Vicente. 2005. Lingua Matis (Pano): Uma Descrição Gramatical. Ph.D. dissertation, Universidade Estadual de Campinas, Campinas, SP, Brazil.
Ferreira, Rogério Vicente. 2008. “Morfemas “partes do corpo” em Matis e algumas línguas da família Pano.” Raído (Universidade Federal da Grande Dourados), 2(4):35-39.
Fields, Harriet L. 1963. “Informe sobre los ‘mayorunas’ o ‘capanahuas salvajes’ del río Yaquerana.” Información de Campo, 131-b (microfiche, Lima: Instituto Lingüístico de Verano).
Fields, Harriet L. 1970. “Panoan comparative vocabulary.” Información de Campo, 224a (microfiche, Lima: Instituto Lingüístico de Verano).
Fields, Harriet L. and Mary Ruth Wise. 1976. “Bosquejo de la fonología matsés (mayoruna).” Datos Etno-lingüísticos, 31 (microfiche, Lima: Instituto Lingüístico de Verano).
Fields, Harriet L. 1978 [1973]. “Una identificación preliminar de los sufijos indicadores de referencia en Mayoruna.” In Eugene E. Loos (ed.), Estudios Panos II, 283-311. Lima: Instituto Lingüístico de Verano.
Figueirêdo, José de Lima. 1939. Indios do Brasil. São Paulo: Companhia Editora Nacional.
Figueroa, Francisco de. 1904. Relación de las Misiones de la Compañía de Jesús en el País de los Maynas. Madrid: Librería General de Victoriano Suárez.
Firestone, Homer L. 1955. “Chama phonology.” International Journal of American Linguistics, 21:52-55.
105

Fleck, David W. 1997. Mammalian Diversity in Rainforest Habitats Recognized by the Matses Indians in the Peruvian Amazon. M.S. thesis in zoology, The Ohio State University, Columbus.
Fleck, David W. 2001. “Culture-specific notions of causation in Matses grammar.” Journal de la Société des Américanistes, 87: 177-196.
Fleck, David W. 2002. “Causation in Matses (Panoan, Amazonian Peru).” In The Grammar of Causation and Interpersonal Manipulation, Masayoshi Shibatani (ed.), 373-415. Amsterdam: John Benjamins Publishing Company.
Fleck, David W. 2003. A Grammar of Matses. Ph.D. dissertation, Rice University, Houston.
Fleck, David W. 2005. “Ergatividade em Matsés (Pano).” LIAMES (Línguas Indígenas Americanas), 5:89-111.
Fleck, David W. 2006a. “Antipassive in Matses.” Studies in Language, 30: 541-573. Fleck, David W. 2006b. “Body-part prefixes in Matses: Derivation or noun
incorporation?” International Journal of American Linguistics, 72: 59-96. Fleck, David W. 2006c. “Complement clause type and complementation strategies in
Matses.” In Complementaion: A Cross-linguistic Typology, R. M. W. Dixon and Alexandra Y. Aikhenvald (editors), 224-244. Oxford: Oxford University Press. Fleck, David W. 2006d. “Panoan languages.” In Keith Brown (ed.), The Encyclopedia of Language and Linguistics, 2nd Edition, volume 9, 156-157. Elsevier: Oxford. Fleck, David W. 2007a. “Did the Kulinas become the Marubos?: A linguistic and ethnohistorical investigation.” Tipití, Journal of The Society for the Anthropology of Lowland South America, 5:137-207. Fleck, David W. 2007b. “Evidentiality and double tense in Matses.” Language, 83:589-614. Fleck, David W. 2007c. “Field linguistics meets biology: How to obtain scientific designations for plant and animal names.” Sprachtypologie und Universalienforschung, 60: 81-91. Fleck, David W. 2007d. “¿Quiénes eran los Mayoruna (Moríke) de Tessmann?” Amazonía Peruana, 30:305-331. Fleck, David W. 2008a. “Coreferential fourth-person pronouns in Matses.” International Journal of American Linguistics, 74:279-311. Fleck, David W. 2008b. “Sugerencias metodológicas para realizar trabajo de campo lingüístico en la Amazonía.” Lexis (Lima), 32:251-280. Fleck, David W. 2010. “Ergativity in the Mayoruna branch of the Panoan family.” In Ergativity in Amazonia, Spike Gildea and Francesc Queixalós (editors). Amsterdam: John Benjamins Publishing Company. Fleck, David W. forthcoming a. Diccionario Matsés-Castellano. Lima: Centro Amazónico de Antropología y Aplicación Práctica. Fleck, David W. forthcoming b. “Los Sensis de la familia Pano.” Amazonia Peruana, 32. Fleck, David W. in progress. The Mayoruna Languages of the Panoan Family. Fleck, David W. and John D. Harder. 2000. “Matses Indian rainforest habitat classification and mammalian diversity in Amazonian Peru.” Journal of Ethnobiology, 20:1-36. Fleck, David W. and Łukasz Krokoszyński. in progress. The two Kapanawas: Ethnonym homonymy in the Panoan family.
106

Fleck, David W. and Robert S. Voss. 2006. “On the origin and cultural significance of unusually large synonym sets in some Panoan languages of western Amazonia.” Anthropological Linguistics, 48:335-368.
Fleck, David W., Robert S. Voss and James L. Patton. 1999. “Biological basis of saki monkey (Pithecia) species recognized by Matses Indians of Amazonian Peru.” International Journal of Primatology, 20: 1005-1028.
Fleck, David W, Robert S. Voss and Nancy B. Simmons. 2002. “Underdifferentiation and sublexemic categories: An example from Matses bat classification.” Journal of Ethnobiology, 22: 63-104.
Frank, Erwin H. 1987. “Bibliografía anotada de fuentes con interés para la etnología y la etnohistória de los Uni.” Amazonía Peruana (CAAAP, Lima), 8(14): 151160.
Frank, Erwin H. 1993. Los Puebos Indios en sus Mitos 2: Uni. Quito: Abya-Yala. Frank, Erwin H. 1994. “Uni.” In Fernando Santos and Frederica Barclay (eds.),
Guía Etnográfica de la Alta Amazonía, volume 2, 129-237. Quito: Ediciones Abya-Yala. Frantz, Donald G. 1973. “On question word movement.” Linguistic Inquiry, 4:531534. Fritz, Samuel. 1922. Journal of the Travels and Labours of Father Samuel Fritz in the River of the Amazons between 1686 and 1723, Translated from the Evora Ms and Edited by the Rev. Dr George Edmunson. London: Hakluyt Society. FUNAI. 1981. Relatório da Viagem Realizada a Áreas Indígenas do Município de Cruzeiro do Sul. Unpublished manuscript. Galt, F. L. 1878. “The Indians of Peru.” Annual Report of the Board of Regents of the Smithsonian Institution Showing the Operations, Expenditures, and Condition of the Institution for the Year 1877, 308-315. Washington: Government Printing Office. Garcia, Mariana de Souza. 2002. Um Estudo Lingüístico Yawanawá. Master’s thesis, Universidade Federal de Goiás, Goiânia, Brazil. García Rivera, Fernando. 1990. “Préstamos quechuas en el shipibo.” In Temas de Lingüística Amerindia: Primer Congreso Nacional de Investigaciones Lingüístico-Filológicas, Rodolfo Cerrón-Palomino and Gustavo Solís Fonseca (eds.), 309-315. Lima: CONCYTEC. García Rivera, Fernando. 1993. Etnohistoria Shipibo: Tradición Oral de los ShipiboConibo. Lima: Centro Amazónico de Antropología y Aplicación Práctica. García Rivera, Fernando. 1994. Aspectos de la Fonología del Shipibo. Bachelor (licenciatura) thesis, Universidad Nacional Mayor de San Marcos, Lima. Gaudeda, Natalia. n.d. (no title), Brasilia: FUNAI archives. Gildea, Spike and Doris Payne. 2007 “Is Greenberg’s ‘Macro-Carib’ viable?” Special issue of the Boletim do Museu Paraense Emílio Goeldi, Ciências Humanas, 2 (2):19-72. Gildea, Spike and Francesc Queixalós (eds). 2010. Ergativity in Amazonia. Amsterdam: John Benjamins Publishing Company. Giglioli, Enrico H. 1906. “Appunti sulle condizioni attuali delle tribu' indigene dell' alto Madeira e regioni adiacenti (Brasilie e Bolivia). Raccolti dal dr. A. Landi, Archivio per l'Antropologia e l'Ethnologia, Firenze, 36:219-228 Girard, Rafael. 1958. Indios Selváticos de la Amazonía Peruana. Mexico City: Libro Mex Editores.
107

Girard, Victor. 1970. Review of “Comparative Takanan Phonology (With Cavineña Phonology and Notes on Pano-Takanan Relationship)” by Mary Ritchie Key. International Journal of American Linguistics, 36:73-78.
Girard, Victor. 1971. Proto-Takanan Phonology. Berkeley: University of California Press.
Girbal y Barceló, Narciso. 192X [1791] “Diario del viaje que yo Fr. Narciso Girbal y Barceló, Misionero apostólico del Colegio de Ocopa, sito en el Arzobispado de Lima y Reyno del Perú, hice desde el pueblo de Laguna, capital de Maynas, por los famosos ríos Marañón y Ucayali.” In Bernardino Izaguirre (ed.), Historia de las Misiones Franciscanas en el Oriente del Peru, Tomo 8, 1791-1815, 101-187. Lima: Imprenta Arguedas.
Gomes, Graziela de Jesus. 2010. Aspecto Morfossintáticos da Língua Huariapano (Pano). Master’s thesis, Universidade Estadual de Campinas, Campinas, SP, Brazil.
González, Carolina. 2005. “Phonologically conditioned allomorphy in Panoan: Towards an analysis.” UCLA Working Papers in Linguistics, 11:39-56.
Gordon, Raymond G., Jr. (ed.). 2005. Ethnologue: Languages of the World, fifteenth edition. Dallas: SIL International.
Grasserie, Raoul de la. 1890. “De la famille linguistique Pano.” Congrès International des Américanistes Compte-rendu de la Septième Session, Berlin 1888, 438-449. Librairie W. H. Kühl: Berlin.
Greenberg, Joseph H. 1960. “The general classification of Central and South American languages.” In Antony Wallace (ed.), Selected papers of the 5th International Congress of Anthropological and Ethnographic Sciences (1956). Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania Press.
Greenberg, Joseph H. 1987. Language in the Americas. Stanford: Stanford University Press.
Grubb, K. G. 1927. The Lowland Indians of Amazonia. London: World Dominion Press.
Groeteken, Autbert. P. 1907. “Bishop Armentia O.F.M. und die Erforschung des Rio Madre de Dios.” Anthropos, 2:730-734.
Guillaume, Antoine. 2008. “Ditransitivité en cavineña: Constructions à objet double.” Amerindia, 31:135-156.
Guillen Aguilar, Flora Nilda. 1974. Léxico Shipibo. Master’s thesis, Universidad Nacional Mayor de San Marcos, Lima.
Hall de Loos, Betty. 1976. ‘Katukina.” In Eugene E. Loos, (ed.), Materiales para Estudios Fonológicos I, 92-94. Yarinacocha, Peru: Instituto Lingüístico de Verano.
Hall de Loos, Betty. 1981. “Auto-corrección en el relato capanahua.” Revista Latinoaméricana de Estudios Etnolingüísticos, 1:47-70.
Hall Loos, Betty. 1986. “Self-correction in Capanahua Narration.” In George Huttar and Kenneth Gregerson (eds.). Pragmatics in Non-Western Perspective, 99-114. Dallas: Summer Institute of Linguistics Publications in Linguistics 73.
Hall de Loos, Betty and Eugene E. Loos. 1978 [1973]. “La estructura semántica y fonológica de los prefijos verbales en capanahua.” In Eugene E. Loos (ed.), Estudios Panos I, 63-132. Lima: Instituto Lingüístico de Verano.
Hall Loos, Betty and Eugene E. Loos. 1980[1976]. Textos Capanahua (2 volumes). Yarinacocha, Peru: Instituto Lingüístico de Verano.
Hanke, Wanda. 1949. “Algumas vozes do idioma karipuna.” Arquivos: Coletanea de Documentos para a História da Amazônia (Manaus), 10:3-12.
108

Hanke, Wanda. 1954. “The Chacobo in Bolivia.” Ethnos (Stockholm), 23:100-126. Hanke, Wanda. 1956. “Los indios Chacabo del río Benisito.” Revista Española de
Antropología Americana, 2(1):11-31. Harder, John D. and David W. Fleck. 1997. “Reproductive ecology of New World
marsupials.” In Marsupial Biology: Recent Research, New Perspectives, Norman. R. Saunders & Lyn. A. Hinds (editors), 175-204. Sydney: University of New South Wales Press. Hassel, Jorge M. von. 1905. “Las tribus salvajes de la región amazónica del Perú.” Boletín de la Sociedad Geográfica de Lima, 17:27-73. Heath, Edwin R. 1883. “Dialects of Bolivian Indians, a philological contribution from material gathered during three years residence in the department of Beni, in Bolivia.” Kansas City Review of Science and Industry, 6:679-687. Herndon, William Lewis. 1853. Explorations of the Valley of the Amazon, Made under Direction of the Navy Department, Part 1. Washington: Robert Armstrong, Public Printer. Hervás y Panduro, Lorenzo. 1800. Catálogo de las Lenguas de las Naciones Conocidas y Numeración, División, y Clases de estas Según la Diversidad de sus Idiomas y Dialectos, Volúmen I: Lenguas y Naciones Americanas. Madrid: Imprenta de la Administración del Real Arbitrio de Beneficencia. Hestermann, P. Ferdinand. 1910. “Die Pano Sprachen und ihre Beziehungen.” Acts of the XVIth International Congress of Americanistes (Vienna), vol. 2: 645-50. Hestermann, P. Ferdinand. 1913. “Nachtrag zur Quellenliteratur der Panosprachen, Bolivien. Anthropos, 8:1144. Hestermann, P. Ferdinand. 1919. “Die Schreibweise der Pano-Vokabularien, mit Benutzung von Angaben J. Capistrano de Abreu’s und Said ben Ali Ida’s.” Journal de la Société des Américanistes, 11:21-33. Hyde, Sylvia. 1980. Diccionario Amahuaca. Lima: Instituto Lingüístico Peruano. Ibarra Grasso, Dick Edgar. 1982. Las Lenguas Indígenas en Bolivia. La Paz: Libreria Editorial “Juventud.” Iggesen, Oliver. 2006. Case morphosyntax in Chacobo: Multiple alignment splits and suprasegmental marking (seminar handout, Research Centre for Linguistic Typology, Latrobe University, Melbourne, 25 October 2006). Ijurra, Manuel. 1905 [1849-50]. “Resumen de los Viajes á las Montañas de Mainas, Chachapoyas i Pará por Manuel Ijurra, Presentado i Dedicado al Excmo. Señor don Ramón Castilla, Presidente del Perú (1841-1845). In Colección de Leyes, Decretos, Resoluciones i Otros Documentos Oficiales Referentes al Departamento de Loreto, Volume 6. Carlos Larrabure i Correa (ed.), 276-412. Lima: La Opinión Nacional. Instituto Lingüístico de Verano. 1997a. Nõ Anenõ, Leamos, Libro de Lectura y Escritura No. 3: Yora. Lima: Instituo Lingüístico de Verano. Instituto Lingüístico de Verano. 1997b. Nõ Koshi Tapinõ, Vamos a Aprender Rápido, Libro de Lectura y Escritura No. 4: Yora. Lima: Instituto Lingüístico de Verano. Instituto Lingüístico de Verano. 2001. Vamos a Leer, Aprestamiento No. 2 para la Lectura y Escritura: Yora. Lima: Ministério de Educación Instituto Lingüístico de Verano. 2005. Nõ Ane Sharaño, Vamos a Leer Bien, Libro de Lectura y Escritura No. 5: Yora. Lima: Instituto Lingüístico de Verano. Izaguirre, Bernardino. 1922-1929. Historia de las Misiones Franciscanas en el Oriente del Peru (14 volumes). Lima: Imprenta Arguedas.
109

Jakway, Martha. 1975. “Listas comparativas de palabras usuales en idiomas vernáculos de la Selva.” Datos Etno-lingüísticos, 4 (microfiche, Lima: Instituto Lingüistico de Verano).
Kästner, Klaus-Peter. 1980. “Der Begriff ‘Chama’-Stämme (Ost-Peru).” Abhandlungen und Berichte des Staatlichen Museums für Völkerkunde, 38:59-85. Dresden.
Kaufman, Terrence. 1994. “The native languages of South America.” In Christopher Moseley and R.E. Asher (eds.), Atlas of the World’s Languages, 46-76. London: Routledge.
Keller, Franz. 1874a. The Amazon and Madeira Rivers: Sketches and Descriptions from the Note-book of an Explorer. London: Chapman and Hall.
Keller Leuzinger, Franz. 1874b. Vom Amazonas und Madeira. Stuttgart: Berlag von U. Aröner.
Kennell Jr., Gerald Raymond. 1976. “Descrição da fonemica de Marubu (Chainawa).” Processo FUNAI, 3779/76:2-5
Kennell Jr., Gerald Raymond. 1978. “Descrição da gramâtica e da fonêmica de Marúbo (Chainawa).” Processo FUNAI, 3507: 6-52.
Kensinger, Kenneth M. 1961. “Brief vocabulary of the Isconahua.” Información de Campo, 111-a (microfiche, Lima: Instituto Lingüístico de Verano).
Kensinger, Kenneth M. 1963. “The phonological hierarchy of Cashinahua (Pano).” Studies in Peruvian Indian Languages, volume 1, 207-216. Norman: Summer Institute of Linguistics of the University of Oklahoma.
Kensinger, Kenneth M. 1981. “Recent publications in Panoan linguistics.” International Journal of American Linguistics, 47:68-75.
Kensinger, Kenneth M. 1983. “Investigación lingüística, folklórica y etnográfica: retrospección y perspectiva.” América Indígena, 43:849-875.
Kensinger, Kenneth M. 1985. “Panoan linguistic, folkloristic and ethnographic research: Retrospect and prospect.” In Harriet E. Manelis Klein and Louisa R. Stark (eds.), South American Indian Languages: Retrospect and Prospect, 224285. Austin: University of Texas Press.
Kensinger, Kenneth M. 1995. How Real People Ought to Live: The Cashinahua of Eastern Peru. Prospect Heights, Illinois: Waveland Press.
Key, Mary Ritchie. 1963. Comparative Phonology of the Takanan Languages. Ph.D. dissertation, University of Austin, Austin.
Key, Mary Ritchie. 1968. Comparative Tacanan Phonology, With Cavineña Phonology and Notes on Pano-Tacanan Relationships. The Hague: Mouton.
Key, Mary Ritchie. 1971. “Response to Girard on Tacanan.” International Journal of American Linguistics, 37:196-201.
Key, Mary Ritchie. 1978. “Araucanian genetic relationships.” International Journal of American Linguistics, 44:280-293.
Key, Mary Ritchie. 2000. Intercontinental Dictionary Series: South American Indian Languages (Volume 1). Irvine: University of California.
Key, Mary Ritchie and Christos Clairis. 1978. “Fuegian and central South American language relationships.” Actes du XLII Congress International des Américanistes, volume 4: 635-645.
Kinberg, Lee. 1980. Diccionario Ashaninca (Edición Provisional). Yarinacocha, Peru: Summer Institute of Linguistics.
Kneeland, Harriet. 1973. “La frase nominal relativa en mayoruna y la ambigüedad.” In Eugene E. Loos, (ed.), Estudios Panos II, 53-105. Lima: Instituto Lingüístico de Verano.
110

Kneeland, Harriet. 1979. Lecciones Para el Aprendizaje del Idioma Mayoruna. Lima: Instituto Lingüístico de Verano.
Kneeland, Harriet. 1982. “El “ser como” y el “no ser como” de la comparación en matsés.” In Mary Ruth Wise and Harry Boonstra (eds.), Conjunciones y Otros Nexos en Tres Idiomas Amazónicos, 77-128. Lima: Instituto Lingüístico de Verano.
Kneeland, Harriet. 1994. “Cultural crisis and ideal values in cultural change among the Matses of eastern Peru.” Notes on Anthropology, 16: 23-48
Kneeland, Harriet. 1996. “El aumentativo -pa: Su efecto sobre el narrador y el tema en matsés.” In Ågot Bergli (ed.), Estudios Lingüísticos de Textos de la Amazonía Peruana, 129-155. Lima: Instituto Lingüístico de Verano.
Kneeland, Harriet and Harriet L. Fields. 1976. “Mayoruna.” In Eugene E. Loos, (ed.), Materiales para Estudios Fonológicos 1, 181-213. Yarinacocha, Peru: Instituto Lingüístico de Verano.
Koch-Grünberg, Theodor. 1941. “Estudo crítico.” In João Capistrano de Abreu, Rãtxa hi-ni ku-i: A lingua dos Caxinauás do rio Ibuaçu, afluente do Muru, Prefeitura de Tarauacá (revised second edition), 631-5. Rio de Janeiro: Livraria Briguiet.
Krokoszyński, Łukasz. 2007. Iskonawa word list. Unpublished list. Landin, David. 1972. Formulário dos Vocabulários Padrões para Estudos
Comparativos Premiliminares nas Línguas Indígenas Brasileiras: Jamináua. Manuscript at the National Museum in Rio de Janeiro. Lanes, Elder José. 2000. Mudança Fonológica em Línguas da Família Pano. Master’s thesis, Universidade Federal do Rio de Janeiro, Rio de Janeiro. Lanes, Elder José. 2002. “Análise acústica de segmentos vocálicos de línguas da família Pano.” In Ana Suelly Arruda Câmara Cabral and Aryon Dall’Igna Rodrigues (eds.), Línguas Indígenas Brasileiras: Fonologia, Gramática e História, Atas do I Encontro Internacional do Grupo de Trabalho sobre Línguas Indígenas da ANPOLL, Volume 2, 112-120. Belém, Pará: Editora Universitária UFPA. Larrabure i Correa, Carlos. 1905-9. Colección de Leyes, Decretos, Resoluciones i Otros Documentos Oficiales Referentes al Departamento de Loreto. Lima: Imp. de “La Opinión Nacional.” Lathrap, Donald W. 1970. The Upper Amazon. New York: Praeger Publishers. Lathrap, Donald W., Angelika Gebhart-Sayer, and Ann M. Mester. 1985. “The roots of Shipibo art style: Three waves of Imiríacocha or there were “Incas” before the Incas.” Journal of Latin American Lore, 11: 31-119. Lathrap, Donald W., Angelika Gebhart-Sayer, Thomas Myers, and Ann. M. Mester. 1987. “Further discussion of the roots of the Shipibo art style: A rejoinder to DeBoer and Raymond.” Journal of Latin American Lore, 13: 225-271. Lauriault, James. 1948. “Alternate mora timing in Shipibo.” International Journal of American Linguistics, 14:22-24. Lehnertz, Jay Frederick. 1974. Lands of the Infidels: The Franciscans in the Central Montaña of Peru, 1709-1824. Ph.D. dissertation, University of Wisconsin, Madison. Leuque, Enrique Philips. 1927. “Algunos términos y frases en el idioma remo.” In Bernardino Izaguirre (ed.), Historia de las Misiones Franciscanas en el Oriente del Peru, Tomo 13, Producciones en Lenguas Indígenas de varios Misioneros de la Orden, 538-540. Lima: Imprenta Arguedas. Lima, Edilene Coffaci de. 2002. Classificação dos animais do Alto Juruá pelos Katukina. In Enciclopédia da Floresta: O Alto Juruá: Práticas e Conhecimentos
111

das Populações, Manuela Carneiro da Cunha and Mauro Barbosa de Almeida (eds), 437-443. Sao Paulo: Companhia das Letras Linhares, Maximo. 1913. “Impressões de um auxiliar de Inspetoria do Servico do Acre, CPI: Os indios do territorio do Acre.” Jornal do Commercio (Rio de Janeiro), 12 January, pp. 3-6. Llosa, Enrique S. 1906a. “Las hoyas del Madre de Dios y Madera y la nueva ruta de Urcos, Marcapata y Tahuantisuyo.” Boletín de la Sociedad Geográfica de Lima, 19:260-301. Llosa, Enrique S. 1906b. “Tribu de los Arazaires: Algunas voces de su dialecto.” Boletín de la Sociedad Geográfica de Lima, 19:302-306. Loos, Eugene E. 1963. “Capanahua narration structure.” Studies in Literature and
Language, 4 (supplement). Loos, Eugene E. 1964. Maps of Panoan languages. Unpublished dialect maps
showing movement of Panoan languages northward into Peru from Bolivia. Loos, Eugene E. 1967. The Phonology of Capanahua and its Grammatical Basis,
Ph.D. dissertation, University of Texas, Austin. Loos, Eugene E. 1969. The Phonology of Capanahua and its Grammatical Basis.
Norman: Summer Institute of Linguisitics of the University of Oklahoma. Loos, Eugene E. 1970. “Rasgos sintáctico-fonémicos en la historia lingüística de los
idiomas de la familia Pano.” Acts of the 39th Congress of Americanists, volume 5:181-184. Loos, Eugene E. 1973-4. “Listas de palabras y frases para estudios comparativos en el idioma remo.” Información de Campo, 210-a (microfiche, Lima: Instituto Lingüístico de Verano). Loos, Eugene E. 1975a. “Nasalization in Sharanahua.” Work Papers of the SIL (University of North Dakota), 19:24-27. Loos, Eugene E. 1975b. “Rasgos sintático-fomémicos en la historia lingüística de los idiomas de la familia Pano.” 39th International Congress of Americanists, Volume 5: Lingüística e Indigenismo Moderno de América, 181-184. Lima. Loos, Eugene E. 1976a. Estudios Panos V: Verbos performativos: Partículas que tienen significado performativo o significado relacionado a los performativos en idiomas panos. Lima: Instituto Lingüístico de Verano. Loos, Eugene E. 1976b. Materiales Para Estudios Comparativos de la Familia Pano: Frases y Textos del Idioma Mastanahua. Datos Etnolingüísticos 48. Lima: Instituto Lingüístico de Verano. Loos, Eugene E. (ed.) 1978a [1973]. Estudios Panos I. Lima: Instituto Lingüístico de Verano. Loos, Eugene E. (ed.) 1978b [1973]. Estudios Panos II. Lima: Instituto Lingüístico de Verano. Loos, Eugene E. 1978c [1973]. “Algunas implicaciones de la reconstrucción de un fragmento de la gramática del proto-pano.” In Eugene E. Loos (ed.), Estudios Panos II, 263-282. Lima: Instituto Lingüístico de Verano. Loos, Eugene E. 1978d [1973]. “La construcción del reflexivo en los idiomas panos.” In Eugene E. Loos (ed.), Estudios Panos II, 161-261. Lima: Instituto Lingüístico de Verano. Loos, Eugene E. 1978e [1973]. “La señal de transitividad del sustantivo en idiomas panos.” In Eugene Loos (ed.), Estudios Panos I, 133-184. Lima: Instituto Lingüístico de Verano. Loos, Eugene E. 1986. “Capanahua syllable restructuring in relation to comparative studies.” In B. Elson (ed.), Language in Global Perspective: Papers in Honor of
112

the Fiftieth Anniversary of the SIL, 1935-1985, 291-301. Dallas: Summer Institute of Linguistics. Loos, Eugene E. 1999a. “’If’ in Capanahua.” In Eugene E. Loos (ed.), Logical Relations in Discourse, 195-217. Dallas: Summer Institute of Linguistics. Loos, Eugene E. 1999b. “Pano.” In R. M. W. Dixon and Alexandra Y. Aikhenvald (eds.), The Amazonian languages, 227-249. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. Loos, Eugene E. 2005. “Un breve estudio de la gramática del proto-Pano.” Revista Latinoamericana de Estudios Etnolingüísticos, 11: 37-50. Loos, Eugene E. 2006. “Discontinous nasal spread in Yaminahua.” Summer Institute of Linguistics Electronic Work Papers, 2006-001. Loos, Eugene E. and Betty Loos. 1971. “Palabras y frases del idioma isconahua.” Información de Campo, 111-b (microfiche, Lima: Instituto Lingüístico de Verano). Loos, Eugene E. and Betty Loos. 1998. Diccionario Capanahua-Castellano. Lima: Instituto Lingüístico Peruano. Loos, Eugene E. and Betty Loos. 2003. Diccionario Capanahua-Castellano. Second (electronic) edition. Lima: Instituto Lingüístico Peruano. López, Agustín. 1913. Letter to María Candamo, Requena 6th November 1911. In Slavery in Peru. Message from the President of the United States Transmitting Report of the Secretary of State, with Accompanying Papers Concerning the Alleged Existence of Slavery in Peru. House of Representatives Document No. 1366. Washington: USA Government Printing Office. Lord, Mary Ann. 1996. Word list: Sharanahua, Roadijo Yora, Yaminahua, Chitonahuaa. Unpublished manuscript in the archives of Eugene Loos. Loriot, James. 1965. “Shipibo cognates with Tacanan.” Información de Campo, 224 (microfiche; Yarinacocha: Insitituto Lingüístico de Verano). Loriot, James, Erwin Lauriault and Dwight Day. 1993. Diccionario ShipiboCastellano. Lima: Instituto Lingüístico de Verano. Loukotka, Čestmír. 1935. Clasificación de las Lenguas Sudamericanas. Edición “Lingüística Sudamericana,” No. 1. Prague: Tipografiía Josef Bartl. Loukotka, Čestmír. 1939. Línguas indígenas do Brasil. Revista do Archivo Municipal (São Paulo, Brazil) 54:147-174. Loukotka, Čestmir. 1963. “Documents et vocabularies inédits de langues et de dialectes sud-américains.” Journal de la Société des Américanistes, 52:7-60 Loukotka, Čestmír. 1968. Classification of South American Indian Languages. Los Angeles: University of California. Ludewig, Hermann E. 1858. The Literature of American Aboriginal Languages. London: Trubner and Co.Ludwig, Rainer A., Robert Munro, David W. Fleck and Uli Sauerland. 2010. “Reported speech in Matses: Obligatory perspective shift with syntactic transparency.” In Proceedings of SULA 5: Semantics of Underrepresented Languages in the Americas Suzi Lima (ed). University of Massachusetts Occasional Papers, 41:33-47. Ludwig, Rainer A., Robert Munro, David W. Fleck and Uli Sauerland. 2010. “Reported speech in Matses: Obligatory perspective shift with syntactic transparency.” In Proceedings of SULA 5: Semantics of Under-represented Languages in the Americas, Suzi Lima (editor). University of Massachusetts Occasional Papers, 41:33-47. Luzero, Juan Lorenço. 1904 [1681]. “Copia de dos cartas escritas de un Missionero, y del Superior de las Missiones de los Maynas, en el Rio Marañon, jurisdiccion de
113

la Real Audencia de Quito, avisando al Padre Vice-Provincial de la Compañía de Iesus, del Nuevo Reyno de Granada; el uno, el estado del pueblo en que assiste; y el otro, el que tiene parte de aquella gloriosa Mission, que avia visitado el año passado de 1681: Segunda carta.” In Francisco de Figueroa, Relación de las Misiones de la Compañía de Jesús en el País de los Maynas, pp. 412-418. Madrid: Librería General de Victoriano Suárez. Lyon, Patricia J. 1975. “Dislocación tribal y clasificaciones lingüísticas en la zona del río Madre de Dios.” 39th International Congress of Americanists, Volume 5: Lingüística e Indigenismo Moderno de América, 185-207. Lima. Manus, Ron. 1959. Sharanahua+Marinahua, Mastanahua, Chaninahua. Unpublished word lists in the archives of Eugene Loos, 18 pp. Marcoy, Paul. 1862-67. “Voyage de l’Océan Atlantique à l’Océan Pacifique, à travers l’Amérique du Sud, 1848-1860.” Le Tour du Monde, 6:81-113, 242-288, 7:225-304, 8:97-144, 9:129-224, 10:129-192, 11:161-233, 12:161-221, 14:81-152, 15:97-160, 16:97-154. Marcoy, Paul. 1869. Voyage de l'Océan Pacifique à l'Océan Atlantique à travers l'Amérique du Sud. 2 volumes. Paris: Hachette. Markham, Clements. 1859. Expeditions into the Valley of the Amazonas. New York:
Burt Franklin. Markham, Clements. 1910. “A list of the tribes of the Valley of the Amazons,
Including Those on the Banks of the Main Stream and all the Tributaries, Third Edition.” The Journal of the Royal Anthropological Institute of Great Britain and Ireland, 40:73-140. Maroni, Pablo. 1988 [1889-92]. Noticias Autenticas del Famoso Rio Marañón. Iquitos, Peru: CETA. Marqués, Buenaventura. 1903. “Vocabulario de los idiomas indicos conocidos por Cunibos y Panos o Setebos.” Gaceta Científica (Lima), 14. Marqués, Buenaventura. 1931. “Fragmento del arte del idioma Conivo, Setebo, Sipibo, y Casivo o Comavo que hablan los indio así llamados que residen a las márgenes del famoso río Paro, alias Ucayali, y sus tributarios Manoa, Cushibatay, Pisqui, Aguaytia y Pachitea. Revista Histórica, 11:111-128. Martius, Carl Friedrich Phil. von. 1867. Beiträge zur Ethnographie und Sprachenkunde Amerika's zumal Brasiliens, 2 volumes. Leipzig: Friedrich Fleischer. Masô, João Alberto. 1919. “Os Indios Cachararys.” Revista da Sociedade de Geographia do Rio de Janeiro, 22-24(1909-11):98-100. Mason, J. Alden. 1950. “The Languages of South American Indians.” In Handbook of South American Indians, Volume 6: Physical Anthropology, Linguistics and Cultural Geography of South American Indians. Julian H. Steward(ed.), 157-317. Washington: United States Government Printing Office. Mattos, João Wilkens de. 1984. Diccionario Topographico do Departamento de Loreto, na Republica do Perú [1874]; Roteiro da Primeira Viagem do Vapôr Monarcha desde a Cidade da Barra do Rio Negro, Capital da Provincia do Amasonas, até a Povoação de Nauta, na Republica do Perú [1854]. Iquitos: IIAP/CETA. McQuown, Norman A. 1955. “The indigenous languages of Latin America.” American Anthropologist, 57:501-570. Métraux, Alfred. 1948. “Tribes of eastern Bolivia and the Madeira headwaters.” In Julian H. Steward (ed.), Handbook of South American Indians, Volume 3, The
114

Tropical Forest Tribes, 381-454. Washington: United States Government Printing Offices. Migliazza, Ernest C. 1982. “Linguistic prehistory and the refuge model in Amazonia.” In G. T. Prance (ed.), Biological Diversification in the Tropics, pp. New York: Columbia University Press. Migliazza, Ernest and Lyle Campbell. 1988. Panorama General de las Lenguas Indígenas en America. Volume 10 of Guillermo Morón (ed.), Historia General de America. Caracas: Instituto Panamericano de Geografía e Historia. Montag, Richard. 1978[1973]. “La estructura semántica de las relaciones entre frases verbales en cashinahua.” In Eugene E. Loos (ed.), Estudios Panos II, 107-159. Lima: Instituto Lingüístico de Verano. Montag, Richard. 1992. Cashinahua Folklore: A structural analysis of oral Tradition. M.A. thesis, The University of Texas, Arlington. Montag, Richard. 1998. A tale of Pudicho’s people: Cashinahua narrative accounts of European contact in the 20th Century. Ph.D. dissertation, University of New York, Albany. Montag, Richard. 2005. “Participant referencing in Cashinahua.” SIL Electronic Working Papers, 2005-013. Montag, Susan. 1979. Lecciones para el Aprendizaje del Idioma Cashinahua. Lima: Instituto Lingüístico de Verano. Montag, Susan. 1981. Diccionario Cashinahua. Lima: Instituto Lingüístico de Verano. Montag, Susan. 2004. Lições para a Aprendizagem da Língua Kaxinawá. Lima: Instituto Lingüístico de Verano. Montagner, Delvair. 2002. Costrução da Etnia Náwa. Unpublished manuscript, Brasília. Montaño Aragon, Mario. 1987. Guia Etnográfica Lingüística de Bolivia (Tribus de la Selva), Volume 1. La Paz: Editorial Don Bosco. Morin, Françoise. 1998. “Los Shipibo-Conibo.” In Fernando Santos and Frederica Barclay (eds.), Guía Etnográfica de la Alta Amazonía, Volume 3, 275-435. Quito: Ediciones Abya-Yala. Munro, Robert, Reiner Ludwig, Uli Sauerland and David W. Fleck. in press. “Reported speech in Matses: Perspective persistence and evidential narratives.” International Journal of American Linguistics, 78 Myers, Thomas P. 1974. “Spanish contacts and social change on the Ucayali River, Peru.” Ethnohistory, 21:135-157. Myers, Thomas P. 1990. Sarayacu: Ethnohistorical and Archaeological Investigations of a Nineteenth-century Franciscan Mission in the Peruvian Montaña. Lincoln: University of Nebraska. Navarro, Manuel. 1903. Vocabulario Castellano-Quechua-Pano con sus Gramáticas Quechua y Pana. Lima: Imprenta del Estado. Navarro, Manuel. 1927. “Vocabulario castellano-Quechua-pano con sus gramáticas Quechua y pana.” In Izaguirre, Bernardino (ed.), Historia de las Misiones Franciscanas en el Oriente del Perú, Tomo 13, Producciones en Lenguas Indígenas de varios Misioneros de la Orden, 15-282. Lima: Imprenta Arguedas. Nimuendajú, Curt and E. H. do Valle Bentes. 1923. “Documentes sur quelques langues peu connues de l’Amazonie.” Journal de la Société des Américanistes, 25 :215-222. Nordenskiöld, Erland. 1905. “Beiträge zur Kenntnis einiger Indianerstämme des Rio Madre de Dios-Gebietes.” Ymer, 25:265-312.
115

Nordenskiöld, Erland. 1906. “Comentarios referentes al conocimiento de algunas tribus indias del territorio del rio Madre de Dios.” Revista del Ministerio de colonización y agricultura, La Paz, 2:516-550.
Nordenskiöld, Erland. 1911. Indianer och Hvita i Nordöstra Bolivia. Stockholm: Albert Bonniers Förlag.
Nusser-Asport, Chr. 1890. “Von Madre de Dios zum Acre.” Das Ausland, 63:792-6. Okidoi, Aline. 2004. Descrição Fonológica Preliminar da Língua Indígena Nukini-
Pano. Bachelor thesis, Universidade Federal de Goiás, Goiânia. Oliveira, Sanderson Castro Soares de. 2009. Preliminares sobre a fonética e a
fonologia da língua falada pelo primeiro grupo de índios Korúbo recém contatados. Master’s thesis, Universidade de Brasília, Brasília. Oppenheim, Victor. 1936. “Notas ethnographicas sobre os indigenas do Alto Juruá (Acre) e valle do Ucayali (Perú).” Annaes da Academia Brasileira de Sciencias 8: 145-155. Ordinaire, Olivier. 1887. “Les sauvages du Pérou.” Revue d’Ethnographie, 6:265322. Ordinaire, Olivier. 1892. Du Pacifique a l'Atlantique par les Andes Péruviennes et l'Amazone. Paris: Plon. Orton, James. 1876. The Andes and the Amazon: Across the Continent of South America. Third Edition, Revised and Enlarged, Containing Notes of a Second Journey Across the Continent from Para to Lima and Lake Titicaca. New York: Harper & Brothers. Osborn, Henry. 1948. “Amahuaca Phonemes.” International Journal of American Linguistics, 14:188-190. Pallarés Fernando and Vic. Calvo. 1870. Noticias históricas de las Misiones de Fieles e Infieles del Colegio de Propaganda Fide de Santa Rosa de Ocopa. Continuación del Compendio Histórico del R.P. Fr. José Amich. Barcelona. Parker, Stephen G. 1992. Datos del Idioma Huariapano. Lima: Instituto Lingüístico de Verano. Parker, Stephen G. 1994. “Coda epenthesis in Huariapano.” International Journal of American Linguistics, 60:95-119. Paula, Aldir Santos de. 1992. Poyonáwa: A Língua dos Índios da Aldeia Barão: Aspectos Fonológico e Morfológicos. Master’s thesis, Universidade Federal de Pernambuco, Recife. Paula, Aldir Santos de. 2004. A Língua dos Índios Yawanawá do Acre. Ph.D. dissertation, Universidade Estadual de Campinas, Campinas, SP, Brazil. Pauly, Antonio. 1928. Ensayo de Etnografía Americana: Viajes y Exploraciones. Buenos Aires: Talleres S. A. Casa Jacobo Peuser, Ltda. Payne, David L. 1990. “Some widespread grammatical forms in South American languages.” In Doris L. Payne (ed.), Amazonian Linguistics: Studies in Lowland South American Languages, 75-87. Austin: University of Texas Press. Payne, Doris L. 1990. “Morphological characteristics of Lowland South American languages.” In Doris L. Payne (ed.), Amazonian Linguistics: Studies in Lowland South American Languages, 213-241. Austin: University of Texas Press. Payne, Doris L. and Thomas E. Payne. 1990. “Yagua”. In Desmond C. Derbyshire and Geoffrey K. Pullum (eds.), Handbook of Amazonian Languages, Volume 2, 249-474. Berlin: Mouton de Gruyter. Payne, Thomas E. 1997. Describing Morpho-syntax: A Guide for Field Linguists. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
116

Pickering, Wilbur. 1973. “Vocabulário Kaxarirí.” Série Linguística (of the Summer Institute of Linguistics, Brazil), 1: 63-66.
Piggott, G.L. 1992. “Variability in feature dependency: the case of nasality.” Natural Language and Linguistic Theory, 10:33-77.
Pike, Eunice and Eugene Scott. 1962. “The phonological hierarchy of Marinahua.” Phonetica, 8:1-8.
Plaza, Manuel and Juan Crisóstomo Cimini. 1907 [1841]. “Viaje a los rios Pachitea i Pozuzo por los PP. Fr. Manuel Plaza i Fr. Juan Crisóstomo Cimini.” In Larrabure i Correa, volume 11, 73-82.
Portillo, Pedro. 1905[1900]. “Exploración de los rios Apurimac, Ene, Tambo, Ucayali, Pachitea i Pichis por el prefecto de Ayacuho, coronel don Pedro Portillo.” In Carlos Larrabure i Correa, ed. Colección de Leyes, Decretos, Resoluciones i Otros Documentos Oficiales Referentes al Departamento de Loreto, Volume 3, pp. 463-550. Lima: Imprenta de “La Opinión Nacional.”
Prost, Gilbert. 1960. “Fonemas de la lengua Chacobo.” Notas Lingüísticas de Bolivia, 2:1-13. La Paz, Bolivia: Instituto Lingüístico de Verano.
Prost, Gilbert. 1962. “Signaling of Transitive and Intransitive in Chacobo (Pano).” International Journal of American Linguistics, 28:108-118.
Prost, Gilbert. 1965. “Chacobo.” In E. Matteson (ed.), Gramáticas Estructurales de Lenguas Bolivianas, volume 2, 1-130. Riberalta: Instituto Lingüístico de Verano.
Prost, Gilbert. 1967a. “Chacobo.” In Esther Matteson (ed.), Bolivian Indian Grammars: 1, 285-359. Norman: Summer Institute of Linguistics of the University of Oklahoma.
Prost, Gilbert. 1967b. “Phonemes of the Chácobo language.” Linguistics, 35: 61-5. Prost, Marian D. 1970. Costumbres, Habilidades y Cuadro de la Vida Humana entre
los Chacobos. Riberalta: Instituto Lingüístico de Verano. Raimondi, Antonio. 1874-9. El Perú. volume 3. Lima: Imprenta del Estado. Raimondy, Antonio. 1862. Apuntes sobre la Provincia Litoral de Loreto. Lima:
Tipografia Nacional. Reich, Alfred and Felix Stegelmann. 1903. “Bei den Indianern des Urubamba und
des Envira.” Globus 83(9): 133-137. Ribeiro, Darcy and Mary Ruth Wise. 1978. Los Grupos Etnicos de la Amazonía
Peruana. Lima: Instituto Lingüístico de Verano. Ricketson, Oliver Garrison. 1943. Notes on the Pacaguara Indians of the Rio
Madeira and their language. Unpublished mimeographed report prepared for the Exploration Department, Rubber Development Corporation, held at the Tozzer Library of the Harvard College Library. Rivet, Paul. 1910. “Sur quelques dialectes Pano peu connus.” Journal de la Société des Américanistes, 7:221-242. Rivet, Paul. 1920. “Les Katukina, étude linguistique.” Journal de la Société des Américanistes, 12:55-63. Rivet, Paul. 1924. “Langues de l'Amérique du Sud et des Antilles.” In A. Millet and Marcel Cohen (eds.), Les Langues du Monde par un Groupe de Linguistes. volume 16, 639-712. Paris, É. Champion Rivet, Paul and Constant Tastevin. 1919-24. “Les langues du Purús, du Juruá et des régions limitrophes: Io Le groupe arawak pré-andin.” Anthropos, 14/15:857-890; 16/17:290-325, 819-828; 18/19:104-113. Rivet, Paul and Constant Tastevin. 1921. “Les tribus indiennes des bassins du Purús, du Juruá et des régions limitrophes.” La Geographie, 35:449-482.
117

Rivet, Paul and Constant Tastevin. 1927-29. “Les dialectes pano du haut Juruá et du haut Purus.” Anthropos, 22:811-827, 24:489-516.
Rivet, Paul and Constant Tastevin. 1932. “Les dialectes pano du haut Juruá et du haut Purus.” Acts of the XXth Intenational Congress of Americanists, volume 3:227-278.
Rivet, Paul and Čestmir Loukotka. 1952. “Langues de l'Amérique du Sud et des Antilles.” In A. Meillet and Marcel Cohen (eds.), Les Langues du Monde par un Groupe de Linguistes. New edition, volume 2, 1099-1152. Paris: Centre National de la Reserche Scientifique.
Rodrigues, Aryon D. 1986. Línguas Brasileiras: Para o Conhecimento das Línguas Indígenas. São Paulo: Edições Loyola.
Rodrigues, Aryon D. 2000. “‘Ge-Pano-Carib’ x ‘Jê-Tupí-Karib’: Sobre relaciones lingüísticas prehistóricas en Sudamérica.” In Luis Miranda (ed.), Actas: I Congreso de Lenguas Indígenas de Sudamérica, Volume 1, 95-104. Lima: Universidad Ricardo Palma.
Rodríguez, Manuel. 1684. El Marañon y Amazonas. Madrid: Imprenta de Antonio Gonçalez de Reyes.
Rodríguez Tena, Fernando. 2004-5[1780]. Crónica de las Misiones Franciscanas del Perú siglos XVII y XVIII. Iquitos, Peru: CETA.
Romanoff, Steven, Daniel Manquid Jiménez Huanan, Fernando Shoque Uaquí Bëso & David W. Fleck. 2004. Matsesën Nampid Chuibanaid: La Vida Tradicional de los Matsés. Lima: Centro Amazónico de Antropología y Aplicación Práctica (CAAAP).
Ruedas, Javier. 2001. The Marubo Political System. Ph.D. dissertation, Tulane University, New Orleans.
Ruedas, Javier. 2002. “Marubo discourse genres and domains of influence: Language and politics in an indigenous Amazonian village.” International Journal of American Linguistics, 68: 447-482
Ruedas, Javier. 2003. “Social context and creation of meaning in indigenous Amazonian performances of myth and oral history.” Journal of Ritual Studies, 17:35-71.
Ruedas, Javier. 2004. “History, ethnography, and politics in Amazonia: Implications of diachronic and synchronic variability in Marubo politics.” Tipití: Journal of the Society for the Anthropology of Lowland South America, 2:23-64.
Ruhlen, Merritt. 1987. A Guide to the World’s Languages. Stanford: Stanford University Press.
Russell, Clif. 1960. “Iskonawa Vocabulario Lista.” Unpublished list. Russell, Robert. 1958. “Algunos morfemas de amahuaca (pano) que equivalen a la
entonación del castellano.” Perú Indígena, 7(16-17):29-33 Russell, Robert. 1965. A Transformational Grammar of Amawaka. M.A. thesis, The
Ohio State University, Columbus. Russell, Robert. 1975. Estudios Pano IV: Una Gramática Transformacional del
Amahuaca. Lima: Instituto Lingüístico de Verano. Russell, Robert and Dolores Russell. 1959. “Syntactonemics in Amahuaca.”
Publicações do Museu Nacional (Rio de Janeiro). Série Lingüística Especial, 1:128-167. Safir, Ken. 1979. “Metrical Structure in Capanahua.” MIT Working Papers in Linguistics, 1:95-114. Safir, Ken. 1982. “Nasal Spreading in Capanahua.” Linguistic Inquiry, 13:689-694.
118

Sagols, Francisco. 1901 [1874]. “Los habitantes de la Pampa de Sacramento.” Boletín de la Sociedad Geográfica de Lima, 11:357-366.
Salvador, Isidro A. 1972. El Misionero del Remo. Lima: Editorial San Antonio. Schmidt, P. W. 1926. Die Sprachfamilien und Sprachhenkreise der Erde.
Heidelberg: Carl Winter’s Universitätsbuchhandlund. Schuller, Rudolph. 1911. “Weitere Ergänzungen zur Bibliographie der Nusprachen
(Pano-Gruppe) .” Anthropos, 4:640-642. Schuller, Rudolph. 1933. “The language of the Tacana Indians (Bolivia).”
Anthropos, 28:99-116, 463-84. Schultz, Harald and Vilma Chiara. 1955. “Informações sôbre os Índios do Alto rio
Purus.” Revista do Museu Paulista, new series, 9: 181-201. Scott, Eugene and Donald G. Frantz. 1978[1973]. “La pregunta en sharanahua y
constrenimientos, propuestos sobre la permutación de la pregunta.” In Eugene Loos (ed.), Estudios Panos I, 184-209. Lima: Summer Institute of Linguistics. Scott, Eugene and Donald G. Frantz. 1974. “Sharanahua questions and proposed constraints on question movement.” Linguistics, 132:75-86. Scott, Marie. 2004. Vocabulario Sharanahua-Castellano. Lima: Instituto Lingüístico de Verano. Shell, Olive A. 1950. “Cashibo I: Phonemes.” International Journal of American Linguistics, 16:198-202. Shell, Olive A. 1957. “Cashibo II: Grammemic analysis of transitive and intransitive verb patterns.” International Journal of American Linguistics, 23:179-218. Shell, Olive A. 1959. Aanua Bana Hunánti: Vocabulario Cashibo-Castellano. Lima: Instituto Lingüístico Peruano. Shell, Olive A. 1965. Pano Reconstruction. Ph.D. dissertation, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia. Shell, Olive A. 1973. “Los modos del cashibo y el análisis del performativo.” In Eugene Loos (ed.), Estudios Panos I, 23-62. Lima: Summer Institute of Linguistics. Shell, Olive A. 1975a. “Cashibo modals and the performance analysis.” Foundations of Language, 13:177-199. Shell, Olive A. 1975b. Estudios Panos III: Las Lenguas Pano y su Reconstrucción. Lima: Instituto Lingüístico de Verano. Shell, Olive A. 1987. Vocabulario Cashibo-Cacataibo. Lima: Instituto Lingüístico Peruano. Shaver, Harold. 1996. Diccionario Nomatsiguenga-Castellano, Castellano Nomatsiguenga. Yarinacocha, Peru: Summer Institute of Linguistics. Silva, Alfredo José da. 1952. “Relatório da excurção feita a tribu dos índios Marubu, setembro de 1952” [Original manuscript in the personal archives of Darcy Ribeiro in Brasília, according to Loukotka 1968]. Simons, Gary F. 1982. “Word taboo and comparative Austronesian linguistics.” Pacific Linguistics, C-76:157-226. Smyth, William and Frederick Lowe. 1836. Narrative of a Journey from Lima to
Para, across the Andes and down the Amazon. London: William Clowes and Sons. Soares, Marília Facó. 2000. “On the relation between syntax and phonology in Tikuna (isolated), Marubo and Matsés (Panoan family).” In Hein van der Voort and Simon van de Kerke (eds.), Essays on Indigenous Languages of Lowland South America: Contributions to the 49th International Congress of Americanists in Quito, 1997. The Netherlands: Universiteit Leiden.
119

Soares, Marília Facó, Raquel C. Romankevicius Costa and Carmen T. Dorigo de Carvalho. 1993. “Para uma classificação rítmica das línguas Pano.” Signo & Seña (Universidad de Buenos Aires), 3:95-116.
Sobreviela, Manuel. 1791a. “Carta escrita a la Sociedad por el Padre Predicador Apostólico Fray Manuel Sobreviela, Guardian del Colegio de Santa Rosa de Ocopa.” Mercurio Peruano, 3:91-104, 107-120.
Sobreviela, Manuel. 1791b. “Plan del curso de los Ríos Huallaga y Vcayali y de la Pampa del Sacramento” (folding map). Mercurio Peruano, 3:120..
Solís Fonseca, Gustavo. 2003. Lenguas en la Amazonía Peruana. Lima: Unión Europea y República del Perú.
Sombra, Luiz. 1913. “Os Cachinauás: ligeiras notas sobre usos e costumes.” Jornal do Commercio (Rio de Janeiro), 11 January, 13 January.
Souza, Emerson Carvalho de. 2004. Aspectos fonológicos da Língua Jaminawa-arara (Pano). Master’s thesis, Universidade Federal de Goiás, Goiânia, Brazil.
Souza, Emerson Carvalho de. in progress. (Yaminawa-arara Grammar), Ph.D. dissertation, Universidade Federal de Goiás, Goiânia, Brazil.
Sousa, Gladys Cavalcante. 2004. Aspectos da Fonologia da Língua Kaxarari. Master’s thesis, Universidade Estadual de Campinas, Campinas, SP, Brazil.
Souza, Ruth Wallace de Garcia. 1979. (no title). Brasilia: FUNAI archives. Spanghero Ferreira, Vitória Regina. 2000a. Língua Matis (Pano): Uma Análise
Fonológica. Master’s thesis, Universidade Estadual de Campinas, Campinas, SP, Brazil. Spanghero (Ferreira), Vitória Regina. 2000b. “Nasalidade em Matis (Pano): Um exercício de análise.” In Luis Miranda (ed.), Actas: I Congreso de Lenguas Indígenas de Sudamérica, Tomo I, 191-196. Lima: Universidad Ricardo Palma. Spanghero Ferreira, Vitória Regina. 2001. Língua Matis (Pano): Uma Análise Fonológica. Munchen: Lincom Europa. Spanghero Ferreira, Vitória Regina. 2005. Estudo Lexical da Lingua Matis: Subsídios para um Dicionário Bilíngüe. Ph.D. dissertation, Universidade Estadual de Campinas, Campinas, SP, Brazil. Sparing-Chávez, Margarethe W. 1998. ‘Interclausal reference in Amahuaca.’ In Desmond C. Derbyshire and Geoffrey K. Pullum (eds.), Handbook of Amazonian languages, volume 4, 443-485. Berlin: Mouton de Gruyter. Sparing-Chávez, Margarethe W. 2005. “La referencia entre cláusulas en el Amahuaca.” Revista Latinoamericana de Estudios Etnolingüísticos, 11: 19-35. Sparing-Chávez, Margarethe W. 2007. Aspects of Grammar: Amawaka: An Endangered Language of the Amazon Basin. Lima: Summer Institute of Linguistics. Spix, Johann Baptist von and Carl Friedrich Philipp von Martius. 1823-31. Reise in Brasilien auf Befehl Sr. Majestät Maximilian Joseph I. Königs von Baiern in den Jahren 1817 bis 1820. Munich: M. Lindauer. St-Cricq, M. de. 1853. “Voyage du Pérou au Brésil par les fleuves Ucayali et Amazone, Indiens Conibos.” Bulletin de la Société de Géographie, 6:273-295. Steinen, Karl von den. 1904. Diccionario Sipibo. Berlin: Deitrich Reimer. Steward, Julian H. and Alfred Métraux. 1948. “Tribes of the Peruvian and Ecuadorian Montana.” In Julian H. Steward (ed.), Handbook of South American Indians, Volume 3, The Tropical Forest Tribes, 535-656. Washington: United States Government Printing Offices. Stiglich, Germán. 1908. “La región peruana de los bosques.” In Carlos Larrabure i Correa (ed.), Colección de Leyes, Decretos, Resoluciones i Otros Documentos
120

Oficiales Referentes al Departamento de Loreto, Volume 15, 308-495. Lima: Imp. de “La Opinión Nacional.” Suárez, Jorge A. 1969. “Moseten and Pano-Tacanan.” Anthropological Linguistics, 11/9:255-266. Suárez, Jorge A. 1973. “Macro-Pano-Tacanan.” International Journal of American Linguistics, 39: 137-154. Swadesh, Morris. 1952. “Lexico-statistic dating of prehistoric ethnic contacts: With special reference to North American Indians and Eskimos.” Proceedings of the American Philosophical Society, 96:452-463. Swadesh, Morris. 1959. Mapas de clasificación lingüística de México y las Américas. Cuadernos del Instituto de Historia, Serie Antropológica N°8, México. Swadesh, Morris. 1962. “Afinidades de las lenguas amerindias.’ Akten des 34 Internationalen Amerikanisten Kongress, 729-38. Wein: Verlag Ferndinand Berger, Horn. Taboada y Lemos, Francisco Gil de. 1859. Memorias de los Vireyes que han
governado el Perú. Volume 6. Lima: Libreria Central de Felipe Bailly. Tastevin, Constant. 1924a. “Chez les Indiens do Haut Juruá.” Les Missions
Catholiques, 56:65-67, 78-80, 90-93, 101-104. Tastevin, Constant. 1924b. “Les études ethnographiques et linguistiques du P.
Tastevin en Amazonie.” Journal de la Société des Américanistes de Paris, 16 (new series): 421-5. Tastevin, Constant. 1925. “Le fleuve Murú: Ses habitants. - Croyances et mœurs cachinaua.” La Geographie, 43:401-422, 44:14-35. Tastevin, Constant. 1926. “Le Haut Tarauacá.” La Geographie, 45:34-54, 158175.Tastevin, Constant. 1929. ”Os Indios da Prefeitura apostólica de Teffé.” O Missionario (Brazil) Vol?:.10-14. Tastevin, Constant. ms a. Dialecte Kachinwa (Foz do Jordão et Haut Jordão, avrilmai 1924). Unpublished lexicon in the archives of Paul Rivet at the Musée National d'Histoire Naturelle in Paris. 2 AP 1 A3 b #4, 30pp. Tastevin, Constant. ms.b. Dialecte Kaśinawa. Unpublished lexicon in the archives of Paul Rivet at the Musée National d'Histoire Naturelle in Paris. 2 AP 1 A3 b #4. Tastevin, Constant. ms.c. Kaśinawa (Foz do Tarauacá). Unpublished lexicon in the archives of Paul Rivet at the Musée National d'Histoire Naturelle in Paris. 2 AP 1 A3 b #5, 3 pp. Tastevin, Constant. ms.d. Chama de l’Ucayali et des rivères et cochas voisines (Cunibos). Unpublished lexicon in the archives of Paul Rivet at the Musée National d'Histoire Naturelle in Paris. 2 AP 1 A3 b #6, 8 pp. Tastevin, Constant. ms.e. Notes linguistiques Póya-nawa (Cruzeiro do Sul, nov. 1922). Unpublished lexicon in the archives of Paul Rivet at the Musée National d'Histoire Naturelle in Paris. 2 AP 1 A3 b #8, 16 pp. Tastevin. Constant. ms.f. Amawaka (Niśi-nawa), Nǝhanawa, Čani-nawa + Mastanawa, Yawanawa-Iskunawa (1924). Unpublished comparative lexicon in the archives of Paul Rivet at the Musée National d'Histoire Naturelle in Paris. 2 AP 1 A3 c #6, 16 pp. Tastevin. Constant. ms.g. Paranawa, Kaśinaua ou Hǝunawa, Yumanawa (1924). Unpublished comparative lexicon in the archives of Paul Rivet at the Musée National d'Histoire Naturelle in Paris. 2 AP 1 A3 c # 7, 15 pp. Tastevin. Constant. ms.h. Poya-nawa, Yaminawa, Katukina (1922-1923). Unpublished comparative lexicon in the archives of Paul Rivet at the Musée National d'Histoire Naturelle in Paris. 2 AP 1 A3 c #8, 36 pp.
121

Tastevin, Constant. ms.i. Dialecte Nukuini (Haut Môa) rio Juruá. Unpublished manuscript in the archives of Paul Rivet at the Musée National d'Histoire Naturelle in Paris. 1 p.
Távara, Santiago. 1905 [1868]. “Diario del primer viaje de la comisión hidrográfica del Amazonas presidida por el almirante Tucker, llevado por el médico de la misma, don Santiago Távara.” In Carlos Larrabure i Correa, ed. Colección de Leyes, Decretos, Resoluciones i Otros Documentos Oficiales Referentes al Departamento de Loreto, Volume 2, pp. 394-429. Lima: Imprenta de “La Opinión Nacional.”
Tessmann, Günter. 1928. Menschen ohne Gott, ein Besuch bei den indianern des Ucayali. Stuttgart: Strecker und Schröder.
Tessmann, Günter. 1929. “Die Tschama-Sprache.” Anthropos, 24: 241-271. Tessmann, Günter. 1930. Die Indianer Nordost-Perus: Grundlegende Forschungen
Für Eine Systematische Kulturkunde. Hamburg: Friederichsen, de Gruyter & Co. M. B. H. Tizón y Bueno, Ricardo. 1911. La Hoya Peruana del Madre de Dios. Lima: La Opinión Nacional. Tournon, Jacques. 2002. La Merma Mágica: Vida e Historia de los Shipibo-Conibo del Ucayali. Lima: Centro Amazónico de Antropología y Aplicación Práctica (CAAAP). Tovar, Antonio. 1961. Catálogo de las Lenguas de América del Sur: Enumeración, con Indicaciones Tipológicas, Bibliografía y Mapas. Buenos Aires: Editorial Sudamericana. Tovar, Antonio and Consuelo Larrucea de Tovar. 1984. Catálogo de las Lenguas de América del Sur: Con Classificaciones, Indicaciones Tipológicas, Bibliografía y Mapas. Madrid: Editorial Gredos. Townsley, Graham. 1994. “Los Yaminahua.” In Fernando Santos and Frederica Barclay (eds.), Guía Etnográfica de la Alta Amazonía, volume 2, 239-58. Quito: Ediciones Abya-Yala. Uriarte, Manuel J. 1952. Diario de un Misionero de Mainas. Madrid: Instituto Santo Toribio de Mogrovejo. Vacas Galindo, Enrique. 1906. Mapa Geográfico-histórico de la República del Ecuador. Quito. Valenzuela, Pilar M. 1997. Basic verb types and argument structures in ShipiboConibo. M.A. thesis, University of Oregon, Eugene. Valenzuela, Pilar M. 1998. “‘Luna-avispa’ y “tigre-machaco’: Compuestos semánticos en la taxonomía shipiba.” In Zarina Estrada Fernández, Max Figueroa Esteva, Gerardo López Cruy and Andrés Acosta Félix (eds.), IV Encuentro Internacional de Lingüística en el Noroeste: Tomo I: Lenguas Indígena, Volumen 2. Hermosillo, Sonora: Editorial Unison.. Valenzuela, Pilar M. 1999. “Adverbials, transitivity, and switch-reference in Shipibo-Konibo.” Chicago Linguistic Society 35: The Panels, 355-371. Valenzuela, Pilar M. 2000a. “Ergatividad escendida en Wariapano, Yaminawa y Shipibo-Konibo.” In Hein van der Voort and Simon van de Kerke (eds.), Essays on indigenous languages of lowland South America: Contributions to the 49th International Congress of Americanists in Quito 1997, 111-128. Leiden: Universiteit Leiden. Valenzuela, Pilar M. 2000b. “Major categories in Shipibo ethnobiological taxonomy.” Anthropological Linguistics, 42:1-36.
122

Valenzuela, Pilar M. 2002a. “Causation and Transitivity in Shipibo-Konibo.” In Masayoshi Shibatani (ed.), The Grammar of Causation and Interpersonal Manipulation, 417-483. Amsterdam: John Benjamins Publishing Company.
Valenzuela, Pilar M. 2002b. Relativization in Shipibo-Konibo: A Typologicallyoriented Study. Muenchen: LINCOM Europa.
Valenzuela, Pilar M. 2003a. “Evidentiality in Shipibo-Konibo, with a comparative overview of the category in Panoan.” In Alexandra Y. Aikhenvald and R. M. W. Dixon (eds.), Studies in evidentiality, 33-61. Amsterdam: John Benjamins.
Valenzuela, Pilar M. 2003b. Transitivity in Shipibo-Konibo Grammar. Ph.D. dissertation, University of Oregon, Eugene.
Valenzuela, Pilar M. 2004. “El sistema de marcación de caso ergativo-escindido en wariapano: Análisis sincrónico y comparativo.” In Zarina Estrada Fernández, Ana. V. Fernández Garay and Albert Álvarez González (eds.), Estudios en Lenguas Amerindias: Homenaje a Ken L. Hale, 309-369. Hermosillo, México: Universidad de Sonora.
Valenzuela, Pilar M. 2005a. “Adjuntos Orientados hacia un Participante en Chacobo (Pano). Acercamiento Comparativo y Tipológico.” UniverSOS, Revista de Lenguas Indígenas y Universos Culturales (Valencia, Spain), 185-200.
Valenzuela, Pilar M. 2005b. “Participant agreement in Panoan.” In Nikolaus P. Himmelmann and Eva Schultze-Berndt (eds.), Secondary Predication and Adverbial Modification: The Typology of Depictives, 259-298. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Valenzueal, Pilar M. 2006. “Los verbos del español en el shipibo-konibo: Aportes a un propuesto universal del contacto lingüístico.” In Claudine Chamoreau and Yolanda Lastra (eds.), Dinámica Lingüística de las Lenguas en Contacto, 141168. Hermosillo, México: Universidad de Sonora.
Valenzuela, Pilar M. 2010a. “Applicative constructions in Shipibo-Konibo (Panoan).”
International Journal of American Linguistics, 76:101-144.
Valenzuela, Pilar M. 2010b. “Ergativity in Shipibo-Konibo.” In Gildea, Spike and Francesc Queixalós (eds), Ergativity in Amazonia. Amsterdam: John Benjamins.
Valenzuela, Pilar M. and Oliver A. Iggesen. 2007. “El desarrollo de un marcador suprasegmental en chácobo (pano).” In Andrés Romero-Figueroa, Ana Fernández Garay, Ángel Corbera Mori (eds.), Lenguas Indígenas de América del Sur: Estudios descriptivo-tipológicos y sus contribuciones para la Lingüística teórica,187-199. Caracas: Universidad Católica Andrés Bello.
Valenzuela, Pilar, M., Luis Marquez Pinedo and Ian Maddieson. 2001. “Illustrations of the IPA: Shipibo.” Journal of the International Phonetic Association, 31:281285.
Valle Arévalo, Daniel 2009. El Sistema de Marcación de Caso en Kakataibo. Bachelor (licenciatura) thesis, Universidad Mayor Nacional de San Marcos, Lima.
Veigl, Franz Xavier. 1785. “Gründliche Nachrichten über die Verfassung der Landchaft von Maynas in Süd-Amerika, bis zum Jahre 1768.” In Ch. G. von Murr (ed.), Reisen einiger Missionarien der Gesellschaft Jesu in Amerika. Nüremberg: Johann Eberhard Seh.
Velasco, Juan de. 1981 [1788-9]. Historia del Reino do Quito en la América Meridional. Caracas: Biblioteca Ayacucho.
Villanueva, Manuel Pablo. 1902. “Fronteras de Loreto (part 1).” Boletín de la Sociedad Geográfica de Lima, 12:361-479.
Villarejo, Avencio. 1959. La Selva y el Hombre: Estudio Antropocosmológico del Aborigen Amazónico. Lima: Editorial Ausonia, S.A.
123

Vogelin, C. F. and Zellig S. Harris. 1951. “Methods for determining intelligiblility among dialects of natural languages.” Proceedings of the American Philosophical Society, 95:322-329.
Voegelin, C. F. and F. M. Voegelin. 1977. Classification and Index of the World’s Languages. New York: Elsevier.
Voss, Robert S. and David W. Fleck. in press. Mammalian diversity and Matses ethnomammalogy in Amazonia Peru. Part 1: Primates. Bulletin of the American Museum of Natural History.
Walker, Rachel and Geoffrey K. Pullum. 1999. “Possible and impossible segments.” Language, 75:764-780.
Weisshar, Emmerich and Bruno Illius. 1990. “Eine Grammatik des Shipibo-Conibo mit Textbeispiel.” In Bruno Illius & Matthias Laubscher (eds.), Circumpacifica, Festschrift für Thomas S. Barthel, 563-587. Frankfurt am Main: Peter Lang.
Werlich, David Patrick. 1968. The Conquest and Settlement of the Peruvian Montaña. Ph.D. dissertation, University of Minnesota.
Whiton, Louis C., H. Bruce Greene and Richard P. Momsen. 1964. “The Isconahua of the Remo.” Journal de la Société des Américanistes, 53: 85-124.
Wise, Mary Ruth. 1976. “Apuntes sobre la influencia inca entre los amuesha: Factor que oscurece la clasificación de su idioma.” Revista del Museo Nacional (Lima), 42:355-66.
Wistrand de Robinson, Lila. 1968. Cashibo Relative Clause Constructions. M.A. thesis, University of Texas, Austin.
Wistrand de Robinson, Lila. 1969. Folkloric and Linguistic Analysis of Cashibo Narrative Prose. Ph.D. dissertation, University of Texas, Austin.
Wistrand de Robinson, Lila. 1971. “Cashibo verb stems, causatives and proposition consolidation.” Papers from the 5th Kansas Linguistic Conference, 204-213. Lawrence: University of Kansas.
Wistrand de Robinson, Lila. 1978. “Some generative solutions to problems of Cashibo phonology.” In Mohammad Ali Jazayery and Edgar Polome (eds.), Linguistic and Literary Studies in in honor of A.H. Hill, volume 2, 257-295. Mouton: The Hague.
Wistrand Robinson, Lila. 1984. Biota of the Cashibo/Cacataibo of Peru. Forest, Virginia: Lingua-Folk Publications.
Wistrand-Robinson, Lila. 1991. “Uto-Aztecan affinities with Panoan of Peru I: Correspondences.” In Mary Ritchie Key (ed.), Language Change in South American Indian Languages, 243-276. Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania Press.
Woodroffe, Joseph F. 1914. The Upper Reaches of the Amazon. London: Methuen & Co. Ltd.
Young de Hyde, Sylvia. 1978[1973]. “El verbo reflexivo del amahuaca.” In Eugene E. Loos (ed.), Estudios Panos II. Lima: Instituto Lingüístico de Verano.Zárate, Andrés de. 1904 [1739]. “Informe que haze á Su Magestad el Padre Andrés de Zárate, de la Compañía de Jhesús, Visitador y Vizeprovinzial que acaua de ser de la provinzia de Quito, en el Reyno de el Perú, y sus Misiones del rio Napo y del Marañon.” In Francisco de Figueroa, Relación de las Misiones de la Compañía de Jesús en el País de los Maynas, 341-407. Madrid: Librería General de Victoriano Suárez.
Zárate, Andrés de, Guillermo Detré, Leonardo Deubler, Francisco Reen, and Pablo Maroni. 1904 [1735]. “Relación de la Mision apostólica que tiene á su cargo la provincia de Quito, de la Compañía de Jesús, en el gran rio Marañon, en que se
124

refiere lo sucedido desde el año de 1725 hasta el año de 1735.” In Francisco de Figueroa, Relación de las Misiones de la Compañía de Jesús en el País de los Maynas, 293-339. Madrid: Librería General de Victoriano Suárez. Zariquiey Biondi, Roberto. 2006. Hacia una Reconstrucción del Sistema Personal del Protopano. Aspectos Fonológicos y Morfológicos. Master’s thesis, Pontificia Universidad Católica del Perú, Lima. Zariquiey Biondi, Roberto. 2012. A Grammar of Kashibo-Kakataibo. Ph.D. dissertation, La Trobe University, Bundoora, Australia. (recently submitted; not yet available) Zariquiey, Roberto & David W. Fleck. in press. “Prefixation in Kashibo-Kakataibo: Synchronic or diachronic derivation.” International Journal of American Linguistics. Zingg, Philipp. 1998. Diccionario Chácobo-Castellano Castellano-Chácobo con Bosquejo de la Gramática Chacobo y con Apuntes Culturales. La Paz, Bolivia: Ministerio de Desarrollo Sostenible y Planificación Viceministro de Asuntos Indígenas y Pueblos Originarios.
125

