INFORMATION TO USERS
This reproduction was made from a copy ofa manuscript sent to us for publication and microfilming. While the most advanced technology has been used to photograph and reproduce this manuscript, the quality of the reproduction is heavily dependent upon the quality of the material submitted. Pages in any manuscript may have indistinct print. In all cases the best available copy has been filmed. The following explanation oftechniques is provided to help clarify notations which may appear on this reproduction.
1. Manuscripts may not always be complete. When it is not possible to obtain missing pages, a note appears to indicate this.
2. When copyrighted materials are removed from the manuscript, a note appears to indicate this.
3. Oversize materials (maps, drawings, and charts) are photographed by sectioning the original, beginning at the upper left hand corner and continuing from left to right in equal sections with small overlaps. Each oversize page is also filmed as one exposure and is available, for an additional charge, as a standard 35mm slide or in black and white paper format.*
4. Most photographs reproduce acceptably on positive microfilm or microfiche but lack clarity on xerographic copies made from the microfilm. For an additional charge, all photographs are available in black and white standard 35mm slide format.*
*For more information about black and white slides or enlarged paper reproductions, please contact the Dissertations Customer Services Department

8603637

Frank, Paul Stephen

A GRAMMAR OF IKA

University of Pennsylvania

PH.D. 1985

University Microfilms
Internationa! 300 N. Zeeb Road, Ann Artjor, MI 48106

Copyright 1985 by
Frank, Paul Stephen All Rights Reserved

PLEASE NOTE:

in all cases this material has been filmed in the best possible way from the available copy. Problems encountered with this document have been identified here with a check mark V .

1. Glossy photographs or pages

2. Colored illustrations, paper or print

3. Photographs with dark background

4. Illustrations are poor copy

5. Pages with black marks, not original copy

6. Print shows through as there is text on both sides of page

7. Indistinct, broken or small print on several pages y ^

8. Print exceeds margin requirements

9. Tightly bound copy with print lost in spine

10. Computer printout pages with indistinct print

11. Page(s)

lacking when material received, and not available from school or

author.

12. Page(s)

seem to be missing in numbering only as text follows.

13. Two pages numbered

. Text follows.

14. Curling and wrinkled pages

15. Dissertation contains pages with print at a slant, filmed as received

16. Other

University Microfilms
International

A GRAMMAR OF IKA PAUL STEPHEN FRANK
A DISSERTATION in
LINGUISTICS
Presented to the Faculties of the University of Pennsylvania in Partial Fulfillment of the Requirements for the Degree of Doctor of philosophy.
1985
Sue rvisor of Dissertation
Graduate Group Chairperson

COPYRIGHT PAUL STEPHEN FRANK
1985

ACKNOHLEDGBffflTS

Many people have played a part in my linguistic training and the

writing of this dissertation. My brother David first piqued my

interest in linguistics and has thus left an indelible mark on my life.

Jared Klein and Ken Pike played a significant role in the early years

of my training. During my graduate studies, Gillian Sankoff, John Fought, Bill Labov, Dell Hymes, and Tony Kroch helped mold my understanding of and ability to do linguistics. My special thanks to Gillian for her invaluable help guiding the writing of this dissertation.

Dave Weber gave me a great deal of guidance in writing the first

draft of this work, and Adolfo Constenla made a number of insightful

observations during the final stages of my research.

Hugh Tracy

unsparingly shared of his data, field notes, ana experience with the

Bfntukwa and the Ika language. Mr. Abran Izquierdo Solis spent many

hours answering my questions concerning his language and teaching me

how things should really be said in Ika.

My colleagues in the Summer Institute of Linguistics in Colombia

provided personal and technical support without which I could not have completed my research. The Ministry of Government of Colombia, under

whom SIL works in that country, facilitated my living and doing research

in Colombia in both direct and indirect ways.

Finally, my wife Maggie gave me personal support and encouragement throughout the years of my graduate program and especially during the writing of my dissertation. She also took on the tedious but necessary

iii

task of typing and editing virtually all of the grammar. She and my son Stephen were my comfort during times of discouragement and helped me maintain my sanity and perspective during these past two years.
iv

TABLE OF COMMITS

ACXNOHLBXaBMENTS

iii

TABLE OF CONTENTS

v

LIST OF TABLES

ix

PREFACE

X

1. 1MTHOUUCT1CH

1

1.1 The genetic classification of the Ika language

1

1.2 The Blntukwa people

1

1.3 The source of data for this study

3

1.4 The typological characteristics of Ika

4

1.4.1 Word order

4

1.4.2 Adpositions

4

1.4.3 Head noun and adjective

5

1.4.4 Head noun and genitive

5

1.4.5 Affixation

6

1.4.6 Relative clauses

7

1.4.7 Comparatives

7

1.4.8 Negation

8

1.4.9 Questions

8

1.4.10 Coding of major syntactic functions

9

1.4.11 Ergativity

10

1.5 Ika phonemics

13

1.6 Syllable structure

15

1.7 Ika morphophonemics

16

1.7.1 Phonologically conditioned variation

17

1.7.2 Alternations applying only at morpheme boundaries

18

1.7.3 Vowel/0 alternations

19

1.7.4 Morphophonemic fusion

22

2. Word classes in Ika

25

2.1 Nouns

25

2.2 Adjectives

26

2.3 Verbs

27

2.3.1 Intransitive verbs

27

2.3.2 Transitive verbs

27

2.3.3 Bitransitive verbs

28

2.3.4 Impersonal verbs

29

2.3.5 Verbs with sentential objects

30

2.3.6 Quotation-like verbs

31

2.3.7 Copular verbs

31

2.3.8 Auxiliary verbs

33

2.4 Adverbs

33

2.5 Pronouns

34

2.6 Noun adjuncts

36

v

2.7 Verb adjuncts

37

2.8 Conjunctions

37

2.9 Postpositions

38

3. THE NOON PHRASE

39

3.1 Quantifiers

39

3.2 Numerals

40

3.3 Adjectives

43

3.4 Articles

44

3.5 Case marking

44

3.6 Nouns as modifiers

45

4. Case Marking and Postpositional Phrases

46

4.1 (-)se' 'locative, source/goal, ergative'

48

4.2 (—)sin 'instrument, accompaniment, and conjunction'

50

4.3 (-)ikin 'limitative*

51

4.4 (-)eki 'locative'

52

4.5 (-)aba* 'location' and 'time'

53

4.6 —n 'by means of'

55

4.7 zei 'genitive'

55

4.8 pari 'from'

57

4.9 zan* 'to be from'

58

4.10 Other markers of position

59

5. THE VERB PHRASE

60

5.1 Auxiliary verbs

61

5.1.1 The obligatory use of auxiliary verbs

62

5.1.2 The optional use of auxiliary verbs

64

5.2 Agreement

67

5.3 Locationals and noun classes

71

5.3.1 Existentials and locatives

72

5.3.2 Noun classes and verbs meaning 'to place*

74

5.4 Temporal aspect

76

5.5 Mood

79

5.5.1 Modal suffixes

80

5.5.1.1 -ikua 'must'

80

5.5.1.2 -*kuei 'able to'

81

5.5.1.3 —wi'na 'prohibited'

81

5.5.1.4 -iwa 'about to'

82

5.5.1.5 -ngua 'will' and -nguasi 'in order to'

82

5.5.1.6 -iza 'would'

85

5.5.2 Mood indicators and clause connectors

86

5.6 Deictic aspect

87

5.7 Valence change

90

5.7.1 Causatives

91

5.7.2 kS— 'peripheral participant' and valence increase

93

5.7.3 Benefactives

96

5.7.4 Reciprocals and reflexives

98

5.8 Comparatives and equatives

99

vi

5.9 an— 'point of reference' 6. CLAUSE FORMATION
6.1 Declaratives 6.2 Questions
6.2.1 Yes/No questions 6.2.1.1 Neutral yes/no questions 6.2.1.2 Alternative yes/no questions 6.2.1.3 Leading yes/no questions
6.2.2 Content questions 6.3 Imperatives
6.3.1 Immediate imperatives 6.3.2 Future imperatives 6.3.3 Hortatory 6.4 Negation 7. SENTHKB FORMATION 7.1 Temporal clause connectors 7.2 Logical clause connectors 7.3 Sentence introducers 8. SUBORDINATION 8.1 Relative Clauses 8.2 Locative nominalized clauses 8.3 Complementation 8.3.1 Verbs with full sentence complements 8.3.2 Verbs with complements not marked for mood 8.3.3 Indirect questions 8.3.4 Motion verbs with purpose complements
8.3.4.1 -ngua 'will' and purpose 8.3.4.2 Gua's 'cause' and purpose 8.3.5 Resultant state complements 8.3.6 A'dzun 'want' 8.4 Adverbial clauses of simultaneous action 9. PRAGMATICS 9.1 Non-referential subjects 9.2 Off-stage subjects 9.3 Ergative marking and the given-new distinction 9.4 Focus 9.5 The pragmatics of clause organization 9.5.1 Zero anaphora 9.5.2 The linear order of clause constituents 9.5.3 -ri 'topic' 9.5.3.1 Clause-final -ri — separating distinct events 9.5.3.2 -ri and contrast 9.5.3.3 -ri and topicality 9.5.4 Participant reference 9.5.4.1 Topic continuity

100
105 105 108 108 108 109 110 112 117 117 119 120 120 122 123 • 126 127 130 130 133 135 136 137 139 140 141 142 142 143 144 147 147 148 149 154 157 158 159 161 162 164 164 165 167

vii

9.5.4.2 Topic continuity in Ika discourse

168

9.5.5 Optional auxiliary verbs and pragmatic structuring

171

10. CGHCXJOSION

176

11. ABBREVIATIONS

178

UHWMIMPKS

179

INDEX

182

viii

LIST OF TABIDS

Table 1 Ika consonants

14

Table 2 Ika vowels

14

Table 3 Ika dipthongs

14

Table 4 Impersonal verbs

30

Table 5 Personal pronouns

34

Table 6 Demonstrative pronouns

35

Table 7 Quantifiers

39

Table 8 Ika numbers 1-9

41

Table 9 Subject person affixes

68

Table 10 Object person prefixes

70

Table 11 Locational words and noun classes

75

Table 12 Modal suffixes

80

Table 13 Person marking for -ngua 'will'

83

Table 14 Content question words

113

Table 15 Clause connecting suffixes

122

Table 16 Ergative marking of subject noun phrases

152

Table 17 Ergative marking with both S and O present

153

Table 18 Zero anaphora for subjects vs. objects

158

Table 19 Zero anaphora, transitive vs. intransitive subjects 159

Table 20 Word order statistics

160

Table 21 Average distance back to last occurence

169

Table 22 Persistence of topics in subsequent discourse

170

ix

PREFACE
Bill Labov once said in class that every linguist ought to write a reference grammar at some point in his or her career. He also said that the first person to research any topic is invariably wrong. In writing this dissertation I have experienced the challenge of writing a grammar of Ika as well as enjoying the dubious distinction of being the first person to write on a variety of topics in Ika grammar.
I feel fortunate to be working in a period in the history of linguistics in which it is once again becoming respectable to write a descriptive grammar of a little-known language. My primary goal has been to provide information on a broad range of topics in Ika grammar in a format that would be accesible to those concerned with language universals and typology.
A secondary goal in producing this grammar has been to lay a foundation for practical materials that would benefit the Bintukwa people (who speak the Ika language). The Bintukwa are at an important point in their history as they have begun to manage the education of their own children, in their own language, with the help of the Colombian government. Bintukwa educational leaders have expressed the desire that their teachers receive more orientation to their language, that they may be able to deal with on a conscious level what they already control with unconscious fluency. It is my hope that this dissertation will benefit not only the linguistic community but also the Bintukwa people as they seek to establish themselves and maintain their language and identity in a changing world.
x

1. INTRODUCTION.
1.1 The genetic classification of the Ika language.
Ika is a Chibchan language spoken by the Bintukwa, approximately 7000 people living on the southern slopes of the Sierra Nevada de Santa Marta in northeastern Colombia.1 Kogi, Malayo, and Chimila are the languages most closely related to Ika and are also spoken in or near the Sierra Nevada de Santa Marta. Although most sources place Ika within the Chibchan language family proper, Shafer (1962) posits a family coordinate with Chibchan, called Aruakan, consisting of Ika and its three sister languages. (See also Constenla 1981, Jijon y Caamafio 1943, Key 1979, Loukotka 1935, 1938, and 1968, Mason 1950, McQuown 1955, Rivet and Loukotka 1952, Tovar 1961, and Wheeler 1972.) The Bintukwa have also been referred to as the Aruak, Arhuak, Arhuaco, lea, Ijca, Bintucua, and vintukua.
1.2 The Bintukwa people.
The Bintukwa are an agricultural people; they grow corn, coffee, bananas, sugar cane, manioc, potatoes, onions, and avocados at elevations between 1000 and 10,000 feet. They also raise a small number of cattle, sheep, and goats and use oxen, horses, and mules for transport. panela (brown sugar), ooffee, and avocados serve as cash
-1-

2
crops. The people live in family groups near their fields, moving from field to field to plant, care for, and harvest their crops. Many families also maintain houses in villages, which serve as social and ceremonial centers.
A central figure in Bintukwa life is the man* or shaman. He serves as the intermediary between the people and the spirit world. The people consult with him on all occasions of importance: marriage, birth, illness, death, naming of children, passage into adulthood, harvesting the first of the crops. The aam* also serves as a bearer of knowledge of ritual, history, and beliefs — a cultural resource that may indeed be dwindling; it is said that few young men are now training for the role of aaa*.
There are political leaders among the Bintukwa, both on the village level and for the group as a whole. The most respected aaa»s choose a governor (cabildo gobernador) who heads a small group of men known as the junta directiva. The junta directiva represents the community in its dealings with the government and other outside groups, and makes decisions pertaining to the community as a whole. The junta directiva and representatives from all areas of tne community meet yearly to discuss important issues and make major decisions. These meetings take place in Nabusimake (formerly known as San Sebastian) and have frequently attracted Colombian government officials as well as politicans aspiring to public office.

3
The Bintukwa live within a land reserve granted by the Colombian government to the Indians of the Sierra Nevada de Santa Marta. Nevertheless, the people face pressure from non-Indian colonists who own land within the reserve, some for many years. The tensions between Indian and colonist have increased and now the community is buying back land as they are able, with the help of the Colombian government. Non-Indian control of schools among the Bintukwa has also been a source of tension in recent years, but the Bintukwa leadership now controls all local schooling and, in conjunction with government agencies, is developing a bilingual educational program.
1.3 The source of data for this study.
The data used in this study come from my own fieldwork with the Bintukwa between May and December 1984 and from texts gathered by Hubert Tracy between 1968 and 1980. The text collection includes narratives (primarily hunting stories), descriptions of animals and their habits, procedural texts (e.g., how to make clothing), conversations, explanations of customs and outlook on their world, and some folk tales. All of these materials were collected in semi-formal sessions with native speakers. To supplement these materials, particularly with regard to infrequently occurring constructions and paradigms, I elicited additional data, primarily from Mr. Abran Izquierdo Soils.

4
1.4 The typological characteristics of Ika.
Ika is an SOV language, as shown by the parameters discussed below.

1.4.1 Word order. The basic word order in main, declarative clauses in

Ika is SOV, as seen in the following examples.

(1) Jose guiadzina wasa-na.

Jose puma

chase-dist

'Jose went after a puma.'

(2) I'mani Juansitu keina-ki guiadzina tsiwa g-an

nu'-na.

once Juancito place-loc puma

goat eat-impfv aux-dist

'One time a puma killed a goat near Juancito's place.'

1.4.2 Adpositions. Ika uses postpositions in adpositional phrases.

The following examples illustrate the postpositions sin 'with,' pari

•from,' and -*lcin 'limitative.'

(3) Peri sin keiwi

zoza-na-rua.

dog with right.away go-dist-IS

'I went with my dog.'

(4) Emi pari guiadzina zag-an

nu'-na.

here from puma

steal-impfv aux-dist

'A puma was stealing from here.'

(5) Eim-eki pari-ri llou-kitsi zan' wa'ka-zar-i that-loc from-top all-emph just see-be-while awion wa'na-z-eki-kin. airplane fall-med-loc-lim 'From there, you could see everything, as far as the airport (where the airplanes fall).'

5

1.4.3 Head noun and adjective. Adjectives follow the head noun in the

noun phrase, as in example 6.

(6) kakar6n

aroma

shotgun.shell empty

'empty shotgun shell'

In this respect, Ika does not fit the pattern of typical OV languages

(Lehmann 1972, 1978) which usually show the order adjective-head noun.

However, it is not uncommon for SOV languages to show the order head

noun-adjective. (See for example the list of languages in Greenberg

1966, appendix II, where 55% of the 64 SOV languages have adjectives

following the noun.) Quantifiers and numerals also usually follow the

head noun:

(7) peri mouga dog two

'two dogs*

1.4.4 Head noun and genitive. Genitives generally precede the head noun. A genitive construction is made up of a possessor phrase and tne head noun (the possessed item). The possessor phrase consists of a noun followed by zei 'genitive.' It is this possessor phrase, then, that usually precedes, but may follow, the head noun. In the following examples, the possessor phrase is in parentheses. (8) (nivi zei) tutusoma
Iplpro gen hat 'our hats'

6
(9) t§inu (in'gui zei) pig one gen 'someone's pig »

1.4.5 Affixation. Both prefixes and suffixes occur in Ika, though

suffixes predominate. There is very little noun morphology: clitics

that mark case, e.g. ka'-se' (ground-locative) 'on the ground,' -ri

'topic', and person prefixes for kin terms. Verb morphology, however,

is more extensive. There are person marking prefixes, but the majority

of the affixes in the verb phrase are suffixes. These fall into four

main classes: aspectual, modal, clause-connecting, and derivational

suffixes. Examples 10a-d illustrate these four classes of verb suffixes

(respectively):

(10) a. ASPECTUAL zoz-an go-impfv

b. MODAL nak—ikua come-must

'going

'must come

c. CLAUSE CONNECTING kat§ar-e' arrive-then

d. DERIVATIONAL nik-ami to.work-nmlzr

'he arrived and then

'wor k'

7
1.4.6 Relative clauses. Relative clauses show a basic order head noun-relative clause. Since case markers occur on the end of the relative clause rather than on the head noun itself, relative clauses are probably best treated as having an internal head. Example 11 illustrates a subject-initial, internally-headed relative clause. The head noun of the relative clause is is bold and the clause itself is in parentheses. Note the ergative marker -se* at the end of the embedded clause rather than on the head noun ik* ing'gui 'a man' itself. (11) (Ik* in'gui Rxsiu za'ki nuk-za)-se'-ri an-t§ua-na.
man one Lisio name cop-med-erg-top pt.ref-see-dist 'A man named Lisio saw it.' Pre-nominal relative clauses also occur but are rare in my corpus. 12 illustrates this relativization strategy: (12) (pguumiaa-dezrigna-se' geaa-tn-adist gtoSaitw-at)o-pri wbarniangk--paekrif nauuxk--mze-da-blao'c •where they had just brought the goat that the puma ate1 A basic order head noun-relative clause is consistent with Ika's noun-adjective order although the order relative clause-head noun would be more typical of an OV language.
1.4.7 Goaparatives. In comparative constructions, the comparative adjective follows the standard of comparison, as seen in example 13: (13) Pedru (na'an-guasi inguman) kawa ni.
Pedro 1pro-compar large seem cert 'Pedro is bigger than me.•

8

1.4.8 Negation. Negation is marked in the verb phrase by the verb

suffix -u* 'negative,' as seen in example 14:

(14) Eima kusari an-a-g-o"

nan-na ni.

that deer pt.ref-12plS-eat-neg aux-dist cert

•We did not eat that deer.'

1.4.9 Questions. In yes/no questions, the question marker occurs at

the end of the sentence, as in example 15:

(15) Jordan n3-kua-za no? Jordan 2S-live-med ig

'Do you live in Jordan?'

In information questions, the question word is generally placed at the 2
beginning of the sentence while the question marker (-©, -e or no)

still appears at the end: (16) Beki as-ik-o?
where sit-must-ig
'Where shall I sit?'

The next two examples question subject and object, respectively, and

also have the question word sentence-initially and the interrogative

particle or suffix sentence-finally.

(17) Ini-ri nai-n

nuk-av-an-o?

what-top walk-impfv aux-aux-impfv-ig

'What could be walking?'

(18) Ini was-i-ri

ei z-an

no?

what chase-while-top thus say-impfv ig

'What is it chasing, barking like that?

9

1.4.10 Coding of aajor syntactic functions. The major categories

subject and object are primarily distinguished by differential marking

on the verb. The single participant of an intransitive verb and the

agent of a transitive verb are both referenced by the same verb marking

morphology. 19 illustrates this fact with an intransitive verb (19a)

and a transitive verb (19b)r both marked for first person by —ruaz

(19) a. Zoza-na-rua. go-dist-1S

'I went.'

b. Mi-t§ua-na-rua. 20-see-dist-1S

'I saw you.'

A set of object prefixes serve several functions, the most basic of

which is the patient in transitive verbs and the 'indirect object* of

bitransitive verbs (e.g., give, sell, buy). 19 illustrates the second

person object prefix. 20 shows that when subject and object prefixes

both occur, the subject prefix comes first.

(20) Na-nive-'zasana u-z-e?

2S-1plO-pay

aux-med-ig

'Did you pay us?'

There is no separate category of indirect object. Thus, with

bi-transitive verbs, the recipient of the object is referenced by the

object prefix, as in 21, where the second person 'indirect object' of

21a is marked in verb morphology in the same way as the second person

object of 21b, by ai- '2 object':

10
(21) a. Mi-k-3ngei'-na-rua. 20-per iph-sell-dist-1S 'I sold it to you.'
b. Mi-tSua u-z-in. 20-see do-med-wit 'He saw you.•
Subject noun phrases usually precede object in linear order. 1.4.11 Ergativity. Ika is basically a nominative-accusative language in both verb morphology and syntactic phenomena, but evidences two types of split ergativity — differential marking of the single participant of intransitive verbs in verb morphology, and optional case-marking of transitive subject noun phrases.
As indicated in the preceding section, verb morphology essentially is nominative-accusative, with the same person-marking affixes referencing both the agent of transitive verbs and the single participant of intransitive verbs. Syntactic phenomena also show a nominative-accusative pattern. For example, with imperatives, the agent of transitive and 'subject' of intransitive are not stated. More significantly, verbal complementation usually involves some sort of same-subject/different-subject restriction associating the transitive agent and intransitive subject. Adverbial clauses, expressing simultaneous action, must have the same subject as the verb of the main clause in which the adverbial is embedded. Thus, in 22 both was 'chase' and zun 'go down' must have the same subject in a nominative-accusative

11

alignment, even though the agent of 'chase* is ergative-marked (as will

be discussed shortly):

(22) Peri-se'-ri win-was-i

zun-na.

dog-erg-top 3plS-chase-while go.down-dist

'The dogs went down chasing it.'

The vast majority of verb roots in Ika take the standard subject

person-marking for both the agent of a transitive and the single

participant of an intransitive, but one small group of intransitive

verbs always references the single participant by the object person

prefixes on the verb, an ergative-absolutive pattern. This small set of

intransitive verbs can be characterized semantically as involving a

participant who is an experiencer. 23a shows a clause with a transitive

verb, in which there is a first person object referenced on the verb by

the prefix n5-. The verb a'tikuaa 'forget' in 23b uses the same prefix

to reference the single participant of the verb:

(23) a. Na-tsua-na. 10-see-dist

'He saw me.'

b. Na-'tikuma-na. 10-forget-dist

•I forgot.'

Dixon has called this sort of split ergativity 'split S-marking,' a

cover term for cases "where intransitive verbs fall into two mutually

exclusive subclasses, one using ALgent]-mar king and the other

oLbjectJ-marking for its s[ubject] NP" with the subclasses based on the

semantic type of the verb (Dixon 1979:84). That is, the intransitive

verbs that show marking characteristic of transitive agents are ones

involving a volitional agent in control of the action, whereas ones that show marking characteristic of transitive patients are ones involving a non-volitional agent not in control of the action. A survey of this set of verbs in section 2.3.4 shows the same semantic basis in this group of verbs that take object marking. Dixon also notes that the size of the class of intransitive verbs taking what he calls O-marking varies from language to language, from being a large open class in some languages to being a small class of only a few dozen verbs in other languages. Indeed, Ika is at the end of the spectrum having only a small number of such verbs. Because of the quite small number of verbs which show this ergative-absolutive pattern of person-marking in the verb morphology, I have chosen to present the person-marking affixes as subject and object markers. It should be noted that the Chibchan languages of Central America are basically ergative in nature (Constenla 1982 and personal communication), suggesting that this aspect of split ergativity in Ika may be the remnant of what was formerly an essentially ergative system.
The other aspect of split ergativity in Ika involves the differential marking of agent noun phrases in transitive clauses. Overt noun phrase references to agents in transitive clauses may be marked by -se* 'ergative,' as seen in 24: (24) Tigri-se* t§inu ka-ga-na.
jaguar-erg pig periph-eat-dist 'A jaguar ate his pig.' The subject of intransitive clauses and the object in transitive clauses receive no case marking. This ergative case-marking is optional in the sense that it does not appear on every agent noun phrase and is not

13
categorically controlled by some factor such as an animacy hierarchy, as discussed by Silverstein 1976 and others. However, it appears that this type of ergative marking is influenced by the pragmatic status of the agent relative to the object, with the agent noun phrase marked as ergative when the object is given information and the agent is new. (See section 9.3 in the pragmatics chapter for a fuller discussion of -Be'.)
Dixon notes that "in most examples of split conditioned by the semantic nature of verbs, bound affixes are involved; whereas, in most examples of split conditioned by the semantic nature of NP's, case-marking is involved" (1979:89). Ika follows this pattern, with the split evidenced in verb morphology depending on the semantic nature of the intransitive verbs, and the split based on the pragmatic status of the noun phrases involving case-marking.
1.5 Ika pbooeaics.
The following two tables summarize the phonemes of Ika.^ (See Tracy and Tracy 1973 for details on Ika phonology.) The symbols in parentheses indicate how the phoneme in question is written here.

14

Bilabial Alveolar Alveopalatal Velar Glottal

Stop

Voiceless p

t

Voiced

b

d

k

?(')

g

Fricative

Voiceless

s

h

Voiced

fe(w)

z

z

Affricate

Voiceless

t§

Voiced

dz

Flap

r

Nasal

m

n

Table 1 Ilea consonants.

Front Central Back

High Mid Low

i

i

u

e

3

o

a

Table 2 Ika vowels.

Stress usually falls on the penultimate syllable and is marked here only when any other syllable is stressed in polysyllabic words.
Dipthongs are composed of a nonsyllabic i or u plus another vowel, in the combination ui, it is the u which is nonsyllabic.

u/i onglide

u/i offglide

ua ia

ei

ui ii

ou

ui

ue

ua

Table 3 Ika dipthongs.

15
1.6 Syllable structure.

The basic syllable structure in Ika involves simple or diptbongal

syllable nuclei with optional onset and coda. (The examples in this

section do not show morpheme boundaries; a period indicates syllable

division.) A simple syllable onset may be any consonant except glottal

stop. A complex onset may be made up o€ a stop plus r.

Syllable onset: Simple CV ma

Complex CCV.CVC dru.nan

•you' 'to fly'

Syllables may be either open or closed. (The words above illustrate two

open syllables and one closed syllable.) A simple syllable coda may be

any consonant except the voiced fricatives; glottal stop occurs only as

a syllable coda. Stops and s, however, may close the syllable only

when immediately followed by an identical segment. The only allowable

complex coda is n*.

Syllable coda: Simple
vc.cvc.cwc.cv
am.win.gua•.na

Complex
v.cvcc
a.wSn'

stop or s
c vc.cw
tluk.kui

•they killed it' 'big'

'rat'

16
1.7 Ika Morphophonemics.
Morphophonemic alternations in Ika can be divided into four types: (i) alternations which can be understood in terms of rules of phoneme combination, (ii) alternations of one segment with another which are regular yet not required by rules of phoneme combination, (iii) alternations of vowels and 0 governed by syllable structure patterns, and (iiii) morphophonemic fusion.
The first group involves changes governed strictly by phonological principles. These alternations change non-allowable phoneme combinations into allowable combinations. Because no alternation can be said to have occurred without reference to the underlying forms of the morphemes involved, I have included these alternations under morphophonemics rather than phonemics. The second group involves automatic alternations which apply only at morpheme boundaries, changing one possible or allowable phoneme combination into another. The third group deals with the basic CV patterns for the underlying forms of morphemes and the way in which these patterns govern vowel/0 alternations at morpheme boundaries. The fourth group describes changes in which segments fuse to form a third segment.

17

1.7.1 Pbooologically conditioned variation. The following paragraphs

describe alternations directly related to patterns of phoneme

combination.

A nasal and the following obstruent always share the same point of

articulation; consequently n becomes • before labials. Compare the

forms of 3n- 'it' in example 25a, and b:

(25) a. an-tsua

b. am-win-guak

pt.ref-see

pt.ref-3plS-kill

•see it'

'they kill it'

r becomes d following a nasal. Compare the forms of —ri 'topic' in

26a and b.

(26) a. Dorori-ri

b. Sawastian-di

Dolores-top

Sebastian-top

The vowels o, a, and e are raised to u, 3, and i (respectively) in

closed syllables. Compare the forms of itSon 'go.up,' nan 'to be,' and

a'tSugen 'collide' below. (Syllable divisions rather than morpheme

boundaries are indicated in these examples.)

(27) a. V.C V.CVC.CVC.CV

b. V.C VC.CV

i.t5o.nam.pan.na

i.tSun.na

'he began to go up'

'he went up'

(28) a. (29) a.

CnVa..CrVe'

b. CnlVnC..nCaV

'was, and then ...'

'was'

(the n becomes r before front vowels

VCa.sCdVe.sCcrVi.bCeVdC below)b. VC.C V.CVC.CV

a'.tsu.ge.nan

a'.tsu.gin.na

'colliding'

'collided'

18

The mid central vowel 3 never occurs word finally and is raised to 4
i at the end of a word. Example 30a and b illustrate this raising in

the word ik* 'people':

(30) a. piekoap-lzee-igen

b. piekoiple

•of the people'

'people'

1.7.2 Alternations applying only at aorpheae boundaries. Several other morphophonemic alternations are regular but not governed by the patterns of phoneme combination. Even though the sequences ki/ke and ni/ne occur within morphemes, k becomes s and n becomes r when followed by a front vowel across a morpheme boundary. The word neki 'contrary to expectation,' for example, shows both n and k followed by front vowels, yet these same consonants change when followed by front vowels across a morpheme boundary. The following examples illustrate these changes with the k of nuk and the final n of nan (copular/auxiliary verbs). The first word in each set illustrates the basic form of each verb, when not followed by a front vowel.

(31) a. nuk—ikua be-must
(32) a. nan-u' be-neg

b. nus-e' be-then

c. nus-i be-while

b. nar-e1 be-then

c. nar-i be-while

Morpheme final k becomes glottal stop before a consonant. This change even occurs before k although the sequence kk does occur within a morpheme. That is, kk occurs within a morpheme in words such as tSukkui 'rat,' but a morpheme-final k would change to glottal stop before a

19

consonant across a morpheme boundary, even when that consonant is

another k. ^ Example 33a and b illustrate this change in the verb root

nak 'to come.'

(33) a. nak-2m-p3n-na come-impfv-incep-dist

b. na'-na come-dist

'began to come'

'came'

The sequences i* and 3* occur within morphemes, for example in the

words zi* 'red' and nS'Sn 'I,' but i and 3 are lowered to e and a,

respectively, when preceding a glottal stop across a morpheme boundary.

Consider the final vowels in the object prefixes nivi— '1 plural object'

and nS— '1 singular object' when they occur before 'zasana 'to pay':

(34) Nive-'zasana u-z-in.

1pl0-pay

aux-med-wit

•He paid us.'

(35) Na-'zasana u-z-in.

10-pay

aux-med-wit

'He paid me.'

1.7.3 Vowel/0 alternations. Many morphemes, both roots and affixes, show two variants: one with and one without an extra vowel at the morpheme boundary. For example, compare the form of nak 'to come' in na*-na (come-dist) 'came' with its uninflected form in example 36: (36) Naka u-z-in.
come aux-med-wit 'He came.'

20

Consider, also, the forms of -na 'distal' below where this morpheme

appears (a) word finally, (b) before a vowel-initial suffix, and (c)

before a consonant-initial suffix:

(37) a. na'-na

b. na'-n-ame'

c. na*-na-ri

come-dist

come-dist-because

come-dist-top

'he came*

'because he came*

'he came*

It might seem that these morphophonemic alternations represent

either epenthesis or vowel deletion. Yet consider the different

behavior of -ku 'medial deictic aspect' and -£kua 'must' in the

following example.

(38) a. na'-ku-in

b. nak—ikua

come-med-wit

come-must

'I came'

'must come'

-£kua occurs without the initial £ following a vowel final morpheme, yet

with the £ after a consonant. If the £ represented an epenthetic vowel,

it should also occur between nak and —ku 'medial.' Since it does not, I

do not believe that the presence or absense of the vowel should be

treated as epenthesis.

There are two problems with describing this vowel/0 alternation as

deletion. First, it makes sense to delete one of two vowels coming

together across a morpheme boundary, but it seems unusual to delete a

vowel between consonants. For example, if the basic form of 'to come'

is naka and the shorter form in na1—na (come-dist) 'came' results from

deleting the final a, then one must assume that some vowels are deleted

adjacent to a vowel (across the morpheme boundary) while others are

deleted before either a vowel or a consonant.

21

Second, a deletion analysis forces the problematic matter of

determining which vowel to delete, the first or the second. Example 39

contrasts two cases involving vowel 'deletion' where the outcome is

different under apparently identical circumstances. The second line of

each example gives the longer form of each morpheme as its basic form.

In both cases, a is followed by e, but in 39a the a is deleted while in

39b the e is deleted:

(39) a. zoza-n-eki zoza-na-eki go-dist-loc

b. keina-ki keina-eki place-loc

'where he went'

'someone's home'

This suggests that the vowel/0 alternation is a property of particular

morphemes, not the result of a deletion rule.

A more accurate characterization of these alternations might be

that each morpheme's underlying form specifies a constant CV pattern or

syllable structure in addition to particular segments that realize this

structure. For instance, the underlying form for the locative suffix in

example 39 above would be

VCV (e) k i

The e in parentheses indicates that if the preceding morpheme does not

end in a vowel, the locative suffix supplies e in order to maintain its

VCV shape; otherwise the e does not appear in the surface form of the

morpheme.

The suffix —na 'distal' would be handled differently. The

underlying form for this suffix would be written as follows:

22
CV n When no vowel immediately follows the suffix, a general rule would supply a. I have two reasons for proposing this analysis. First of all, a is by far the most frequent vowel involved in vowel/0 alternations. Secondly, whenever a and a different vowel come together across a morpheme boundary, the a is usually 'deleted,' regardless of its position in the sequence. By positing an empty V in the underlying form, it is possible to state a general rule supplying the majority of the optional vowels, without a need for a separate rule specifying which vowel will be realized in a sequence of two optional vowels. It is not my purpose here to detail completely an analysis of vowel/0 alternations, but I believe that an analysis of this area should be along the lines sketched above.
1.7.4 Morpbopbooeaic fusion. There is one instance of two segments fusing to form a third segment: when k is followed by z, the two fuse to form g. Consider the following. The verb roots nik 'to work' and nuk 'to be' when followed by —e* 'then' become nise1 and nuse*. The fact that the verb root final k becomes s before e, as described above, indicates that -e' immediately follows the verb root. However, if —z(a) 'medial' occurs between one of these roots and -e', the results are nige* and nuge* respectively, the k and z fusing to form g. This fusion takes place in all cases where morphemes ending in k are followed by z. In words such as these, there is no longer any segment which uniquely

23 represents 'medial' since the g belongs to both the root and the suffix. However, I will write words in which this fusion occurs as follows: (40) nik-z-e'
do-med-then Phonemically, g occurs rather than ki.
Some cases involving vowels show evidence of two vowels or a vowel and a glide collapsing together, though a third, distinct segment does not result as in the case of k and 2. The auxiliary verb u has two morphophonemic alternants, u before consonant-initial suffixes and aw before vowel-initial suffixes. Thus, aw is chosen before —u' 'negative,' but the resulting form is au', with the w and u collapsing into u. Another case of the collapsing of vowels is the combination Snkari 'to converse* and -i 'while' as Sokarf. In such cases of two identical vowels in sequence, the two vowels collapse into one, often with word stress shifted to that vowel.
1. At this point in time, the stated preference of the community is for the people to be called the Bintukwa and the language Ika.
2. Although question words almost always occur at the beginning of the clause, there is no evidence that this position is the result of a movement. I have found no examples of questions where the question word refers to the object and is followed by a full noun phrase subject. In interrogative transitive clauses questioning the object, the subject is given information and not overtly referenced in the clause by a noun or pronoun. Thus, the question word appears in initial position simply because the subject is not present.
3. In a few words, the velar nasal (g) appears to contrast with n prevocalically, e.g. arugSn 'to think' vs. drunSn 'to fly.' For this reason, Tracy and Tracy 1973 lists the velar nasal as a separate phoneme. However, the syllable boundary always follows any intervocalic 9, thus it could be said that the phoneme n is realized as a velar nasal syllable-finally before vowels, before velar consonants, and word-finally. In this work, then, all nasals with a velar point of articulation are written as n. The vowel 5 presented problems in the original analysis and its representation in the

24
practical orthography has lead to confusion. 5 occurs almost exclusively in closed syllables (with some instances of variation between a and 3 in unstressed open syllables), but neither a nor i occur in closed syllables. Using morphological clues, it is possible to identify alternation between a and 3 and between * and 3, as described in the section on morphophonemics. The Bintukwa community has apparently decided to group 3 and * as one element in the orthography, as distinct from a. I have taken the approach of maintaining 3 as a separate element in this work because of the uncertainties concerning its phonemic status. 4. The 5/i alternation could be seen as a lowering process, thus making the citation form of the word the basic form. Spanish loan words, however, show a similar raising of mid to high vowels word-finally, e.g. poeoti 'bridge' (Spanish poente) and kSbaiu 'horse' (Spanish caballo). 5. The phonetic difference between kk and *k is slight, but one clue to distinguishing the two is that most vowels have a shorter and more lax allophone before kk.

2. fiord classes in Ika.
The major word classes in Ika include nouns, adjectives, and verbs, each of which, in turn, may be subdivided further. Among the minor classes are adverbs, personal pronouns, demonstrative pronouns, postpositions, conjunctions, noun adjuncts, and verb adjuncts. This chapter briefly discusses each of these categories and notes the sections where particular topics are covered in greater detail in later chapters.
2.1 Nouns.
Nouns may be divided into the following subclasses: kin terms, proper names, nouns derived from verbs, and other nouns. Kin terras carry person prefixes indicating whose kin is being referred to, e.g. n5-kak* (1-father) *my father.' When used as a term of address to one's own kin, the kin term does not take a person prefix (e.g., kak* 'father'), proper names are generally ones borrowed from Spanish with considerable assimilation to Ika phonological patterns.
Nouns derived from verbs do not appear to be very freguent. The nominalizer —aa* can be seen in nik—aa* (to.work-nmlzr) 'work'; —1(a) 'medial deictic aspect' derives from verbs a noun meaning 'a person who characteristically does an action,' e.g. z£g5—za (steal-medial) 'thief.'
-25-

26
2.2 Adjectives.

A small number of adjectives by themselves may serve as noun

modifiers or as predicate adjectives in descriptive clauses. The adjective aroaa 'empty1 falls into this class.

(41) chokui

aroma

gourd.bowl empty

'empty dish'

Most adjectives must occur with kawa 'seem,' both when modifying a noun

and as a predicate adjective. In descriptive clauses, with predicate

adjectives, kawa serves as the verb:

(42) Juansitu warin kawa ni. Juancito tall seem cert

'Juancito is tall.'

In noun phrases these adjectives plus kawa look something like relative

clauses. In example 43, the adjective phrase awSn* kawa (big seem)

serves as a modifier in the noun phrase. The head noun is in bold and

the adjective phrase is in parentheses

(43) Ana'nuga (avSn' kava) guaka-za. animal big seem kill-med

'It kills big animals/animals that are big.'

27
2.3 Verbs.
There are at least eight categories o€ verbs in Ika: intransitive, transitive, bitransitive, impersonal verbs, verbs that take a sentential object, quotation-like verbs, copulas, and auxiliary verbs.
2.3.1 intransitive verbs. Intransitive verbs are one-participant verbs (or in the case of motion verbs, one participant plus optional location). Subject person affixes on the verb reference this single participant. The verb root asa 'to sit down* is one intransitive verb. (44) Eim-eki-ri win-asa aw-i-ri,
there-loc-top 3plS-sit aux-while-top •They are sitting down there,...1

2.3.2 Transitive verbs. Transitive verbs involve two participants.

The subject is referenced in the verb by the same person affixes used

with intransitive verbs. The object is referenced by object prefixes.

(Section 5.2 covers person-marking.)

(45) Mi-tsua-na-rua. 20-see-dist-1S

•I see you.'

Subject noun phrases may be marked by -se* 'ergative.' (Section 9.3

examines ergative marking in some depth.)

(46) A-se'-ri

du t§ua u-na.

3pro-erg-top well see aux-dist

'He looked it over well.*

28
Transitive clauses without this ergative marking on the subject NP usually show the standard SOV order with explicit reference to both subject and object. (47) Gariwieri tigri a'wasa-na.
Gabriel jaguar chase-dist 'Gabriel hunted a jaguar.'

2.3.3 Bitransitive verbs. Bitransitive verbs involve subject, object,

and a source/destination for the movement of the object. Subject and

object noun phrases are not marked for case; the human participant who

is the source or goal is marked by —se". Non-third person source/goal

is referenced on the verb by the object prefixes.

(48) Abran-di Juan-se' kafe a'be u-z-in. Abran-top Juan-loc coffee deliver aux-med-wit

'Abran delivered coffee to Juan.'

Ika has a series of bitransitive verbs meaning 'to put down' which

are used with objects of different shapes: long and thin (galea),

cylindrical (sa), flat (pan), and containers, or more or less three

dimensional (tSo's). Example 49 demonstrates this contrast for kSn

'stick' and paperi 'paper.' (See section 5.3.2 for an explanation of

the noun classes involved.)

(49) a. KSn ka'-se* gak6

u!

stick ground-loc put.down aux

'Put the stick on the ground!'

b. paperi ka'-se' pa

u!

paper ground-loc put.down aux

'Put the paper on the ground!'

29
2.3.4 Impersonal verbs. Some verbs, e.g. a'zan 'to think/feel' and kusein 'to get better,' have only one participant which is referenced on the verb by the object person prefixes. Note the first person object marker nS— in the example below. (50) Na-kusein-u* gui ni.
10-recover-neg also cert 'I still have not gotten better.' This is essentially an ergative pattern, but the vast majority of verbs show nominative-accusative person-marking, with a small, closed set showing the pattern described here. This phenomenon is similar to what Giv6n calls 'dative subjects' (1984:143-144): experiencer subjects which are case-marked as dative objects. It is also similar to some verbs in Latin, e.g. the verb for 'repent,' for which the single participant occurs in the accusative.1 i will use the term 'impersonal' to capture the fact that the one participant is referenced by the object markers but there is no subject involved. (See section 1.4.11 for a fuller discussion of ergativity in Ika in relation to these verbs.) I have identified the following verbs as impersonal verbs:

30

aguntan a'mStSa a'sinkirin a'ten a'tikuma a' zan angakuma gankua gumStSan kawa kapSna kazan kusein

to be tired' to hurt (feel pain)' to sneeze' to be wet and cold' to forget' to think/feel' to be/get frightened* to know' to be drunk' to seem' or 'to have to x' to get sick' to be busy/occupied' to recover/get better'

Table 4 Impersonal verbs.

2.3.5 Verbs witb sentential objects. Two verbs which take sentential

objects are goa*sa 'to cause' and kawa 'seem.' gua'sa takes an object

whose verb is marked only by —Sn 'imperfective'; the subject of the

embedded clause is not coreferential with the subject of gua'sa:

(51) (Si

wis-3n

) neki gua's-u* nar-i

foul.odor spray.out-impfv cntr cause-neg aux-while

•(She) did not let the skunk's scent spray out,...'

kawa used with a sentential object unmarked for mood is interpreted

as 'it seems that X':

(52) (vMualktaurrie--seer'g egaat-n-adist) skeaewm--iwni.t 'It seems that a vulture ate it.'

31

2.3.6 Quotation-like verbs. A number of verbs involving speech,

perception, or cognition take a sentential complement which is a full

clause with an inflected/finite verb. Examples are za 'say,' tSua 'see,' and a'zan 'think.1 (Each of these verbs also fits in another

class: £a and tSua with transitive verbs, and a'zan with impersonal

verbs.)

(53) Pedru "kSnkanan nai-n

zei-kua"

Pedro jungle walk-impfv go-must

nS-ka-za-n-ame' 1O-periph-say-dist-because

'because Pedro Arias said to me "Let's go hunting."...'

(54) Kusari dzumena pa na keiwi

tsua-na-rua.

deer unsought flat cop right.away see-dist-1S

'I unexpectedly saw a deer lying down.'

2.3.7 Copular verbs. The set of copular verbs includes nan, zan, zanik •become,' and kawa. Descriptive clauses (with an adjectival complement) use all of these copular verbs, depending on the particular adjective involved. (55) Juan kui'ma na ni.
Juan young cop cert 'John is young.' (56) Ing4 na-kaw-ame', little 10-seem-because 'Because I am small,...'

(57) Meina-ri our6 zar-in. gully-top deep cop-wit

'The gully is deep.'

(58) sinki an-zanis-i late pt.ref-became-while

'getting late'

Equative clauses (with a nominal complement) use nan as copula:

(59) Kazatani kabirdu na ni. Cayetano cabildo cop cert

'Cayetano is the cabildo (a political office).'

nan is optional for statements true in the present.

(60) Eima guioma geirota

ni.

this snake coral.snake cert

'This snake is a coral snake.'

Clauses indicating location or position use both nan and zan as the

copula.

(61) Guiadzina-ri ei t§o

nar-e',

puma-top

thus standing cop-then

'The puma was standing,...'

(62) Ranta ku3-z-aba' gu*n zan-andi,

danta live-med-loc ?

cop-if

'If it is where the danta (animal) lives,...'

33
2.3.8 Auxiliary verbs. The auxiliary verbs include nan, nak, and u. nan is used in the next verb after the negative and modal suffixes, nuk occurs as an auxiliary verb with progressive and perfect tense/aspect, u is used for virtually all the remaining cases; it has two allomorphs: u before consonant-initial suffixes and aw before vowel-initial suffixes. (Section 5.1 outlines the circumstances in which auxiliary verbs occur.)
2.4 Adverbs.
The category of adverbs includes words that specify manner (e.g. a3n* 'rapidly,' keiwi 'right away,' eigui 'again,' eiki 'still'); relative time words (iwa 'now/today,' sai 'yesterday'); absolute time words (dSuiku* 'noon,' sinki 'after sundown' (probably borrowed from Spanish las cinco 'five o'clock'); days of the week borrowed from Spanish (runiba* 'Monday,' bierne 'Friday'); and location words (warek* 'up high,' zakk* 'over yonder,' waa*s£rig3n 'at the head of).
One series of adverbs indicates how many times an action is performed: i'aSni 'one time,' au'muru 'two times,' and a£iauru 'three times.' Other adverbs modify adjectives, e.g. ing* diwSn (little different) 'a little bit different,' ing* aStSei (little close) 'fairly close to,' and inguaSn diwSn (lot different) 'very different.' These adverbs always occur to the left of the adjective they modify.

34

Another element serving as an adverb is a phrase which compares how

two actions are performed. Such an adverbial phrase is in parentheses

in 63:

(63) (Terefono nar-i ) "tininin" keiwi

i-e'-ri,

telephone be-while ring

right.away say-then-top

'It rang like a telephone does, ...'

2.5 Pronouns.

The set of personal pronouns distinguishes first, second, and third

person, singular and plural. Personal pronouns do not occur very

frequently in text; they occur occasionally in subject position, very

rarely in object position, and most frequently as the object of a

postposition, e.g., aa-sin (you-with) 'with you' and nivi zei (we

genitive) 'our.' Table 5 gives the personal pronouns.

Singular Plural

1 | nan | niwi |

2 | ma | miwi |

3| a

| ikana' |

Table 5 Personal pronouns.

The infrequent pronoun aanSnka* is a first person inclusive form (Hugh Tracy, personal communication) whereas niwi would usually be used exclusively. Landaburu 1985 mentions that aanSnka* is sometimes used as an indirect form for 'you' in reference to the defendent in trials. The

35
personal pronouns, with the exception of the third person forms, are closely related to the object prefixes (see section 5.2).
Demonstrative pronouns distinguish distance, and deictic versus anaphoric reference. Table 6 lists the most common demonstrative pronouns.

aza eima zama zika

"this/that one' 'this/that one' 'that one' 'that one there'

(anaphoric) (being pointed to) (choice among alternatives) (alternative farther away)

Table 6 Demonstrative pronouns.

Sza is used anaphorically while eiaa refers to something in the physical

context, eiaa and either zaaa or z*ka are used in contexts involving a

choice among alternatives:

(64) Bema

me-'dzun-o, kua eima

kua zama?

which.one 20-want-ig or this.one or that.one

'Which one do you want, this one or that one?'

Using z*ka 'that one there' rather than 2aaa would indicate that the

second alternative is farther away than the first one.

There are a number of interrogative pronouns, used in content

questions (information questions; see section 6.2.2).

36 2.6 Noun adjuncts.

Elements commonly found in noun phrases are quantifiers, articles,

adjectives, and numbers. Noun phrases may also have case markers. Two

quantifiers are Sou 'all' and

'much.' Ika generally does not mark

definiteness, but the demonstrative pronoun eiaa 'this/that* may be used

to indicate definiteness. Further, the numeral in'gui 'one' is at times

used to indicate indefiniteness. Finally, the topic marker -ri is

commonly founo on noun phrases.

Ika numbers operate on a decimal system. There are single words

for 1 to 9 and phrases for the numbers 10 to 99. The number phrase

gives the number of tens first, followed by the number of ones.

(65) mouga uga in'gui kattou

two tens one ones

•21 •

By borrowing Spanish numerals (e.g. sientu '100'), it is possible to

compose numbers above 100, but in general the Spanish system is coming

to be used more than the native Ika system. (All of the noun adjuncts

are discussed further in chapter 3; case marking is covered in chapter

4.)

37
2.7 Verb adjuncts.
Among the elements found in the verb phrase are main verbs, auxiliary verbs, adverbs, and verb affixes. The verb affixes include person marking prefixes and suffixes (both subject and object), the negative suffix, modal suffixes, temporal aspect suffixes, deictic aspect suffixes, clause connecting suffixes (indicating subordinating or coordinating relationships), and mood markers. (Most verb adjuncts are discussed further in chapter 5; clause connecting suffixes and mood markers are discussed in section 5.5.2 and chapters 6 and 7.)
2.8 Conjunctions.
There are few conjunctions. Adjectives and nouns are conjoined only by sin 'with'; sin marks the second item in the conjoined phrase. Clauses are conjoined by means of clause connecting suffixes in the verb phrase optionally followed by one of the three clause combining conjunctions: pari "from that point,' gusnti 'finally,' or nSngua •and.'

38
2.9 Postpositions.
Postpositions in Ika serve at least two functions: case marking (ergative, locative, genitive, indirect object, limitative, instrument, accompaniment), and locational/positional relationships (e.g. under, from). Some postpositions are independent, stress-bearing words, but most postpositions cliticize to the preceding word. (At least one, z3 'genitive,' sometimes attaches to the following word. See chapter 4 for more detail on postpositions.)
1. Adolfo Constenla helped clarify my thinking on impersonal verbs.

3. THE NOUN PHRASE.

This chapter summarizes the roles of the following in noun phrases: quantifiers, numerals, adjectives, articles, casemarking, and nouns used attributively. Section 2.5 summarizes personal and demonstrative pronouns. Chapter 4, on case marking and post-positional phrases, discusses the genitive and gives more detail on case marking. Section 8.1 discusses relative clauses.

3.1 Quantifiers.

Quantifiers follow the head noun in noun phrases. summarizes the quantifiers.

Table 7

dzina imi ing-i re'masi sammi zou

'plural' 'many/much' 'a little' 'many' (used only with animates) 'much' (used only with inanimate objects) 'all'

Table 7 Quantifiers.

Examples of the quantifiers are yua ing4 (blood little) 'a little blood,' peri i«i (dog many) 'many dogs,' urak* Sou (house all) 'all the houses,' akunsi sSaa* (cooked.food much) 'much cooked food,' and ik* re'aasi (person many) 'many people.' Nouns are not marked as singular or plural, but the quantifier dzina 'plural' conveys the idea of 'more than one' without specifying any absolute or relative quantity: n3—gunaa* dzina (1-worker plural) 'my workers.'
-39-

40

Another type o€ quantifier is a noun phrase which indicates some

type of measure, e.g. aouga kintari (two sack) 'two sacks' in the

following noun phrase:

(66) in mouga kintari corn two sack

'two sacks of corn'

The nouns indicating measure are generally ones borrowed from Spanish.

Ika

Spanish

English

kintari paketi metru ribra karga

quintal paquete metro libra carga

sack package meter pound load

Two native words used in quantifier phrases are adSu 'whole,' as in

a§kk* in'gui adzu (clothes one whole) 'a whole (change of) clothes,' and

dzuna 'kind,' as in aouga dzuna inguSn* (two kind path) 'two kinds of

paths.'

3.2 Nuaerals.

Ika numerals operate on a decimal system. The numbers one to nine are as follows:

41

in'gui mouga mSikSni ma'keiwa asewa tiinwa koga abewa ikawa

•one' •two' 'three' •four' •five' 'six' * seven * 'eight* 'nine'

Table 8 Ika numbers 1-9.

Beyond nine, numbers are made up of the number of tens, uga, followed by

the number of ones, kSttou:

(67) in'gui uga mouga kattou one tens two ones

* twelve *

For numbers between ten and twenty, in'gui uga is optional:

(68) ma'keiwa kattou

four

ones

'fourteen'

By borrowing Spanish numerals (sientu '100,' air '1000'), it is

possible to compose numbers above ninety-nine, e.g. sientu bouga uga

(100 two tens) '120.*

Juxtaposing two successive numbers indicates an imprecise amount

within the range of the two numbers:

(69) mouga maikani kaggi two three year

'two or three years'

Numbers may either precede or follow the noun head, depending on

whether the reference is definite or indefinite.^ Numbers appear before

the noun in indefinite reference and after the noun in definite

42

reference. For example, 70 is an indefinite reference to 'man' as the

participant is first introduced into the story:

(70) In'gui tSeirua-se'-ri wakuma-ri guako-u-na. one man-erg-top skunk-top kill-aux-dist

'A man killed a skunk.1

In 71, however, the reference to 'one dog* is definite; the previous

sentence stated that 'the dog did not come back,' and 71 recapitualates

that clause:

(71) Peri in'gui eigui nak-u'-nan u-z-e'

nangua-ri,

dog one also come-neg-aux aux-med-then and-top

'The one dog did not come back, and then...'

Again, 72a and b contrast an indefinite and definite reference,

respectively, involving the number 'two.' 72a is at the beginning of a

story, and the reference of the phrase 'two men' is indefinite, while

72b is at the end of a story, summing up events involving known

participants:

(72) a. Mouga t§eirua-ri meina ri-zori-e'-ri,

two man-top

stream 3plS-go-then-top

'Two men went along the stream,...'

b. Tigri peri mouga na-k§-gga

a-u'

no?

jaguar dog two 10-periph-eat aux-neg ig

'The jaguar ate my two dogs, didn't it?'

Numbers may head noun phrases; these refer to a specific number of

items out of an already specified group.

(73) Iwa mouga-ri awa'rei zoza-na. now two-top below go-dist

'Two (men) went below.'

43 3.3 Adjectives.

Adjectives and adjective phrases follow the head noun in a noun

phrase, e.g., ye kSnta* (water warm) 'warm water' tint* ziri (hair

fluffy) 'fluffy hair (of a dog),' and kakar6n aroaa (shotgun.shell

empty) 'empty shotgun shell.' Rather than occurring alone (as in these

cases), most adjectives occur with kawa 'seem' in an adjective phrase:

(74) tutu

tui kawa

wool.bag black seem

'black wool bag'

(75) ye k£ kawa water cold seem 'cold water'

(76) paka awan' kawa cow big seem

•big cow'

Repetition of an adjective indicates a greater degree of the

quality:

(77) tsukkui tSammi tSammi kawa

rat

yellow yellow seem

'a very yellow rat'

(78) unti ziri ziri hair fluffy fluffy 'very fluffy hair'

By attaching the postposition sin 'with' to a second adjective

phrase, it is possible to modify one noun with two adjectives.

44

(79) tutu

bunsi kawa tu£ kawa-sin

wool.bag white seem black seem-with

'black and white wool bag'

3.4 Articles.

Although there are no articles per se, the demonstrative pronoun

eiaa 'this one' occasionally serves to indicate de€initeness and the

number in'gui 'one' to indicate inde€initeness:

(80) Eiaa kusari-ri an-a-g-u'-nan

u-na.

this deer-top pt.ref-12plS-eat-neg-aux aux-dist

'We did not eat the deer.'

(81) In'gui t§eirua-se'-ri wakuma-ri guako-u-na.

one man-erg-top

skunk-top kill-aux-dist

'A man killed a skunk.'

3.5 Case marking.
Case markers cliticize to the right-most element of the noun phrase. In example 82 sin 'with' attaches to the end of a noun phrase made up of a possessor phrase and head noun: (82) (bunat§i za-gei )-sin
white.man gen-fire-with 'with the whiteman's fire'

45 For more detail on case marking, see chapter 4.
3.6 Nouns as aodifiers.
Nouns sometimes modify other nouns attributively, e.g. trapitSi kSn (press wood) 'wooden sugar cane press' (trapitSi is a noun borrowed from Spanish trapiche). A more complex example involves a noun phrase modifying a noun (the head noun is in bold): (83) peri (dzo' mot§u)
dog tail broken 'short-tailed dog' (aotSu is an adjective borrowed from Spanish aocbo) In cases such as these, the noun that modifies usually follows the head noun, following the pattern of adjectives.
1. Adolfo Constenla suggested to me that aefiniteness correlates with the order of number and noun, parallel to a distinction in definiteness based on adjective/noun order in Chibchan languages of Costa Rica.

4. Case Marking and postpositional Phrases.
Case marking is handled by means of postpositions and includes ergative, locative, genitive, instrument, accompaniment, means, and limitative cases. By 'case' I mean the role of a noun phrase within a clause as overtly indicated by a postposition. The postpositions marking these relationships are mono-syllabic and are phonologically bound forms, with the exception of zei 'genitive' in some circumstances. I will write these phonologically dependent postpositions in isolation with a hyphen in parentheses, e.g. (—)sin 'with' to symbolize their phonologically bound but grammatically independent status. With the exception of zei, they appear cliticized to the last word of the phrase to which they pertain. (Zei 'genitive* sometimes cliticizes to the beginning of the next word in the sentence, and at other times stands as a separate word). Other postpositions mark positional relationships, e.g., 'under' or 'on top of.' These forms are bi-syllabic and are independent, stress-bearing words.
More than one postposition may occur on a single noun or nominalized clause. For example, pari 'from' usually combines with a time or locative word in an expression meaning "from that point on.' The locative word may be one formed by a noun-postposition combination, resulting in two postpositions in a row:
-46-

47

(84)

PP

NP I (eim-eki) pari that-loc from

•from there1

Example 85 provides a similar case but contains a nominalized clause

rather than a noun (see sections 4.4, 4.5 and 8.2 for more on locative

nominalized clauses):

(85) ((awion wa'n3-z)-eki)-kin airplane fall-med-loc-lim

•As far as the airport (where the airplanes fall)•

Note that in both of these examples, the inner postposition serves as a

nominalizer, and the outer postposition thus attaches to a nominal

element rather than to another postpositional phrase.

The genitive marker zei may occur embedded in a noun phrase which

is in turn marked for some other case, but the outer case-marker does

not apply directly to the phrase with the genitive:

(86)

((bunat§i za-) gei) -sin whiteman gen- fire -with •with the whiteman's fire'
The genitive and noun form a possessor phrase which combines with another noun to form the noun phrase, and it is this noun phrase that takes (-)sin 'with.'

48
The following sections explain the function(s) of each postposition, beginning with the bound, case-marking forms and ending with the phonologically independent forms indicating positional relationships. The genitive marker, zei, which is sometimes bound and sometimes free, stands between the other two main groups.
4.1 (-)se' 'locative, source/goal, ergative*.
The postposition (—)se* serves a variety of functions, including marking locative, (both source and goal) and ergative. As a locative marker, (—)se* indicates movement toward or away from a location that is close by, movement into an area, or a position at or on the specified item. (In the following examples the word or phrase to which the postposition pertains is in parentheses.) (87) (uraki)-se' kachar-i
house -loc arrive-while 'arriving at the house' (88) (cAa'vkeatti)--lseo'c eknatmeSrt-Sdai-snta. 'It went into a cave.' (89) Anga tu£ kawa (ka')-se' a's§-za. bee black seem ground-loc live-med 'Black bees live on the ground.' The use of {—)se* to mark source or goal in transactions is obviously related to its use in marking direction of movement. With some transactional verbs (e.g., Sngeik 'sell' and a*be 'deliver') the recipient is marked by (-)se':

49

(90) Abran-di (Huan)-se' kafe a'be u-z-in. Abran-top Juan -loc coffee deliver aux-med-wit

•Abran delivered coffee to Juan.'

One characteristic of the verb a'be 'deliver' is that it marks the

recipient as the locative. The coffee goes from Abran to Juan-locative.

With other verbs (e.g., san 'buy'), the source, rather than the

recipient, is marked by -se":

(91) Juan-di (Abran)-se' kaf£ k-i-sana

u-z-in.

Juan-top Abran -loc coffee periph-?-buy aux-med-wit

•Juan bought coffee from Abran.'

Thus, one of the grammatical facts concerning san 'buy' is that it marks

the source of the transaction as the locative. Each verb depicting a

transaction, then, specifies whether the source or the recipient will be

marked by (-)se" 'locative.'

Transitive clauses sometimes show the subject noun phrase marked by

(-)se'.

(92) (In'gui tieirua)-se'-ri wakuma-ri guako-u-na.

one man

-erg-top skunk-top kill-aux-dist

'A man killed a skunk.'

Tracy and Levinsohn (1977) suggest that this use of (—)se* marks a

subject noun phrase referring to a non-topical participant. I will

argue, in section 9.3, that ergative marking is controlled by the

pragmatic status of the agent relative to the object. When each

participant is ranked on a scale involving the given-new distinction, an

overt agent noun phrase is ergative-marked when it is less given than

the object. With regard to the alignment of ergative with locative,

note that in many of the ergative languages of Australia, the ergative

50
and locative markers are either identical or similar in form (cf. Dixon 1976:313, Blake 1977:51).

4.2 (—)sin 'instrument, accompaniment, and conjunction*.

(-)sin 'with' marks instrument noun phrases, indicates

accompaniment, and serves as a means of conjoining noun and adjective

phrases. 93 illustrates {—)sin marking an instrument noun phrase.

(93) Kansia-sin si

a'sir-i,

vine -with string tie-while

'He tied it with a vine,...'

94 illustrates the use of (—)sin to indicate accompaniment:

(94) Jose-ri Pedru-sin an-zuei-'

nar-i-ri,

Jose-top Pedro-with pt.ref-go-neg aux-while-top

'Jose did not go with Pedro,...'

Note that to say that Jose did not go does not imply that Pedro also did

not go, only that they did not go together. Thus the scope of the

negative is the subject noun phrase only, and does not include the

accompaniment phrase.

Conjoined noun phrases are not very frequent but are constructed by

attaching (-)sin to the second conjunct, as in the following:

(95) Pedru-ri a-sin-di gunn-i win-de's-i, Pedro-top he-with-top hand 3plS-agree-while 'Pedro Arias and he agreed,...'

In a conjoined noun phrase, the noun that does not bear (—)sin 'with'

grammatically heads the phrase. This is rarely a matter of concern, but

with bitransitive verbs meaning 'to put something down' the shape of the

51

unmarked noun in a conjoined noun phrase controls the selection of verb

(see section 5.3.2). Compare the verb used in 96a with the verb used in

96b and c:

(96) a. Rapi gak<5-u! pencil put.down-aux

'Put the pencil down!'

b. Ribru pa

u!

book put.down aux

'Put the book down!'

c. Ribru rapi-sin pa

u!

book pencil-with put.down aux

'Put the book and pencil down!'

Adjective phrases may also be conjoined by (—)sin. (As with noun

phrases, such constructions are not common.)

(97) tutu

bunsi kawa (tui kawa)-sin

wool.bag white seem black seem -with

'black and white wool bag'

4.3 (—Jiltin 'limitative'.
(—)£kin 'limitative' indicates the end point of a period of time or space, indicating 'up to this point/time and no further.' (-)£kin typically occurs with locative constructions including clauses with locative marking meaning 'where X happens,' as in 98:

52
(98) Eim-ek£ pari-ri z6u-kit§i zSn' wa'k3-zar-i that-loc from-top all-emph just see-aux-while (awi6n wa'na-z-eki)-kin. airplane fall-med-loc-lim •From there you can see everything, as far as the airport (where the airplanes fall).'

4.4 (-)eki "locative*.

The postposition (-)eki 'locative' cliticizes to nouns and clauses

to indicate a location, especially one relatively far away. (-)ek£

occurs frequently with demonstrative pronouns (e.g. eiaa 'that one') to

form a location word meaning 'there' or 'in that place':

(99) Eim-ek* itiun-nik-z-e'-ri, that-loc go.up-when-med-then-top

'When it goes up there,...'

(—)eki occurs with nouns naming features of the landscape to form an

adverb of location, often a destination for motion verbs:

(100) Kankana-ki keiwi

zoza-na.

forest-loc right.away go-dist

'He went to the forest.'

(—)eki also occurs with words indicating position, e.g. bSk5na—k£

(middle.of-loc) 'far off in the middle of,' ava'r-ek* (below-loc) 'far

off down below.'

(-)eki also cliticizes to the ends of (verb-final) clauses without

mood marking to nominalize the clause as naming a location. The

53
nominalized clauses are usually stative or imperfective rather than referring to a specific, bounded event. (101) (A'kStti awan' kawa nuk-z )-eki it5or-e'-ri,
cave big seem cop-med-loc go.up-then-top 'He went up to where there is a big cave,...' (102) (dPo^gr-ie-rsge* pkear-idpahn--bSanrk-impfv anuuxk--mze)d--elokci mStSei k3t5ar-e'-ri near arrive-then-top '(They) arrived near where the dog had been barking at something,...' With certain nouns, the formative -si comes between the stem and -eki; e.g., urak* 'house,' but orak*-si—k* (house-null-loc); ye 'river,' but ye-si-ki (river-null-loc). It is tempting to consider -si as a meaningful element segment, but there is no context where a contrast between -si and another suffix or the absense of a suffix shows any semantic difference. In examples, I will segment —si as part of the locative suffix.
4.5 (-)aba' •location* and 'tiae*.
The postposition (-)aba' has three main uses: (i) a case marker for temporal expressions, (ii) a locative marker for demonstrative pronouns, and (iii) a clause nominalizer for specifying the location where something happened. The combination of ini 'who/what' and (—)aba* produces an interrogative word iniba* meaning 'when.' (—)aba* also

54

occurs on words referring to days of the week (borrowed from Spanish),

e.g. runi—ba* (Monday-time) 'Monday/on Monday.'

(-)aba' has many of the same uses as (—)eki as a locative marker.

Both may occur with demonstrative pronouns to form a word meaning

•there.* 103 gives a case of (-)aba* with a demonstrative pronoun.

(103) Az-aba*

keiwi

kStSar-i,

that.one-loc right.away arrive-while

•(They) arrived there,...'

(—)eki and (—)aba* also both nominalize clauses to name a location.

With {—)aba*, however, the embedded clause always involves an action

(rather than a state), especially an action involving motion.

(104) I'man-eigui (tas-i

zoza-n)-aba* katSar-e'-ri,

once-also look.for-while go-dist-loc arrive-then-top

•He arrived once again at the place from which he had gone looking,...'

The difference between (—)aba* and (—)ek£ may hinge on the nature

of (-)ek* as deictic and distal. That is, (-)ek* points to a specific

fixed distant place while (-)aba' merely names a place. This can be

seen, for example, in the frequent co-occurrence of aza 'that one' with

(—)aba', while eiaa 'that one pointed to' more frequently co-occurs with

(—)eki. As demonstrative pronouns, aza and eiaa differ in that eiaa

points to a specific thing while aza serves for anaphoric reference.

55
4.6 -n 'by means of*.

The formative -n *by means of' indicates to do something 'by means

of' the noun so marked.1 For example, k3tt3-n (foot-by.means.of) 'by

foot* describes a way of traveling. -n also combines with language

names to specify 'in that language':

(105) BunatSa-n-di

azi a-guak-o?

Spanish-means-top how 12plS-say-ig

'How do you say it in Spanish?'

Other examples are ikS-n (Ika.language-means) 'in Ika,' and peibu-n

(Kogi.language-means) 'in Kogi.'

4.7 zei 'genitive*.

The postposition zei marks the genitive case. The genitive is used to indicate part-whole, kinship, and ownership relationships. More generally, the genitive is used to indicate that two nouns are inherently or permanently related to one another. The genitive marker always follows the possessor noun, and this phrase either precedes or follows the possessed noun. In the examples which follow, the possessor phrase is bracketed.
When the genitive is used to express kinship relations, the 'possessed' item is a kin term while some other noun, marked by the genitive, indicates to whom the kin term pertains:

56

(106) (Marta za-)t§eit§i Marta gen-father

'Marta's father'

(107) (na'an zei) a'^ia

I

gen woman

'my wife'

In the part-whole use of the genitive, the head noun is the part and the

genitive-marked noun is the whole:

(108) (uraki zS-JkStti

house gen-foot

'house's main posts'

(109) (peri za-)dzua

dog gen-blood

'dog's blood'

In phrases expressing ownership, the head noun is the possessed item and

the genitive-marked noun is the possessor:

(110) (nivi zei) tutusoma

we gen hat

'our hats'

In examples involving ownership, the possessor phrase is much more

likely to follow the possessed item: (111) tSinu (in'gui zei)
p'isgomeonoen'es pigg'en

Some uses of the genitive do not clearly fall under the headings

kinship, part-whole, or ownership. For example, in 112, the 'possessed'

noun is the pau — the 'owner' or 'master':

57
(112) (ana'nuga z3-)pau animal gen-owner 'animal's owner'
In another case, bunatS* z3-gei (whiteman gen-fire) 'whiteman's fire,' this type of fire is neither part of nor owned by but simply the whiteman's. It is in this sense that the genitive marks an inherent or permanent relationship that usually (but not always) involves kinship, part-whole, or ownership.
The examples above illustrate two forms of the genitive marker, zei and zS. Given the order 'possessor genitive possessed,' zei appears as a prefix z3 on the possessed noun whenever that noun is one syllable, or generally when it is shorter than the possessor. When the possessed is longer than the possessor, or when the order is 'possessed possessor genitive,' zei stands as a phonologically independent word and bears stress.
4.8 pari 'froa*.
The postposition pari indicates the beginning of a time period or the location from which an action is directed. The phrase •ouge' pari (day.after.tomorrow from) conveys the idea of 'from the day after tomorrow on,' and birin pari (long.ago from) refers to a time span that began long ago, extending toward the present.
In the sense 'the location from which an action is directed,' pari often occurs with locative words. In 113, pari marks a place from which one can see:

58

(113) (Eim-eki) pari-ri z6u-kit§i zS' wa'kS-zar-i,

that-loc from-top all-emph just see-aux-while

'From that place, one can see everything,...'

pari also occurs at the ends of dependent clauses (i.e., as the

last word in the verb phrase). One translation of pari in this usage

might be 'X happened; from that location, Y.* Often there is a shift in

perspective immediately after pari, and the event marked by pari may be

viewed as a climax (of episode), as illustrated in 114. (The

postposition is underlined and the clause it marks is in parentheses.)

(114) ("nAonneki, gzoe-in-e'g--keimtp§hi naaunxn--mauksuta cneir"t pkeer-iip-he-'s)ay-then pfarromi--troip,

Jose-ri Pedru-sin Mn-zuei-'

nar-i-ri,

Jos4-top Pedro-with pt.ref-go-neg aux-while-top

'"No, you must not go!" he told him, so from that time on Jose did not go with Pedro,...'

4.9 zaoi 'to be froa'.
zani combines with a noun to define a place or time that is characteristic of something. A typical use of zani is to define a person's home. (115) a. Beku zani na-nan-ku-e?
Where from 2S-cop-med-ig 'Where are you from?' b. Jordan zani na-ru-in. Jordan from cop-IS-wit 'I am from Jordan.'

59
(Incidentally, 'where one is from' here refers to a person's home, not where he is currently living nor where he was born and raised.)
One case of zan* with a time word, birin zan* (long.ago from), presumably refers to something associated with times past, rather than, as would be the case with pari, a time period beginning long ago and extending toward the present.
4.10 Other markers of position.
A number of other postpositions indicate position. Tek* indicates a location 'on top of* or 'in the top of' with respect to the noun so marked. For example, a*n* teki (rock top.of) means 'on top of the rock' and kSn teki (tree top.of) means 'in the top of the tree.' Two other indicators of position are Sndin 'under' as in ka1 Sndin (ground under) 'underground,' and a'tit€i 'above.*
1. I have only seen —n attached to single nouns, not to phrases, but because noun morphology is otherwise virtually non-existent, I have included the form with the postpositions.

5. THE VERB PHRASE.
The major topics of concern in discussing the Ika verb phrase include auxiliary verbs, agreement, aspect, mood, and valence change. Section 5.2 covers agreement as understood in the normal sense of referencing arguments of the verb by means of verb affixes. Section 5.3, "Locationals and noun classes" discusses another type of agreement involving a restricted noun class system as reflected in the predicate. The section on valence change (5.7) covers various operations which affect the number of participants referenced in the verb phrase: causatives, benefactives, reflexives and reciprocals, and a prefix which enables the object prefixes to refer primarily to non-direct objects and possessors. A final section discusses the functions of the prefix an— •point of reference.'
The following formula gives the relative order of the major groups of elements in the verb phrase:
lexical-verb (negative) (temporal aspect) (modal suffixes) (deictic aspect, mood/clause connectors)
The lexical verb stem itself is the only obligatory element in the verb phrase. Parenthesized elements sometimes have no overt marker in a given case, though this 0 choice may have a particlular significance (e.g., 0 temporal aspect implies 'perfective'). There are four parenthesized groups. If the negative suffix occurs, it comes immediately after the lexical verb. The temporal aspect markers form the second group (section 5.4). The modal suffixes form the third group
-60-

61
(section 5.5.1). Deictic aspect and mood indicators or clause connectors form the fourth group (sections 5.6 and 5.5.2).
There are certain co-occurrence restrictions among the suffixes in the verb phrase, though the full extent of these restrictions is not known. For example, the modals -ngua 'will' and -nguasi 'in order to' must follow a verb marked by -3n 'imperfective' and —iza 'would' usually does so as well.
Agreement affixes have no fixed location in the verb phrase. Among the subject affixes, the prefixes occur at the beginning of the phrase, and the one suffix occurs at the end (—rua 'first person singular subject'). The object markers may appear in two places. Ordinarily they appear on the lexical verb, immediately following the subject prefix (if any), but with the modal verb/suffix -ngua 'will,' object markers reference the subject of the clause and appear prefixed to -ngua medially in the verb phrase. (The section below on agreement gives examples of all the agreement affixes; section 5.5.1.5 gives more detail on —ngua and its use of the object prefixes.)
5.1 Auxiliary verbs.
Auxiliary verbs occur in five environments. Firstly, stressed, uninflected auxiliary verbs occur in imperatives (see section 6.3 below, in the chapter on clause formation). Secondly, auxiliary verbs occur in sentence introducers, supporting deictic aspect and clause connecting suffixes. These suffixes show the relationship between the final clause

62

of the previous sentence and the first clause of the sentence which the

introducer initiates (see section 7.3, in the chapter on sentence

formation). Thirdly, auxiliary verbs occur in questions which help keep

conversation flowing, as in 116. (The auxiliary verb in focus is in

bold, in 116b.)

(116) a. "Eiki nik-u' nan-no?" na-'zar-i thus work-neg aux-ig 10-think-while

eimai nako-u-w-in. by.here come-aux-prox-wit

'I have come thinking "He is still working, isn't he?"•

b. Kua, eimei

ki na-u-ku-e?

oh like.this cntr 2S-aux-med-ig

•Oh, did you (come) like that?'

The last two uses of auxiliary verbs involve the structure of the

verb phrase itself and will be covered in the next two sections.

Auxiliary verbs obligatorily occur in the verb phrase to support

suffixes which are prevented from appearing on the main verb and

optionally occur under specific pragmatic conditions to produce a phrase

with an uninflected main verb followed by an auxiliary verb.

5.1.1 The obligatory use o€ auxiliary verbs. The obligatory use of auxiliary verbs in the verb phrase is controlled by the groups of elements discussed in the introduction to this chapter. The formula given there shows the lexical verb as the first element in the phrase, optionally followed by suffixes from four groups:

63

lexical-verb (negative) (temporal aspect) (modal suffixes) (deictic aspect, mood/clause connectors)

As a general rule, the four groups are mutually exclusive: suffixes

from more than one group do not appear together on a single verb. Thus,

if both a temporal aspect suffix and a modal suffix occur in the same

verb phrase, for example, the lexical verb carries the temporal aspect

and the auxiliary verb supports the modal suffix. A major function of

auxiliary verbs, then, is to support additional suffixes when suffixes

from more than one group occur in a given verb phrase.

In 117, the first verb carries the modal suffix -*kua 'must,' and

the auxiliary verb nan (reduced to n in this case) carries the clause

connecting suffix —aae* 'because.' (The suffix —kuaa 'impersonal' does

not enter into the concept of mutually exclusive groups in the verb

phrase, but may combine with suffixes from any group; for more on its

function, see section 9.2)

(117)

MODAL AUX-CONNECTOR

mi-u-kum-akkua n-ame'

20-do-impers-must be-because

'it had to be done to you because . . .'

118 shows a verb phrase in which the lexical verb carries the temporal

aspect suffix —ak£ 'perfect' while the auxiliary verb carries the

deictic aspect marker -na 'distal.'

(118) TEMPORAL AOX-DEICTIC guak-akl nu'-na kill-perf aux-dist

'it had killed it*

64

The negative suffix u* requires that the following auxiliary verb (if

needed) be nan. In 119, the lexical verb carries the negative, the

first auxiliary verb carries —5n 'imperfective,' and the modal —ngoa

•will' serves as its own auxiliary. (See section 5.5.1.5 below for more

on the verb-like nature of this modal.)

(119) NEGATIVE AUX-TEMPORAL AUX-MODAL

nik-u' nan-an

na-ngua

work-neg aux-impfv

10-will

•I will not work'

Other suffixes besides the negative also place restrictions on the

choice of the following auxiliary verb. —aki 'perfect' and —3n

•imperfective• (when it is not followed by 'will') require that the

following auxiliary be nuk. Most of the modal verbs require nan as the

next auxiliary verb, although -4kuei 'able to' appears to select either

nan or zan.

5.1.2 The optional use of auxiliary verbs. The auxiliary verb u may optionally occur in the verb phrase to produce a phrase with an uninflected verb stem.^ The optional auxiliary verb follows immediately after the uninflected verb. The lexical verb is usually the uninflected verb in such phrases. Native speakers do not indicate that there is any difference in meaning between verb phrases with and without optional auxiliary verbs, but it appears that the function of optional auxiliaries is to give pragmatic emphasis to the main, lexical verb. Most of the examples below contrast two clauses, the first one without

65

an optional auxiliary verb and the second with one. The abbreviation

AOX (in bold) appears above the optional auxiliary.

In both 120a and 120b, the only suffix is -na 'distal deictic

aspect,' but in 120a, the main verb carries this suffix, while in 120b

the main verb is uninflected and the following optional auxiliary

carries the suffix.

(120) a.

LEXICAL—DEICTIC

Mouga-ri awa'rei zoza-na. two-top below go-dist

'Two men went below.'

b. LEXICAL ADX—DEICTIC

Zoza u-na.

go

aux-dist

'They went.'

121 involves a modal suffix, with the main verb carrying this suffix in

121a and an auxiliary verb carrying the suffix in 121b. (Zei is an

allomorph of zoza 'go,' and aw is an allomorph of u with further

morphophonemic reduction to a.)

(121) a. ,

LEXICAL-MODAL

Kankanan nain-n

zei-kua

ni.

forest walk-impfv go-must

cert

'Let's go hunting (walk in the forest).'

b. ,

LEXICAL ADX-MODAL

Kankanan nai-n

zoza a-ukua nin.

forest walk-impfv go

aux-must cert

'Let's go hunting.'

When the negative suffix occurs in the verb phrase, it appears on

the main verb, requiring that nan be the following auxiliary verb. In

such cases, an optional auxiliary verb in turn may follow nan, and nan,

66

not the main verb, is uninflected. (The uninflected nan cliticizes to

the preceding verb.)

(122) a. LEXICAL-NEG AUX-DEICTIC

Na-zei-' 2S-go-neg

nan-na. aux-dist

'You did not go.*

b. LEXICAL-NEG-AUX ADX-DEICTIC

Ka * chon-u'-nSn u-na.

find-neg-aux

aux-dist

'He did not find it.'

Optional auxiliaries may also occur in verb phrases which already

contain an obligatory auxiliary verb, as described in the previous

section. Both 123a and b have a modal suffix followed by an obligatory

auxiliary verb carrying the remaining suffixes in the phrase. In 123b,

an optional auxiliary also occurs in the phrase, leaving the main verb

with no suffixes:

(123) a.

LEXICAL-MODAL

AUX-CONNECTOR

Eimei

mi-u-kum-akkua n-ame',

like.this 20-do-impers-must aux-because

'It had to be done to you like this because...'

b. LEXICAL ADX-MODAL AUX-CONNECTOR Na-zoza aw-iza na-ndi, 2S-go aux-would aux-if

'If you were to go...'

The feature common to all verb phrases with optional auxiliary

verbs is that the lexical verb is separated towards the left, optionally

taking only the negative suffix, with the remainder of the grammatical

material occurring to the right on auxiliary verbs. This grammatical

organization serves to highlight the main verb, and optional auxiliary

67 verbs are especially common in cases where the verb itself constitutes
2
the new information in the clause. The chapter on pragmatics contains a fuller discussion of my conception of the pragmatic structuring of Ika clauses; but suffice to say, here, that when the comment portion of a topic-comment pragmatic structure consists only of the verb phrase, that phrase is more likely to contain an optional auxiliary verb, giving added prominence or emphasis to the lexical verb itself.^
5.2 Agreement.
Agreement in Ika is handled by means of subject and object affixes. Third person plural subject is optionally marked, and third person subject and object are always unmarked, but otherwise, person-marking is obligatory. The subject affixes consistently reference the subject of a clause, but the object prefixes serve a variety of functions. The primary function of the object prefixes is to mark the grammatical object. When the source/goal of bitransitive verbs (e.g., 'buy,' 'sell,' 'give,' etc.) is human, the object prefix refers to that participant rather than the (less animate) object. In conjunction with kS- 'peripheral participant,' the object prefixes may reference the possessor of one of the arguments of the verb (see section 5.7.2 below). Finally, the object prefixes are involved in the formation of benefactive markers (section 5.7.3).

68
Table 9 gives the subject person affixes. First person singular is usually unmarked, but -rua 'first person singular subject' occurs in the past a4nd with irrealis forms (e.g., with negatives such as *I did not go'). Third person singular is always unmarked. First and second person plural are both indicated by a- 'first or second person plural subject' but, in practice, are distinguishable by mood: first person is usually declarative and second person interrogative (there is no person marking with imperatives). Special contexts are required for the opposite combinations (e.g., first person plural interrogative). riand win— are intransitive and transitive prefixes, respectively, for third plural.^

Singular Plural

1 | 0/-rua |

|

2 H nfi-

1 |

a-

| |

3|0 4

| ri-/win- |

+

+

Table 9 Subject person affixes.

The following chart gives a simple paradigm for the verb tSua 'see' to illustrate subject person marking. I have given the second person forms as interrogatives, as noted above.

69

Singular

plural

1 t§ua-na-rua see-dist-1S

a-tSua-na 12plS-see-dist

•I saw it.*

*We saw it.*

2 na-t§ua u-z-e 2S-see aux-med-ig

a-tSua u-z-e 12plS-see aux-med-ig

'Did you see it?'

'Did you all see it?'

3 tiua-na see-dist

win-tSua-na 3plS-see-dist

'He saw it.'

'They saw it.'

One other suffix, -kuSr, appears to be a first person plural

exclusive form. For example, I can say 124 to describe how many

siblings there are in my family:

(124) Tsinwa nan-ku2ra ni. six cop-1plexcl cert

'We are six.' or 'There are six of us.'

The context in which this form was elicited made clear that the hearer

was not included. Again, exluding the hearer, one can say:

(125) Pablo-sin gou-kuara ni. Pablo-with make-1plexcl cert

'Pablo and I (we) made it.'

See section 5.6 for other correlates of subject person in verb

morphology.

Table 10 summarizes the object person prefixes on verbs. As with

subjects, third person singular object is unmarked.

70

Singular

Plural

1 | na-

| niwi- |

2 | mi-

| miwi- |

3| 0

| wina- |

Table 10 Object person prefixes.

The object prefixes are also used as possessor prefixes on kin terms.

With kin terms, however, third person is indicated by a-, e.g. a-tegue

(3-uncle) 'his uncle.'

When subject and object prefixes occur on the same verb, the

subject prefix comes first. In 126, the second person subject prefix

nS- precedes the first person plural object prefix niwi- (the final i of

niwi— is lowered to e morphophonemically before glottal stop):

(126) Na-niwe-'zasana ki u-z-e?

2S-1plO-pay

cntr aux-med-ig

'Did you pay us?'

The combination of second person subject and first person object (both

singular) results in the repetition of the form nS:

(127) Bin zan-ikin na-na-n-wa'k-an-no? when cop-lim 2S-10-ben-see-impfv-ig

'How long will you wait for me?'

71
5.3 Locationals and noun classes.
Ika has a minimal noun class system in that the shape of a concrete object determines the choice of verb or predicate nominal in sentences involving existence, location, or the notion 'to put.' The main classes involved are long objects (one dimensional), flat objects (two dimensional), three dimensional objects, liquids, containers, and objects with specialized holders. The grammatical correlates of these classes are different words/verbs chosen according to the category of the item involved (e.g. galea 'to put down long objects,' pan 'to put down flat objects').
Dixon lists three characteristics of noun class systems (1982:161): We can say that the category of noun classes is (1) a grouping of all the nouns of a language into a smallish number of classes, (2) so that there is some overt indication of the class of a noun within any sentence in which it occurs, (3) and this indication is not entirely within the noun-word.
The noun class system in Ika is minimal in that it involves only nouns referring to concrete objects and the noun classes are only relevant in locational sentences. This type of noun class system is similar to that of the Athapaskan languages (Dixon 223).

72

5.3.1 Existentials and locatives. Existential and locative clauses

make use of noun class indicator plus copula to indicate existence or

location, in 128, a'kuaskuasi is the noun class indicator for liquids.

(128) Tio'kui-se' dze a'kuaskuasi zina.

gourd.bowl-loc water liquid

cop

'The water is in the bowl.' or 'There is water in the bowl.'

The class indicator for three-dimensional objects is sa:

(129) Akunsi

s3mmi 2n-sS zar-i-ri,

cocked.food lots ?-3D cop-while-RI

'There was a lot of cooked food,...'

The same noun may occur with more than one class indicator. For

example, in one hunting story, dzua 'blood' occurs in one case with

a'kuaskuasi to mean 'a pool of blood' and in another case with pa 'flat

things' to mean 'spread out or spilled on the ground':

(130) a. Dzua ingi-ri a'ni teki a'kuaskuasi zar-i,

blood little-RI rock top.of liquid

cop-while

'There was a pool of blood on top of a rock...'

b. peri z3-dzua papa zin-eki dog gen-blood flat cop-loc

•where dog blood was on the ground'

The distinction between existential and locative clauses is not

always clear, when the item involved is known, definite, or topical, it

will generally not be overtly mentioned, and the clause is taken as

locative in nature. When the item is indefinite, new, or non-topical,

it will more likely occur as a noun phrase and the clause is interpreted

as existential. For example, in 131a, the tur6 'round hill' is a new

73

item and the clause is existential; in 131b the item (a deer) is known

and not overtly mentioned, and the clause is locational/positional.

(131) a. Dzirigakan bakanna tur6

a'sS zan' zina'ba,

mountain middle round.hill 30 just cop

'There was a hill in the middle of the mountains...'

b. Eiki p£ nar-e', still flat cop-then

'(The deer) was still lying down...'

Occasionally, class indicator words help categorize unfamiliar

objects by referring to their general characteristics and position. In

132, the hunters see something but cannot identify it:

(132) Ini pS na? what flat cop

'What is that lying down?'

In 133, an unfamiliar item (a sword) is described both as 'like a

machete' and as galea 'a long thing':

(133) Husband: Oha gaka masite nar-i

kawa.

sword long machete cop-while seem

'A sword is like a machete.'

Wife:

Aza gaka?

that long

•It's a long thing?'

Husband: At'zhIaatt'sglaoankgalo.ngHs6thrheuai-tnshge-,l'ocitalo'wnzagus.bien.ianscnhouepsa--twihh..i'le

74

5.3.2 Noun classes and verbs Meaning 'to place*. Verbs meaning 'to

place something' are sensitive to the nature of the object handled.

Example 134 contrasts the verbs for 'put down,' which vary according to

the class of the object:

(134) a. Kan gak6

ui

stick long.put aux

'Put down the stickl'

b. Ribru pa

u!

book flat.put aux

'Put down the book!'

c. A'ni sa

u!

rock 3D.put aux

'Put down the rock!'

d. Pratu t§o'

ui

plate cont.put aux

Put down the plate!

Other verbs of placing appear to be derived from the basic verbs for 'put down.' Thus, 'put down flat things' is pan, 'put flat things up on' is ipan, and 'put flat things into' is kSpas. Table 11 summarizes all the information I have gathered to date concerning noun class indicators and verbs of placing, location, and existence.

75

r•oCu<HOOD

>3N >3N

S3

>3CNO
3J0SC

•o 3
IT

<0
CD

4(J0 fa

a<0

•><S00i

J31C0

0}

0CO

to

0 •u

'o

0

30

•d

•o

<3 0 •cM <0

<3 0 •'icH-t

•J<3ciC0H

<0 •CHO

1t0o 0>0) 3C0O

3J—3"1aC0*00

<3 0 •3acH0

3JC1a3*00

ac10

<ca0. 3aC(0O0

J•(03t0M> — 10

(3 0 ••a<iHuH>

310
-r-t
a>

<0

•aV > M

10 >0

3Ja<<0£00>

••4H•CaXc•-HJiUOt0l•JJ6>oI0HJiD)

c CaQ>

0c a3 0c aa) AIV

oc a3 •3 P

<oc5u (43JX

c 403J4

Table 11 Locatiooal words and noun classes.

The noun class 'things with holders* refers to such relationships as a machete in its sheath or batteries in a flashlight. The key idea is that the holder is designed to contain the item in question. For the

76
verb meaning *to put,' only 'put in' is relevant for this class. The noun class 'containers' refers to the position or existence of items such as pots or plates, rather than referring to the contents of the container. Note that people fall into this class when in an upright position. Thus, when coming up to a person who is standing, a polite comment is ei tSo (thus container/standing) 'you're standing.' However, people may also be classified as three dimensional (sa) when sitting.
Reduplication indicates plurality of the objects involved. Thus, when referring to a book on a table, the proper locational word is ipa but for a number of books is ipap£.
5.4 Temporal aspect.
To understand the marking of temporal relations, it will be useful to distinguish the time of an event, some reference point from which that event is viewed, and the time of speaking (Reichenbach 1947). The three choices for temporal aspect, -ak£ 'perfect' (anterior), -5n 'imperfective,' and 0 'perfective,' involve the relationship between the event and the reference point for viewing the event. —ak£ 'perfect' sees an event from its termination, as already completed at the (time of) the reference point, i.e., it indicates that the event referred to is anterior to the reference point:

77

(135) Eiki i-ri-tSor-e'-ri,

guiadzina z'a gSmmi

there ?-3plS-ascend-then-top puma

gen child

peri-se' ana-kuss-i

guak-aki nu'-na.

dog-erg pt.ref-bite-while kill-perf aux-dist

'They went up there, and the dogs bad killed the puma cub, biting it.'

The first clause in 135 sets the reference point for -ak£: by the time

the hunters arrive. With respect to that time, the dogs have already

killed the puma cub.

-3d 'imperfective' indicates an event going on at the time of the

reference point, focussing on the event-in-progress rather than its

beginning or end. (This suffix covers the same ground as what is

usually called the progressive in English.) In 136, the reference point

is the time of speaking:

(136) Ini-ri ei ka-z-Sn-no? what-top thus periph-say-impfv-ig

'What are (the dogs) barking at?'

In 137, the reference point is prior to the time of speaking:

(137) Emi pari guiadzina zag-an

nu'-na.

here from puma

steal-impfv aux-dist

'A puma was stealing from here.'

-5n 'imperfective' may also combine with two other suffixes, -pan

'inceptive' and —bina 'motion.' -pan 'inceptive' refers to an event

which is beginning to take place or about to take place at the reference

point.

78

(138) Ingi-ri t§out§o kanak-am-pana

keiwi

little-ri afraid become-impfv-incep right.away

u-z-e'

pari-ri, wi Sn-zoza-na.

aux-med-then from-top ? pt.ref-go-dist

'He began to get scared, and at that point he went.'

(139) Akin ora nS-kition-am-pan-ni. late hour 10-time.has.come-impfv-incep-cert

'My time is about to come.' or 'It is just about time.'

—bina 'motion' indicates that the subject leaves his primary

location to perform the action, then returns to that location once

again. For example, the question in 140 does not contain any verb of

motion, yet implies that Abram came to eat, then returned to where he

had been before:

(140) Abran zami g-am-bina

u-z-e?

Abram food eat-impfv-motion aux-med-ig

'Did Abram come to eat?'

-bina, then, marks an action performed while temporarily away from the

subject's primary physical point of reference. The motion involved may

be either away or toward; that is, the free translation of 140 would be

'Did Abram go to eat?' if Abram had been 'here' and would presumably

return.

Not choosing —akf 'perfect,' or —Sn 'imperfective,' implies a

perfective view of an event. That is, the event is seen as an

undifferentiated whole. In 141, 'when Pablo came' establishes the point

of reference, and 141a-c show the three options: (a) Cesar had already

gone; (b) he was going; and (c) simply, he left. (Zo£a 'go' is an

79

irregular verb; its varying forms in 141 do not represent any difference

in meaning.)

(141) Pablo nas-e'-ri, a. C£sar zoz-aki nus-in.

Pablo come-then-top

C£sar go-perf aux-wit

'When Pablo came,'

'Cesar had already gone.'

b. c£sar zuei-n nus-in. Cesar go-impfv aux-wit

'Cesar was going.'

c. Cesar zor-in. Cesar go-wit

•Cesar went.'

5.5 Mood.
Indicators of mood may be grouped into two sets, a set of modal suffixes involving obligation, intention, ability, etc., and suffixes and particles that show the connection between a verb and its context. The latter set indicates the connection between a dependent clause and its main clause, or between an independent clause and the speech situation.

80
5.5.1 Modal suffixes. Table 12 lists the seven modal suffixes. These suffixes indicate a non-actual event and are therefore irrealis in nature.

—ikua —ikuei -wi'na -iwa -ngua -nguasi -iza

'must' •able to' 'prohibited' 'about to' 'will' 'in order to' 'would'

Table 12 Modal suffixes.

5.5.1.1 -ikua "must*, -ikua 'must' conveys the idea of 'obligation';

a typical use is to give a command without using a grammatically

imperative form:

(142) Zei-'-kitSi nann-akua ni! go-neg-emph aux-must cert

'You must not go!'

Another use of -ikua is to indicate hortatory mood, i.e., 'Let's do X.'

(143) Nii-n-kit§i

zan* kankanSn nuk-ikua nin.

walk-impfv-emph just forest aux-must cert

'Let's go hunting (walk in the forest).'

-ikua is also used with first person, as in 144:

(144) Beki as-ik-o? where sit-must-ig

'Where should I sit?'

81

5.5.1.2 —ikuei 'able to*. —ikuei 'able to' deals with the realm of

possibility, i.e., what could take place:

(145) Gumia'sa aw-e'-ri, ingumSn tos—ikuei neika nin cover aux-then-top more catch-able NPfoc cert

otiki-ri. animal-top

'You cover over (the hole) and then you can catch the otiki anrimal.'

(146) kS-wa's-i

a*tl6n-Skuei zin-n-eki

periph-see-while arrive-able aux-dist-loc

'where you can arrive and see out'

(147) Wareki zar-i-gui,

k§-wa'n

a-ukuei.

high cop-while-also periph-fall aux-able

'Up high like that, they could fall down.'

5.5.1.3 -wi'na 'prohibited'. —vi1na 'prohibited' marks an action as something one must never do, for example, drinking kerosene: (148) Petroriu a'ga-wi'na ni.
kerosene drink-prohib cert 'One must not drink kerosene.' The combination of the negative plus —ikua 'must,' by contrast, only implies that one must not do the action in this particular instance. 149 is from a story in which a hunter has bad luck because he went hunting during Easter week. The verb naSa 'walk' is a shortened form of the idiom for hunting ('walk in the forest'), and dSuia' 'day' refers in this case to Easter. Note that one must hunt (-ikua 'must'), but one must never hunt during religious holidays (—wi'na 'prohibited'):

82
(149) Nai-kua neki nai-wi'na dzuia'-se'. walk-must cntr walk-prohib day-loc 'One has to hunt, but one should never hunt on that day.'

5.5.1.4 -iva 'about to1, -iva 'about to' is a sort of immediate

future, expressing intention to do something soon.® When a person

begins to tell a story s/he may say kuentu i-wa ni (story say-about.to

cert) 'I'm going to tell a story.' The use of -iwa in this formulaic

opening to a narrative illustrates the immediacy of the time involved.

The reference point for —iwa need not be the time of speaking. In 150,

the first clause 'when Pablo arrives' sets the reference point; the use

of —iwa implies that the second action will immediately follows Pablo's

arrival.

(150) Pablo na'-nik-z-e'-ri,

i'ba

zor-iwa

ni.

Pablo come-when-med-then-top together go-about.to cert

'When Pablo comes, we will (immediately) go together.'

5.5.1.5 —ngua 'will1 and —nguasi 'in order to'. —ngua 'will' serves as

a general future tense. This modal expresses intention but no

particular time frame. In 151, good hunting dogs are characterized as

thinking "I will chase all kinds of animals."

(151) Pinna dzuna was-an

na-ngua.

all kind chase-impfv 10-will

'I will chase all kinds.'

83 Many examples involving -ngua imply a general rather than specific intention, as in 151. This modal may also be used, however, with a specific intention. For example, in one hunting story, as a man prepares to fire at bis quarry, he thinks 'this shotgun shell is supposed to be able to kill big game' and therefore guak—5n—gua (kill-imperfective-will) 'it will kill it,' referring to this specific case.
—ngua 'will' is the only modal which is always marked for person. Person marking with -ngua makes uses of the object person prefixes. In this sense, -ngua parallels the impersonal verbs (see section 2.3.4).

H 1|

singular na-ngua

plural +
| niwi-ngua |

2j -i
3| -i

isi-ngua 0-ngua

J miwi-ngua j

+

+

| win-gua

|

H

+

Table 13 Person marking for —ngua 'will*.

The modal -nguasi 'in order to' may be simply a variant of —ngua 'will.' A clause with a verb marked by -nguasi is the purpose for the action stated in a second clause. (This second clause is indicated in the free translation of 152 but is not included in the vernacular to avoid confusion.) (152) Uraki-siki zei-n na-nguasi
house-loc go-impfv 10-in.order.to '(I went to look for my mule) in order to go home.'

84

At the time when the narrator went to look for his mule, going home was

still an intention, so the use of -ngua 'will* is appropriate. The -si

could mark this verb as the goal of the main verb, but —nguasi appears

to have become frozen as a single morpheme; 'X—nguasi Y* implies 'do Y

in order to X.'

-ngua 'will' (and -nguasi) differs from other modals in that it

must follow a verb marked by Sn 'imperfective.' The imperfective

usually indicates on-going action, as in dan—Sn nuk—za

(bark-imperfective aux-medial) 'it is barking,' but in verb phrases of

the type 'verb-imperfective verb' the imperfective expresses purpose or

futurity. In 153, tak 'look for' carries the imperfective suffix and is

the purpose for the second verb, zoza 'go.' in terms of the

chronological sequence, the speaker first 'went,' then afterward 'looked

for,' so the verb marked by the imperfective is also future with respect

to the final, main verb.

(153) Mura an-ka-tak-an

zoza-na-rua.

mule pt.ref-periph-look.for-impfv go-dist-1S

'I went to look for (my) mule.'

—ngua behaves similarly; subsituting —ngua 'will' for zoia 'go' produces

a structurally and semantically similar construction:

(154) Mura an-k§-tak-an

nS-ngua.

mule pt.ref-periph-look.for-impfv 10-will

'I will look for (my) mule.'

The action 'looking for' is still future and is an intention, but -ngua

itself has no lexical meaning. Thus, -ngua behavies similarly to

lexical verbs yet has no lexical meaning. Note also that -ngua carries

85
person markings in the same way as verbs with experiencer subjects, using the object prefixes to mark the subject o€ the clause. It would seem, then, that this modal is a verb which has become bleached of its lexical content and is becoming (or has become) grammaticized as a indication of intention or future time.
5.5.1.6 -iza 'would*, -iza, which I will gloss 'would,' marks a verb as indicating what would happen under certain conditions. This idea of 'under the right conditions' can be seen in 155, where the first clause establishes a condition. (155) Bogota zoza aw-iza na-ndi, Monserate tSua aw-iza.
Bogota go aux-would aux-if Monserate see aux-would 'If one were to go to Bogota, one would see Monserate.' Combined with the negative, —iza implies 'does not want to': (156) Wakuma wima neki g-u' nan-an ninza ni. skunk meat cntr eat-neg aux-impfv 1:would cert •I would not (do not want to) eat skunk meat.' (The form ninza is a special form for first person with 'would.') unlike -ngua, there is no consistent person marking pattern for the —iza; for second and third person, the person marking appropriate to the lexical verb is used. In 157, nS- '2 Subject' and «i— '2 Object' are selected for the two main verbs, respectively: (157) N3-zoza aw-iza na-ndi, mouga me-'zar-iza ni. 2S-go aux-would aux-if two 20-feel-would cert 'If you were to go, something bad would happen (lit., 'you would feel two').'

86
In 158, there is no overt marking for person, which is the usual pattern for third person. (158) Asige' husiri tSu-an zor-iza neki t§out§o
next.day shotgun see-impfv go-would cntr fear kSnas-e' pari-ri, become-then from-top "The next day he would have gone to see the shotgun (booby-trap) but he got scared ...•
5.5.2 Hood indicators and clause connectors. The other side of mood marking concerns indicators of a clause's connection to its sentential or interactional context. Non-final, dependent clauses carry clause-connecting suffixes that indicate the temporal or logical relationship between that clause and the next clause in a clause chain. (See chapter 7 for detail on clause chaining and the suffixes involved.) Final, independent clauses are marked for speech-act value by clause final suffixes or particles. The mood indicators include markers for declarative, imperative, and interrogative. (See sections 6.1, 6.2, and 6.3 for details on mood indicators.)

87
5.6 Deictic aspect.
One paradigmatic set of verb suffixes indicates the degree of closeness or relevance between a verb and its point of reference (the situation of speaking for independent verbs; the main clause for medial, dependent verbs). Subject person and time are both involved in determining the 'distance' involved, with first person and 'now' the points of reference. The elements in the set, from the most proximal to the most distal, are -w (used with first person only), -ku, 0, -la, and -na. For the sake of convinience, I will call the first and last elements in this list 'proximal' and 'distal' deictic aspect, respectively, and the intermediate three elements 'medial' deictic aspect. The following discussion will explain the differences between the members of the set.
There is a correlation between deictic 'distance' and time: independent verbs marked by -na 'distal' are always past time; and those marked by —w 'proximal' are virtually always present/immediate past. Example 159 illustrates the use of -za 'medial' for present time and -na 'distal' for past time: (159) a. Biteriu eik£ kua-za.
Viterio there live-med 'Viterio lives there.' b. BViitteerriiuo ethiekrie kluiav-en-ad.istal 'Viterio lived there.'

88
Thus, -na is more 'distant' from the point of reference than the other forms in7 the set, primarily in time. In conjunction with —in 'witness' , however, -za 'medial' always refers to past time: (160) TSua u-z-in.
see aux-med-wit 'He saw it.' By contrast, remaining in third person, using no suffix (the 0 choice) implies 'happening now' or 'just happened': (161) TSua aw-in. see aux-wit 'He sees it.' or 'He just saw it.' In this sense, —za is more distant from the point of reference than 0. Another component of the 'distance' involved is the relationship between the speaker and the event. If the speaker did not witness an event, he must use -na 'distal'; otherwise he may use -za 'medial': (162) a. TSua u-z-in.
see aux-med-wit •He saw it (and I saw him see it).' b. TSua u-na. see aux-dist 'He saw it (but I didn't see him do so).' Although 'not witnessed' calls for the use of -na 'distal,' the converse is not necessarily true: -na may be used for events which the speaker did witness. For example, -na 'distal' may be used with first person (where witness/nonwitness is irrelevant), e.g., t§ua—na—rua (see-distal-IS) 'I saw it.' Examples like this reflect the speaker's

89

choice of presenting the event as more or less relevant to the time of

speaking.

The relationship between the deictic suffixes and person is

complex. The following chart lists the various forms for 'I/you/he

see(s) it* for present/immediate past, past, and further removed/not witnessed. o

Immediate past

Past

Further removed

1 t§ua u-w-in see aux-prox-wit

tSua u-ku-in see aux-med-wit

tSua-na-rua see-dist-1S

2 n3-tSua u-ku-in

na-t§ua u-z-in

n3-tsua-na

2S-see aux-med-wit 2S-see aux-med-wit 2S-see-dist

3 t§ua aw-0-in see aux-med-wit

tSua u-z-in see aux-med-wit

tsua-na see-dist

Note that -na 'distal* occurs with all three persons. Note also that

for past time, -za 'medial' is not used with first person. Apparently a

verb for which the speaker is the subject is too 'close' to use -za

'medial* in the past. —ku 'medial' is used for 'you now' or 'me then,'

that is, one step removed from the speaker, either second person or past

time (but not both). 0 may alsc be used for second person, past time,

as in 163:

(163) Makki gaw-an

ki nus-e?

clothes make-impfv cntr aux-ig

'Were you making clothes?'

Given this fact and the forms for the immediate past, it can be seen

that 0 is one step more distant than -ku in person (third vs. second person in the immediate past, second vs. first person in the past). The

third person forms demonstrate that za is one step more distant in time

90
than 0. This suggests that the variation between 0 and -2a in the second person past time may represent a subtle distinction in time.
The deictic aspect suffixes make poor tense markers; only -na has any consistent time reference and -2a shares past time with it. Nor do the suffixes make good subject person markers; only -w has any consistent person reference. One could construct glosses for the
g suffixes that hinge primarily around subject person. For example, -w would be 'first person,* —ku would be 'one of the two of us who are talking together,' and both 0 and 2a would be 'not first person,' leaving -na as some sort of 'past' which simply happens to interact with the other markers paradigmatically. However, considered as markers of 'degree of relevance* or 'distance between verb and reference point,' the suffixes make more sense. Person, time, and (non-)witness all enter into the relationship between an event and the speech situation (or between two events in an event chain, in the case of medial verbs/clauses).
5.7 Valence change.
Causatives, kS— 'peripheral participant,' benefactives, and reciprocals/reflexives all involve a change in the number of participants referenced by a verb.

91

5.7.1 Causatives. Ika has two sorts of causatives, lexical and

analytic (cf. Comrie 1981:160-61). Lexical causatives are those where

the idea of causation is built into the verb itself, for example, guak

'to kill' taken in the sense 'cause to die.' Another lexical causative

involves permission rather than causation, per se: tSuna 'to let

someone enter':

(164) a. Mi-tSuna

u-z-e?

20-let.enter aux-med-ig

'Did he let you go in?'

b. Na-tSuna

u-z-in.

10-let.enter aux-med-wit

•Ee let me go in.'

T§una 'let enter' is minimally different from t§ona 'enter,' but I have

found no other such pairs to warrant identifying a morphological process

of causative formation. Note, however, that tSona behaves similarly to

other causative verbs: the one who enters becomes the object of the

verb, and the one who causes is the subject.

Two verbs show clearer evidence of a morphological causative.

Compare kSiiaa 'sleep' and kSaaa-s 'cause/rock to sleep' in 165:

(165) a. bZ'aiTzbhiye hhbaaambmmyaokwcaka--ssleo'scleeskpalmiemne-gp<-Sinimnpftvheanuhuxa'-m-dmnioasc.tk.'

b. Marta zizi hamaka-se' k3mma-s-3n

nu'-na.

Martha baby hammock-loc sleep-cause-impfv aux-dist

'Martha rocked the baby to sleep in the hammock.'

92

Compare also aaw 'cry' and aou-s 'to make someone cry.•

Analytic causatives are ones involving two verbs, one of which

specifically means 'cause.' The verb gua'sa 'to make, cause' takes a

verb with -Sn 'imperfective' as its complement, conveying the idea 'to

make someone do X':

(166) Juan-se' t§ei t§us-an

gua'sa-na.

Juan-erg farm leave-impfv cause-dist

'Juan made him leave his farm.'

Gua'sa plus the negative indicates 'cause not to X' or 'prevent from

doing X' rather than 'did not cause to X'; that is, the scope of

negation is the subordinate verb rather than gua'sa itself.

(167) 5i

wis-Sn

neki gua's-u* nar-i,

foul.odor spray.out-impfv cntr cause-neg aux-while

'(She) did not let the (skunk's scent) spray out.' '(She) kept the (skunk's scent) from spraying out.'

The causee is referenced on gua'sa by the object prefixes:

(168) a. Zoz-an mi-gua'sa u-z-e? go-impfv 20-cause aux-med-ig

'Did he make you leave?'

b. Na-gua'sa-na. 10-cause-dist

'He made me (leave).'

Gua'sa always involves the idea of force, i.e., making the causee do

something s/he would not otherwise do.

93
5.7.2 k3- 'peripheral participant' and valence increase. The prefix kS- 'peripheral participant' increases a verb's valence by allowing the verb to take object person prefixes to refer to an additional participant. With some verbs, this peripheral participant is one semantically implied by the verb but not included in the set of participants that the verb can refer to grammatically. In other cases, the additional participant is the possessor of one of the items involved in the action.
za 'say' semantically implies a hearer but, grammatically, may not refer to that hearer without adding kS- (compare ia-na (say-distal) 'he said' with nS-kS—ia-na (10-peripheral.participant-say-distal) 'he said to me'). Similarly, va'k 'look' is grammatically intransitive although the act of looking implies what is seen; in order to add object prefixes, it is necessary to use kS-, e.g., ai-ka-wa'ka (20-peripheral.participant-look) 'it looks at you.' TSua 'see,' on the other hand, is transitive and may take object marking prefixes without kS-.
The verb 3ngeik 'to sell' is a transitive verb (rather than bitransitive) though semantically it implies a buyer. To explicitly refer to the buyer, either by a separate noun phrase or a first or second person object prefix, it is necessary to use k3-. Compare 169a and b:

94

(169) a. Kaf4 angei'-na-rua ni. coffee sell-dist-1S cert

'I sold coffee.'

b. Kaf6 Pablo-se* k-3ngei'-na-rua

ni.

coffee Pablo-loc periph-sell-dist-1S cert

'I sold coffee to Pablo.'

Apart from the cases described above, the additional participant

brought in is the possessor of one of the clause participants. With

transitive verbs, kS— indicates the possessor of the object. In 170a,

the second person object prefix «i- refers to 'you' as the object of the

verb ga 'eat' while in 170b, because of the presence of kS—, it refers

to 'you' as the possessor of the object:

(170) a. Tigri mi-ga.

jaguar 20-eat

'The jaguar eats you.'

b. Peri kin-di mi-ka-ga.

dog lim-top 20-periph-eat

'(The jaguar) eats your two dogs.'

With locative/existential clauses, a possessor is associated with the

location. 171 predicates the existence of a kakSrdn 'shotgun shell' and

names the husiri 'shotgun' as the place where the shell is located. The

combination of the first person object marker and kS— 'peripheral

participant' indicates that the speaker is the possessor of the location

— the shotgun:

(171) Husiri kakaron neki na-k-a'niku

na-' no?

shotgun shell cntr 1O-periph-be.in-neg aux-neg ig •There is no shell in my gun, is there?'

95

In 172, the tSegekuana 'handbag' is the location specified, and the

peripheral participant is the possessor of the handbag.

(172) T§egeku£na-se' a'buru k-a'nikua-na. handbag-loc offering periph-be.in-dist

'There was an offering in his handbag.' or 'He had an offering in his handbag.'

Hith intransitive verbs, kS— indicates the possessor of the subject:

(173) Husiri neki k-a'wi-u'

nSn-na.

shotgun cntr periph-go.off-neg aux-dist

'His shotgun didn't fire.'

This particular usage of kS— is similar to what Relational Grammarians

call ' Possessor Ascension' (cf. Frantz 1981:28—30, and Allen, Gardiner,

and Frantz 1984:306-7 for possessor ascension in Southern Tiwa). As is

apparently the case with other instances of possessor ascension, the

peripheral participant/possessor, here, is associated with the most

oblique of the noun phrases present: subject of intransitive, object of

transitive, source/goal of bitransitive, and location of

locative/existential clauses.

To summarize, kS— serves to include a peripheral participant in a

clause as the referent of the object prefixes. The particular role of

that peripheral participant is determined by the nature of the verb.

96

5.7.3 Benefactives. The benefactive role is signalled by the verb

prefix n- for first and second person, and by i- for third person, in

combination with the object person prefixes.^® Compare 174a and b, in

which 174b shows nS— '1 Object' plus n- 'benefactive' to indicate 'for

me':

(174) a. Kafe zas-an

nuk-z-in.

coffee save-impfv aux-med-wit

'He is saving coffee.'

b. Kafe na-n-zas-an

nuk-z-in.

coffee 10-ben-save-impfv aux-med-wit

'He is saving coffee for me.'

In 175, i— 'benefactive' indicates that the action is performed for the

benefit of another:

(175) Juan uraki i-gaw-an

nuk-za ni.

Juan house ben-make-impfv aux-med cert

'Juan is making a house for someone.'

Although third person singular object is unmarked, third plural is

indicated by winS- (with the S deleted preceding i):

(176) Akusa win-i-zas-an

nu'-ku-in.

needle 3pl0-ben-save-impfv aux-med-wit

'I'm saving needles for them.'

The benefactive markers are also used in a 'malefactive' sense:

(177) Juan na-n-gu'-na.

Juan 10-ben-pick.up-dist

'Juan took it from me (took it to my detriment).'

Some verbs may occur with either the benefactive marker or k3—

'peripheral participant.' in such cases, the benefactive form indicates

a closer or more direct involvement in the action then the form with

97

k3-. Compare nS-n-una'-na (10-benefactive-bring-distal) 'he brought me'

and nS—k—una'—na (10-peripheral.participant-bring-distal) 'he brought

something to me.' With the benefactive, the person reference by the

object prefix is directly affected whereas with kS—, s/he is only a

recipient.

In some cases, the benefactive form results in an idiom. Wa'k

usually means 'to look,' but in combination with the benefactive means

'to wait for':

(178) Mi-n-wa'k-3n

nus-e?

20-ben-look-impfv aux-ig

'Was he waiting for you?'

Another idiomatic use of the benefactive is with the copula zan in

expressions indicating 'older or younger than.' in such constructions,

the object prefixes in conjunction with the benefactive marker refer to

the subject of the clause.

(179) Dawid na'an guasi ingumSn i-zin-ni. David 1pro compar more ben-cop-cert

'David is older than me.'

(180) Na'an Juan guasi inguman na-n-zin-ni. 1pro Juan compar more 10-ben-cop-cert

'I am older than Juan.'

98
5.7.4 Reciprocals and reflexives. Reciprocals and reflexives are marked by the verb prefix rina 'reciprocal'.11 In the absence of overt noun phrases, it is not always clear whether a reciprocal or reflexive meaning is intended: (181) Rina-tSua u-ku-in.
recip-sec aux-med-wit 'We saw each other.' or 'I saw myself.' The postposition sin 'with' with an overt noun indicates a reciprocal meaning: (182) Pablo-sin rina-t§ua u-w-in. Pablo-with recip-see aux-prox-wit 'Pablo and I (just) saw each other.' Rina— occurs with verb forms usually associated with first person singular (see section 5.6 on deictic aspect). The adjective kingui 'same' following the subject noun indicates a reflexive reading of rina—: (183) A kingui rina-sua u-z-in. 3pro same recip-burn aux-med-wit 'He burned himself.' Note that kingui is also used in emphatic forms, e.g. 'he himself did it.'

99
5.8 Comparatives and eqoatives.

Comparison is indicated by the postposition goasi associated with

the standard of comparison, in conjunction with a separate adjective or

adverb, in 184, Juansitu is the standard of comparison and inguaSn

•more' (meaning 'faster' in this case) is the comparative adjective:

(184) Pedru Juansitu guasi inguman naza ni.

Pedro Juancito compar more walk cert

•Pedro walks faster than Juancito.*

Equation is also handled by means of a postposition, in this case

sin 'with.' In 185, aa 'you' is the standard for the equation and

dikkin 'same height' is the adjective:

(185) Juan ma-sin dikkin

kawa no?

Juan 2pro-with same.height seem ig

'Is Juan the same height as you?'

Note that the standard of comparison is an oblique constituent, not

referenced on the verb. 186a is a single-participant descriptive clause

in which kawa 'seem' is an impersonal verb, referencing the participant

by the object prefixes. The addition of a standard of comparison in

186b does not alter the person marking, and the reversal of the

participants in 186c results in a corresponding change of the object

marker on the verb:

100

(186) a. Ha deiru mi-kawa ni. you thin 20-seem cert

'You are thin.'

b. Ma na'an guasi deiru mi-kawa ni.

you I

compar thin 20-seem cert

'You are thinner than me.'

c. NI'aI'aanm mtyahoiunngceuoramspitahrandtehyiiornuu.'n1S0--ksaeweam ncie.rt

5.9 an- 'point of reference*.
The verb prefix an— 'point of reference' occurs in two main environments: with transitive verbs, to indicate a non-human object, and with motion verbs, to identify a significant place with respect to which the motion takes place. In both uses, the key idea is that of fixing a point of reference towards which the action is directed. The prefix has the form Sn— when followed by a consonant-initial form, resulting in a closed syllable.
With transitive verbs, an- indicates that a non-human object is involved, usually one which is directly affected by the action in a clause with a high degree of carry-over from agent to patient. In 187, an— occurs on the verbs guak 'kill' and ga 'eat,' illustrating the direct impact of the action on the non-human object.

101

(187) Dze-siki an-guak-ak£

nus-i-ri,

ingi-ri

river-loc pt.ref-kill-perf aux-while-top little-top

an-g-an

nus-e' keiwi

kachan-na.

pt.ref-eat-impfv aux-then right.away arrive-dist

'Having killed (the deer) at the river, (the dogs) were eating on it when I arrived.*

Verbs with which an- o€ten occurs are ones which inherently imply a

direct effect on the object, e.g., a'tSri 'skin an animal,' a'si 'tie

up,' and gos 'carry'; other verbs imply less contact, e.g., tSua 'see,'

dan and 'bark.' In all cases, however, an— 'point of reference'

indicates that the object is the focus of attention.

With motion verbs, an— singles out a location as a significant

point with respect to which the motion takes place. In this way, an-

helps distinguish directed and undirected motion. That is, a motion

verb without an- predicates movement without being specific about the

location involved. 188a would be a leave-taking which focusses on the

departure while 188b focusses on the goal of the motion:

(188) a. Zor-iwa

ni.

go-about.to cert

'I'm going now.'

b. Nabusfmake an-zor-iwa

ni.

Nabusimake pt.ref-go-about.to cert

•I'm going to Nabusimake.'

Within narratives, an— helps define physical scenes. For example,

hunting stories involve a great deal of movement as the hunters leave

home to track game, follow particular animals, return home and later

resume the hunt, etc. Only a few instances of motion verbs, however,

are marked by an—. These cases are usually ones involving motion

102 towards significant locations in the story. When the hunter returns to his home, the verb usually carries an-; a person's house as his home base is an inherently important location. As a story progresses, however, narrators use an- to define a place around which a segment of the story revolves. In the hunting stories, these are places such as where game is sighted and the hunters converge or where the chase ends and the kill is made. Movements toward these spots often are marked by an— while other verbs of motion are not so marked.
This use of an- 'point of reference' to mark a significant location is similar to the use of 'come' and 'bring' in English. Fillmore suggests that these verbs may serve to define points of reference within narratives (1975:67):
"Come" and "bring" also indicate, in discourse in which neither speaker nor addressee figures as a character, motion toward a place taken as the subject of the narrative, toward the location of the central character at reference time, or toward the place which is the central character's home base at reference time. Naka 'come' is very infrequent in the narratives in my corpus and apparently is defined with reference to the speaker, not the characters within the story. an—, however, combines with other motion verbs to serve the same purpose of indicating significant locations within the narrative. Clauses in which an— 'point of reference' figures often show features of high transitivity, as defined by Hopper and Thompson 1980. In a general sense, transitivity is seen as "the effective carrying over of an activity from an A [agent] to a patient" (1980:279), but more specifically, Hopper and Thompson suggest that transitivity be broken

103 down into a number of components defining scales along which a given clause can be ranked as more or less transitive. Those components of interest with regard to an- are number of participants, kinesis, volitionality, affectedness of the object, and individuation of the object.
Motion verbs with specific locations have more "participants" than those with no location or those with a non-specific location. The verbs on which an— appears are usually kinetic, i.e., involving action as opposed to states (an exception to this is a verb such as tSua 'see'). Clauses with an- usually show volitionality of the agent and an affected object, often with a direct impact of the agent on the object (e.g., with verbs like 'kill' and 'eat')- Finally, in clauses with an-, the object or location is almost always highly individuated; that is, it is referential, concrete, and definite rather than non-referential, abstract, and indefinite.
1. Uninflected, here, means having no suffixes. Prefixes play a relatively minor role in the verb complex as a whole and apparently have no bearing on the occurrence of optional auxiliary verbs.
2. Hugh Tracy suggested that auxiliary verbs focus on the preceding verb (personal communication), drawing my attention to the possibility that optional auxiliaries have a pragmatic rather than a grammatical function.
3. These observations concerning frequency of optional auxiliaries are only informal at this point.
4. The suffix -raa 'first singular subject' may occur following -na 'distal deictic aspect' (used in past time references) or following the auxiliary/copular verb nan, which usually appears in irrealis contexts, that is, with negatives and modal suffixes. The section on deictic aspect discusses the relationship between aspect and person, and two auxiliary verbs appear to have first person bound up with the verb stem itself (uw 'first person auxiliary' and ninza '1:would'), but apart from these circumstances and —rua, there is no overt marking of first person.

104
5. Although win- usually marks third plural subject with transitive verbs, it also occurs with vowel-initial intransitive verb stems, rather than ri—. Landaburu 1985 gives win- as potentially referring to second person, a combination which I have not observed myself.
6. The glosses of -iwa 'about to' and -pan 'inceptive' give the impression that the two overlap in meaning or function. -iwa, however, mainly involves intentionality while —pan focusses on the temporal relationship between an event and the point of reference for describing the event, that the event was, is, or will be beginning (or about to begin) at the time of the point of reference.
7. The suffix -in 'witness' is one of the markers of declarative mood, for predicating events in the past that the speaker witnessed. Although this gloss sounds like one associated with evidential markers, there is no evidential system per se in Ika. The suffix is discussed in more detail in section 6.1, in the chapter on clause formation.
8. As I mentioned in section 5.2, on agreement, second person forms are usually interrogative, first person forms declarative, in Ika. In that sense, the second person declarative forms in this chart are unnatural, and indeed, it was necessary to generate special contexts in order to elicit a form such as 'you saw it': how often does a person ask a question about what he himself has done? My first experiments with eliciting paradigms invariably produced such 'paradigms' as the one given in the section on agreement: 'I saw it. Did you see it? He saw it.' It is possible that speakers of other languages do not have the same difficulty that the Bintukwa have with this matter, but their reactions highlight the unnaturalness of eliciting paradigms. A few semesters of linguistic training seem to give one a permanent immunity to the feeling that manipulating language in the abstract is an odd sort of thing to do.
9. Landaburu presents just such an analysis, handling these suffixes, with the exception of — na (considered to have no relation to the other suffixes) , as markers of subject. His analysis hinges around a basic distinction between the participants in the speech situation versus 'the world,' further subdividing the participants in the speech situation between the speaker himself and various sets of referents, including both first and second plural.
10. In the section on Ika phonology, I noted that, in contrast to Tracy and Tracy 1973, I am not considering the velar nasal to have phonemic status. One environment in which n has a velar point of articulation is syllable-finally before vowels. The n of the prefix n- 'benefactive' phonetically has a velar point of articulation when preceding a vowel, and therefore part of the definition of its underlying form is that a syllable boundary follows the n.
11. As with n— 'benefactive' (see the previous footnote), the n of rina— 'reciprocal/reflexive' phonetically has a velar point of articulation, and the underlying form of the morpheme would show a syllable boundary following the n.

6. CLAUSE FORMATION.

This chapter covers the formation of basic clause types: declaratives, questions, and imperatives, as well as dealing with negation, a topic whose scope is within the clause.

6.1 Declaratives.

Declarative mood is marked by ni 'certainty,' -in 'witness,' or 0.

—in indicates that the speaker witnessed the event predicated and covers

a time span from 'now' (i.e., just happened) through (recent) past, ni

'certainty* covers all time frames, but for accomplished events it

indicates that the speaker did not witness the event or that the speaker

wants to convey that the event is removed in time, space, or relevance

to the present. Compare the question in 189a with two possible answers,

189b using —in and 189c using ni:

(189) a. win-naka u-z-e? 3plS-come aux-med-ig

'Did they come?'

b. Win-naka u-z-in. 3plS-come aux-med-wit

'They came (and I saw it).'

c. Win-naka u-na

ni.

3plS-come aux-dist cert

'They came (but I didn't see it).'

-105-

106 —in 'witness' may indicate immediacy in space or location relative to ni. For example, 190a and b differ in the emphasis placed on the location where the sentence is uttered: ni (190a) refers to 'around here in general,' while -in (190b) emphasizes 'right here where we are speaking.' (190) a. Snke' kua-wa ni.
here live-prox cert 'I live here.* b. anke' kua-w-in. here live-prox-wit 'I live here.' or 'This is where I live.' —in 'witness' is also used for 'right now.' In 191a and b, the question and answer refer to an event going on at the time the exchange takes place which the asker cannot see but which the answerer sees: (191) a. Ns'utAgorupeetaahu-exoy-?isgtopping?' or 'Did they stop?' b. Nugue aw-in. stop aux-wit 'They stopped.' ni 'certainty' occurs in several contexts in which -in 'witness' does not occur: in descriptive clauses (with predicate nominals and adjectives), in clauses with modal suffixes, and in statements that are generally true but do not refer to a specific event. Example 192 illustrates ni in a descriptive clause:

107 (192) Tigri ni.
jaguar cert 'It's a jaguar.'

In 193, ni occurs with the modal - i k u a 'must':

(193) KSnkanSn nai-n

zoza a-ukua nin.

forest walk-impfv go aux-must cert

'Let's go hunting.'

(Note the free variant nin in 193.) Example 194 shows ni in a clause

which is generally true rather than referring to a specific case:

(194) Gag5ru-ri kSniu ga-za ni. animal-top cane eat-med cert

'The "gagaru" animal eats sugar cane.'

ni 'certainty' does not always occur in the environments where it

might be expected. Within narrative, especially, mood marking may be

absent on final independent clauses. The narrative establishes an

environment in which unmarked clauses are understood as declarative.

Declarative sentences in isolation also may lack mood marking.

An additional context in which declarative mood markers occur is in

indirect content questions. 195 shows ni occurring with in* 'what' in

an indirect question:

(195) In-i ni neki a'za-' nan-na. what cert cntr think-neg aux-dist

'He didn't know what it was.'

(See Section 8.3.3 for more on indirect questions.)

108 6.2 Questions.
There are three kinds of questions in Ika: yes/no questions, content questions, and indirect questions. Interrogative marking occurs on the final, independent clause of a sentence and always involves one of the verb phrase (and clause) final suffixes or particles: -e, -o, or no. Content questions also use special question words which are generally in clause initial position. Indirect content questions utilize the question words but use declarative mood marking in the verb phrase. (See section 8.3.3.)
-e 'interrogative' covers past time while -o and no occur in questions referring to the present, the future, and the distant past.
6.2.1 Yes/Ho questions. There are three types of yes/no questions: neutral, alternative, and leading (expecting a yes or no response).
6.2.1.1 Neutral yes/no questions. Neutral yes/no questions are formed by simply adding one of the interrogative suffixes or no, as in 196: (196) Mari me-'zan-o?
hunger 20-think-ig 'Are you hungry?' As mentioned above, -e is used for questions regarding the past: (197) Win-naka u-z-e? 3plS-come aux-med-ig 'Did they come?'

109 Ho 'interrogative* is used following forms such as medial deictic aspect and —ngua 'will' that do not allow an interrogative suffix and in clauses with predicate nominals (which usually have no copula to refer to the present). These three cases are illustrated in the following three examples, respectively. (198) Jordan na-ku3-za no?
Jordan 2S-live-med ig 'Do you live in Jordan?' (199) Sige' zei-n mi-ngua no? tomorrow go-impfv 20-will ig 'Will you go tomorrow?' (200) Sisio no? birg ig 'is it a bird?'

6.2.1.2 Alternative yes/no questions. Alternative yes/no questions

involve the combination of two questions, each beginning with kua 'or':

(201) Kua kusari ki nan-an no? Kua guiadzina ki

or deer cntr cop-impfv ig or puma

cntr

nan-an no? cop-impfv ig

'Is it a deer or is it a puma?'

Examples from conversation suggest that it is possible to give only kua

plus the second alternative as the second part of the question:

(202) Matiei an-zag£t§—ik-o,

kua peiki nar-i?

near pt.ref-pass-must-ig or far cop-while

'Do they pass near (each other) or far away?'

110

6.2.1.3 Leading yes/no questiocs. Leading yes/no questions end in the

particle (or phrase) (na-») no •(be-negative) interrogative':

(203) Peibu-se'-ri diw3n

kaw-i

tutusoma isa-za

Kogi-erg-top different seem-while hat

sew-med

TAG-NEG kawa na—' no. seem be—neg ig

'It seems that the Kogi people make their hats differently, doesn't it.'

Leading questions are an interrogative form often used to express

opinions. When the lexical verb and the tag are either both negative or

both positive, the question expects a negative reply. When one is

negative and the other is positive, the question expects a positive

reply. A negative tag always has the form na-1 (be-negative); a

negative in the verb phrase usually appears on the lexical verb but may

also appear on an auxiliary verb.

In 203, the verb is positive and the tag is negative, thus

expecting a positive reply. In 204, the verb is negative but the tag is

positive, and this case therefore expects a positive reply also. The

first free translation follows the Ika negation pattern, and the second

one provides an idiomatic English version.

(204)

LEXICAL-NEG TAG

Eima-ri dzuiri a'za-'

no.

that-top soft cop-neg

ig

'"These are not soft, are they."' (literal) •These are soft, aren't they.'

Example 205 illustrates a negative verb and a negative tag,

expecting a negative reply ('No, my shotgun does not have a shell in

it.') .

111

(205)

LEXICAL—NEG

TAG—NEG

Husiri kakar6n neki na-k-a'nik-u'

na-' no.

shot.gun shell cntr 1O-periph-have-neg be-neg ig

'"My shotgun doesn't have a shell in it, doesn't it."' (literal)
'My shotgun doesn't have a shell in it, does it.'

The fourth possibility, a positive verb with a positive tag, expects a

negative reply:

(206) Makari-se' aweri eimei

kaw-i

ki

vulture-erg ?

like.this seem-while cntr

LEXICAL TAG

g-an

no.

eat-impfv ig

'"A vulture eats like this, does it."' (literal) 'A vulture doesn't eat like this, does it.'

This fourth possibility is rare in my corpus. A positive verb with

a positive tag is indistinguishable in form from a yes/no question. In

these cases, the context enables a determination of whether the speaker

is expressing an opinion or genuinely asking for information. Example

206 comes in a context where the speaker examines a goat which a

predator killed. After examining the animal, he states 206, lists the

relevant data, then says the following:

(207) Guiadzina-se' ga-na guin kaw-e'-ri,

puma-erg

eat-dist ? seem-then-top

'It seems that a puma killed it...'

In the context, then, it is clear that the speaker is not asking 'Does a

vulture eat like this?' but is stating his opinion: 'A vulture does not

eat like this.' At the same time, the potential confusion between a

leading question of this form and a neutral yes/no question may motivate

112 speakers to choose, instead, a leading yes/no question 'negative verb plus negative tag' to give a negative reading to the whole sentence.
One possible variation in the tag is the addition of n3n 'be,' implying that the situation being asked about is removed in space. In 208a, na—* no (be-negative interrogative) implies here and now, while in 208b na-' n3n-no (be-negative be-interrogative) implies removed in space: (208) a. Rero wiehu kawa na-' no?
watch old seem be-neg ig 'The watch seems old, doesn't it?' (speaker is looking at the watch) b. Rer6 wiehu kawa na-' nan-no? watch old seem be-neg be-ig 'The watch seems old, doesn't it?' (the watch is somewhere else)

6.2.2 Content questions. Content questions utilize clause-final

interrogative marking plus special question words that generally occur

clause-initially:

(209) Beki na-zoza no?

where 2S-go

ig

'Where are you going?'

Table 14 lists the question words used in content questions.

113

ini(-ba') bema big a bindi beki bin zan iar i azi

'who,• 'what (day)' 'which one' 'how many' 'how many,' 'how much' 'where' 'when' 'why' 'how'

Table 14 Content question words.

The discussion of these question words will follow the order given in

Table 14, from those questioning noun phrases, to those questioning

elements within noun phrases, to those questioning more peripheral

clause constituents such as time and manner.

Ini 'who,' 'what' is the interrogative word for noun phrases. In*

may refer to a subject, object, or oblique NP. In 210, the questioned

constituent is the subject.

(210) Ini-ri nai-n

nuk-o?

what-top walk-impfv aux-ig

'What is walking (by)?'

When the object is in question, the subject is usually given information

and not overtly mentioned in the clause:

(211) Ini was-i-ri

ei z-an

no?

what chase-while-top thus say-impfv ig

'What is it chasing, barking like that?'

The appearance of the question word at the beginning of the clause in

211 does not give clear evidence that the question word has been fronted

or moved from its 'normal' position after the subject. Indeed,

declarative clauses having no overt subject noun phrase, such that the object occurs sentence-initially, are quite frequent in text, and this

114 suggests that question words in sentence-initial position may be due to

this pattern of zero anaphora rather than to a movement rule. In 212

the noun phrase being questioned is the object of the postposition sin

'with*:

(212) In* sin nS-nas-e? what with 2S-come-ig

•Who did you come with?•

In*ba' 'what day' is derived from ini by the addition of the

suffix/clitic -aba', which is also found attached to words tor days of

the week, borrowed from Spanish. Iniba' asks for a specific day of the

week in reply, as opposed to bin zan 'when,' which asks for any sort of

time word in reply. In the following exchange, the wife's initial

question is not clear to her husband, so he shifts the question from bin

'when' (in general) to iniba* 'what day':

(213) Wife:

Bin zar-i-ri

a-zori-e?

when cop-while-top 12plS-go-ig

•When did you all go?'

Husband: Iniba' zar-e?

what.day cop-ig

'What day was it?'

Wife:

iniba' na-zoza nan-an no?

what.day 2S-go aux-impfv ig

'On what day did you go?'

Husband: FB'riWieedrwaneyenMMtoonntssoeerrMaaottneesera1a-2tzpeolrSoi-n-gnoF-.rwiitday.1

115

Beaa 'which one' also questions a noun phrase but refers to one

member of a set of possibilities:

(214) Bema

gowiernu uraki no?

which.one government house ig

•Which one is the government building?'

Biga 'how many' is the interrogative word corresponding to numbers:

(215) Biga

miri

ga-na no?

how.many thousand eat-dist ig

'How many thousand did they eat?'

Biga may combine with -aura 'times' to indicate 'how many times':

(216) BigS-muru

na-zori-e?

how.many-times 2S-go-ig

'How many times did you go?'

An answer to bigSauru would be one of the adverbs utilizing —aura; e.g.,

au'-auru (two-times) 'twice,' aSi-auru (three-times) 'thrice.'

Bindi 'how much' does not necessarily ask for a number in reply, as

biga does. 217 might be a follow-up question to a person saying '1 sold

some coffee':

(217) Bindi nS-ngeis-e? how.much 2S-sell-ig

'How much did you sell?'

Bek* 'where' is the interrogative locative word. Note in 218 that

the postposition pari 'from' immediately follows bek*; postpositions

always immediately follow the question word to which they pertain.

(218) Beki pari na-nas-e? where from 2S-come-ig

'Where did you come from?'

116

Bin zan is the interrogative form for time expressions; apparently

the actual question word bin 'when' always occurs with the copula zan.

(219) Bin zan-o? when cop-ig

•What time is it?'

(220) Bin zar-i-ri

a-zori-e?

when cop-while-top 2plS-go-ig

•When was it that you went?'

Iari 'why' questions a reason or cause. 221b uses a motion verb

with a purpose complement (see section 8.3.4 below) to answer iari

'why•:

(221) a. Iari zei-n mi-ngua no? why go-impfv 20-will ig

'Why are you going?'

b. Tutu

angeik-3n zor-iwa

ni.

wool.bag sell-impfv go-about.to cert

'I'm going to sell wool bags.'

Azi 'how' deals with manner. The phrase gSgg* re'tos in example

222 is an idiom meaning 'reply' or 'answer':

(222) Azi gaggi re'tos—ik-o? how answer-must-ig

'How should I answer?' or 'What should I say?'

Most o£ the examples of azi that I have encountered are in indirect

questions, as in 223:

(223) "Azi ni'-ni," neki a'zan-u' nan-na. what do-cert def think-neg aux-dist

'He didn't know what to do.'

117

When questions involve elements within post-positional phrases, the

postposition immediately follows the question word. In 224, -£kin

•limitative' indicates 'up until* some time and is cliticized to both

the question word and the time word in the answer:

(224) a. Bin zSn—ikin na-na-n-wa•k-Sn-no? when cop-lim 2S-1O-ben-look-impfv-ig

'Until when will you wait for me?' 'How long will you wait for me?'

b. Bierne-kin mi-n-wa'k-an

na-ngua ni.

Friday-lim 20-ben-look-impfv 10-will cert

'I will wait for you until Friday.'

6.3 Imperatives.
Imperatives involve a verb followed by a stressed auxiliary verb. The lexical verb is uninflected or carries —U* 'negative' or -3D 'imperfective.' The auxiliary verb is inflected only for the future imperative, u-nik—Sa (aux-when-medial). The hortatory form is marked by -Sndi 'hortatory').
6.3.1 Iaaediate imperatives. 225 illustrates a positive immediate imperative: (225) Amase u!
get.up aux "Get up!' or 'Stand up!'

118

The auxiliary verb recieves heavy (phrase) stress. When the verb stem

ends in an unstressed a, u 'auxiliary' tends to cliticize to the main

verb, and the a u becomes 60, as seen in 226 with guka 'to pick up.'

(226) Guk<5-u! pick.up-aux

'Pick it up!'

Using the auxiliary ana rather than u indicates that the action is to be

performed now but a little ways away:

(227) Awakati dze ido-awa! avocado water spill-aux

'(Go) water the avocado tree' (over there/away)'

With negative imperatives the auxiliary is n5n.

(228) TSo's-u'

nSnl

put.down-neg aux

'Don't put it down!'

When the lexical verb carries —Sn 'imperfective,' the action is to be

done over a span of time, and the auxiliary verb is nuk (with the k

deleted word-finally). The implication is that the speaker is going

away and will be back shortly, but the hearer should perform the action

meanwhile.

(229) Mura sia ipas-3n

nu!

mule saddle put.on-impfv aux

'Put/be putting the saddle on the mule!'

With stative clauses, the stressed verb is the copula appropriate to the

particular predicate adjective, e.g., zSn with te 'quiet' and nSn with

tin 'still':

119
*
(230) Te zan! quiet cop

'Be quiet!'

(231) Gammasini tin nSn!

boy

still cop

•Son, be still!'

6.3.2 Future imperatives. Future imperatives utilize -nik 'when' and z

'medial deictic aspect' to indicate that the hearer is to do the action

later. (Besaaano is borrowed from Spanish 'kiss hand.')

(232) Besamano besamano ke-i-nik-za! greetings greetings periph-say-when-med

•Give him/her my greetings!'

(233) Akusa na-n-zas6-u-nik-za! needle 10-ben-save-aux-when-med

'Save a needle for me!'

The future imperative may combine with the negative: the auxiliary verb

used in this case is u3n, as with the immediate imperative:
*
(234) Dzui a'ta'nig-u' nSn-nik-za! money loan-neg aux-when-med

'Don't loan out the money! (at some time in the future)'

The future imperative with -3n 'imperfective' indicates that the action

should be performed in the future and over a span of time but before the

speaker returns:

(235) Buru tak-an

nu'-nik-za

burro look.for-impfv aux-when-med

'Look for the burro!'

120

6.3.3 Hortatory. The hortatory is marked by -5ndi 'hortatory' on the

lexical verb or on a following auxiliary:

(236) As-andi! sit-hort

'Let's sit down!'

(237) KSnii mi aw-andi! cane grind aux-hort

'Let's grind sugar cane!'

Native speakers consider the use of the hortatory a "suggestion" or

"invitation" rather than a command. The hortatory may also be used with

inceptive aspect, as one person suggests to others that they begin doing

something. For example, 238 could be used when a group has met to

discuss something, and now it is time to begin:

(238) Asai-m-pana

aw-andi!

talk-impfv-incep aux-hort

'Let's begin to talk!'

6.4 Negation.
Negation is marked in the verb phrase by the suffix -u' 'negative' (the suffix has the form —' when following a vowel-final morpheme): (239) Mura neki tiuza-' nar-i-ri,
mule cntr see-neg aux-while-RI 'He did not see the mule...' The negative occurs on the main verb of a clause, even when its scope is a subordinate verb in a merged complement. For example, in 240, the

121

negative with gua'sa 'cause' negates the subordinate verb 'spray out'

rather than gua'sa itself:

(240) §i

wis-Sn

neki gua's-u' nar-i,

four .odor spray.out-impfv cntr cause-neg aux-while

'She prevented the skunk's scent from spraying out (i.e., caused to not spray out)...'

A second major function of the negative is to interact with the tag

of a leading yes/no question in order to make the whole statement

affirmative or negative. (See section 6.2.1.3 for more on these

questions.) If the lexical verb is negative as well as the tag, the

whole statement is negative:

(241) Mura neki t5uzan-u' na-' no? mule cntr see-neg be-neg ig

'I don't see the mule (do I?)'

However, the lexical verb may be negative yet the whole statement

positive if the tag is positive. In 242, the verb is negative (with the

negative carried by the optional auxiliary verb aw, reduced to a), and

the tag is positive:

(242) Tigri peri mouga na-ka-gga

a-u' no?

jaguar dog two 10-periph-eat aux-neg ig

'The jaguar ate my two dogs (didn't it?)'

(242 occurs in a context where it is clear that indeed the jaguar killed

the dogs.) Thus, in leading yes/no questions, negation on the lexical

verb does not negate that verb, but indicates that the proposition will

have the polarity of the tag.

7. SBHTEHCE IQBMfflON.

Clause chaining, a phenomenon common in SOV languages, provides the major mechanism for combining clauses into sentences in Ika (cf. Giv6n 1984:71). Sentences are made up of one or more clauses. The non-final clauses are marked for their logical or temporal relationship to the following clause. In the discussion that follows I will refer to the suffixes that specify these relationships as clause "connectors," as a cover term that includes both the notions of conjunction and subordination. Final clauses are not marked for these relationships and instead have mood indicators (for declarative, imperative, or interrogative; cf. Giv6n 1984:70, 'speech-act indicators'). Table 15 lists the clause connecting suffixes:

-i

'while'

-e' 'then'

-adzu 'immediate succession'

-ame' 'because'

-ndi 'if'

Table 15 Clause connecting suffixes.

The conjunctions pari 'from,' nSngua 'and,' and guinti 'finally' may follow —i 'while,' -ef 'then,' and —adzu 'immediate succession.'
The environment for the occurrence of the clause connectors is 'x-z Y,' where X and Y are the two clauses concerned and z is the clause connector. Thus any mention of 'the two events connected' by a given clause connector has to do with the events referred to by X and Y, respectively.

-122-

123 Sentence "introducers" provide a way to link two sentences by means of an auxiliary verb with deictic aspect markers and a clause connecting suffix. The sentence introducer shows the relationship between the independent clause of the previous sentence and the first clause of the next sentence.
7.1 Temporal clause connectors.
—i 'while' specifies temporal overlap or inclusion, or, in general, that two events are tightly (but not causally) connected. The subject of a clause marked by —i is almost always the same as the subject of the next clause. 243 illustrates the use of —i: (243) Mouga mciikani "hau hau" zan' ka-dar-i-ri,
two three yip yip just periph-bark-while-top peri te nis-e'-ri, dog quiet do-then-top 'Barking two or three times, the dog became quiet,...' -e" 'then' indicates 'X and then Y' in both a logical and a temporal sense. With -e", in contrast to —i 'while,' the two events connected are more likely to involve a different subject, show temporal succession rather than overlap, and stand in a causal relationship. 244 illustrates —e* in a context that shows both temporal succession and a logical/causal relationship:

124

(244) Tigri anneki an-t§uza-'

nar-e" nSngua-ri,

jaguar cntr pt.ref-see-neg aux-tben and-top

eigui keiwi

tak-3n

zoza-na.

also right.away look.for-impfv go-dist

'They didn't see the jaguar, and then (so) they went to look for it again.'

245 shows a case with -e1 involving a change of subject between clauses:

(245) Eiki ri-zun-an

nus-e'-ri nSngua-ri,

still 3plS-go.down-impfv aux-then-top and-top

peri-ri in'gui eigui keiwi

zoza-na.

dog-top one also right.away go-dist

'They were still going down, and then one dog took off.'

-e* 'then* may also occur with -nik 'when' to mark a time

conditional relationship, 'when you do X, then Y.' In 246 (talking

about how cable cars operate in pairs), -e* indicates that the event

indicated by the first clause temporally precedes that indicated by the

second clause and -nik marks the first event as the condition under

which the second event takes place:

(246) Eiki itSun-nik-z-e'-ri, There go.up-when-med-then-top

iwa eim-eki zani an-zuna-z-e'-ri, now that-loc from pt.ref-go.down-med-then-top

•When it goes up, the one up there comes down...'

-adzu 'immediate succession' indicates two events that follow

immediately one after another (without temporal overlap), performed by

the same subject:

125

(247) Du kaw-i

a'tSr-i u-n-adiu

n3ngua-ri,

good seem-while skin aux-dist-imm.scc and-top

du kaw-i

manteki-se' isua aw-i,

good seem-while lard-loc cook aux-while

'As soon as she skinned it well, she €ried it in lard well...'

In certain instances, a clause may have no clause connecting suffix

yet be interpreted as part of a clause chain. Such cases involve one or

more instances of the same verb (usually a motion verb), marked by

-na-ri (distal-topic); the last verb followed by guinti 'finally' or

oSngua 'and.' This combination of elements displays durativity, i.e.,

the action referred to took place over a span of time:

(248) Ri-zun-na-ri,

zun-na-ri,

3plS-go.down-dist-top go.down-dist-top

zun-na—ri

guinti, per-i=se' k:a=dan=:an

go.down=dist=top finally dog=erg periph=bark=impfv

nuk=z=ek-i m:at5£i k:atSar=e'=ri, aux=med=loc near arrive=then=top

'They went down, down, down until finally they arrived near where the dog had barked at something...'

One verb alone may signal durativity in this way provided it carries

—na-ri guinti (distal-topic finally):

(249) ingiti sekanar-i zun-na—ri

guinti,

little stalk-while go.down-dist-top finally

"ing4 zi'i t§u-ai" a'zar-e', little red see-seems think-then

'He descended stalking carefully until finally he thought "I can see a little red."'

Frequently the two clauses joined in this way involve a motion verb

followed by a verb indicating arrival:

126

(250) 3m-win-igeis-i

an-2un-na-ri

pt.ref-3plS-carry-while pt.ref-go.down-dist-top

nSngua-ri, uraki-siki kStSar-i-ri, and-top house-loc arrive-while-top

'They descended carrying it and arrived at the house...'

The conjunctions pari 'from' and nSngoa 'and' may occur with —i

'while,' -e* 'then,' and -adzu 'immediate succession.' Pari 'from'

indicates a change in episode or a turning point in a narrative. In a

number of hunting stories, for example, if a hunter fails to find his

quarry, gets scared, or does not know what to do, he leaves the scene,

and this crucial point is marked by pari:

(251) Pedru-ri tSoutSo kanas-i, azi a-ukua ni pedrc-top fear have-while what aux-must cert neki a'zan-u' guin nar-e1 pari-ri, cntr think-neg ? aux-then from-top

t§out§ou kanas-e', kure nika u-na.

fear

have-then run do aux-dist

'Pedro got scared and didn't know what to do, and from that point he got scared and he ran.'

7.2 Jiogical clause connectors. -ame* 'because* marks a clause as the reason for the next clause:

127

(252) Semana Santa dzuia'-se' kankan'cin nai-n week holy day-loc jungle walk-impfv

zoza-na-ru-ame' z3n' tigri peri mouga go-dist-1S-because just jaguar dog two

na-kS-gga

au-' no.

10-periph-eat aux-neg ig

'Because I went hunting in Holy Week, the jaguar ate my two dogs, didn't it.'

—ndi 'if' marks a clause as a condition, as seen in 253:

(253) Husiri na-ka-na-ndi, tSaza ninza. shotgun 10-periph-cop-if shoot 1:would

'If I had my shotgun, I would shoot.'

A clause marked by -ndi may follow the clause to which it refers:

(254) Wit5-u' ki nann-ak-o, Sndin zue-ndi? die-neg cntr aux-must-ig under go-if

'Would you die if you went underneath?'

Clause connectors that mark temporal relationships do not have this

freedom because the order of the clauses is strictly iconic, i.e.

determined by the order in which the events occurred.

7.3 Sentence introducers.

Independent clauses are not marked for their logical/temporal relationship to a following clause (as are medial clauses). Sentence "introducers," however, contain the clause connecting suffixes and conjunctions which show how the final, independent clause of the previous sentence is related to the first clause of the sentence the introducer initiates. Especially within narrative, sentence introducers

128

enable the speaker to break the grammatical clause-to-clause sequence

while still indicating (by means of the sentence introducer) how the

actions are related to one another. Example 255 is made up of three

sentences (a, b, and c). The sentence introducer at the beginning of

255b indicates temporal overlap between 'went down chasing' and 'the

puma climbed a tree.' The introducer at the beginning of 255c presents

'Jose shot* and 'he killed it' as a temporal sequence.

(255) a. ...in'gui-se* zan* eiki was-i

zun-na.

one-erg just still chase-while go.down-dist

'One still went down chasing it.'

b. Ei aw-i

nSngua-ri, kan-se' keiwi

thus aux-while and-top tree-loc right.away

eigui an-it§on-§n

nus-e' nangua-ri,

also pt.ref-go.up-impfv aux-then and-top

Jos6-se' eigui t§ei-na. Jose-erg also shoot-dist

'(While it was chasing the puma,) the puma climbed a tree, and then Jos£ shot.'

c. Ei u-5-e*

nSogua, guako-u-na.

thus aux-med-then and

kill-aux-dist

'(He shot it, and then) he killed it.'

Sentence introducers are made up of ei 'thus* (a sort of pro-verb),

followed by an auxiliary verb carrying deictic aspect and

clause-connecting suffixes, optionally followed in turn by one of the

conjunctions pari 'from' or nSngua 'and.'

A number of clause-chaining languages in Papua New Guinea also use

the first element of a sentence to provide linkage with the prior

sentence: "Commonly the function of the first base in such chaining

129

units is to refer back to the last base of the previous chain" (Longacre

1972:45; cf also Grimes 1972:521).

Occasionally, the first clause of a sentence will repeat the verb

of the last clause of the previous sentence, but with different deictic

aspect and with a clause connecting suffix. (This is in contrast to

beginning the sentence with a sentence introducer.) The text of 255

continues as follows:

(256) a. Ei u-z-e'

nangua, guako-u-na.

thus aux-med-then and

kill-aux-dist

•And so he killed it.'

b. Gkuialkla aauwx--iw-hriil,e-top gianstiersotines cau'tk.uoiut ua-uzx--mee'd--rtih,en-top m§ndongu-se'-ri wimi £ikani samm-i k-anikua-na. stomach-loc-top meat apart lots periph-contain-dist

'Killing it, they gutted it, and there was a lot of meat in its stomach.'

This repetition of the lexical verb indicates a significant break in the

flow of a narrative, in this case the culmination of the hunt and the

winding down of the story.

Kayap6 of Brazil shows a similar phenomenon, "the verbatim

repetition of a verb which is final in one sentence as the verb which

leads into the succeeding action in the next sentence" (Stout and

Thomson 1971:254). Note that one use of such verbatim repetition of a

verb is to indicate the change from introduction to plot and plot to

coda in Kayap6 narrative.

8. SUBORDINATION.
Subordinate clauses in Ika fall into the following catergories: relative clauses, locative nominalized clauses, clauses as complements to other verbs, and adverbial clauses.
8.1 Relative Clauses.
The basic strategy for forming relative clauses is to place a head noun in clause-initial position in a restricting clause having a non-finite verb, then to embed that restricting clause as one constituent of the matrix clause. There is no use of relative pronouns and no particular evidence of gapping, given that variation in word order in main, declarative clauses makes it impossible to fix an invariable position for major clause constituents. Thus, it is impossible to say that a noun phrase has been 'moved,' simply that it usually occurs in clause-intial position.
Most of the relative clauses encountered in text are relativizations into the subject position in the restricting clause, with the restricting clause following the head noun.1 when topic and case markers occur with a relative clause, they occur on the end of the restricting clause rather than on the head noun itself, suggesting that the head noun is internal to the relative rather than external. Two examples in my corpus show relativization into the object position, one with a pre-nominal restricting clause and the other with a post-nominal
-130-

131

restricting clause. One additional example shows relativization into

the locative/indirect object. The verb phrase in a relative clause is

non-finite in that it lacks mood marking but is otherwise identical to

the verb phrases of independent clauses.

Example 257 illustrates the most frequently occurring type of

relative clause: relativization into the subject position. Notice the

ergative and topic markers at the end of the relative clause (in

parentheses). If the head noun were a constituent of the matrix clause,

I would expect these markers to occur on the noun rather than at the end

of the restricting clause.

(257) (Ik* in'gui Risiu za'ki nuk-za)-se*-ri 3n-t5ua-na. man one Lisio name cop-med-erg-top pt.ref-see-dist

'A man named Lisio saw it.'

Not all examples of relative clauses show case or topic marking to help

identify their status as a clause embedded within another clause, as in

258. In this example, however, note that the embedded clause occurs

between a sentence-inital locative word and the verb at the end of the

sentence, "live.* The marker of declarative mood, ni 'certainty'

pertains to ku3-za (live-medial), while the verb of the restricting

clause has no such mood marking.

(258) Dzo'sSgaka (per* guiadzina wasa-za) kua-za ni.

Yo'sagaka dog puma

chase-med live-med cert

•A dog that chases pumas lives in Yo'sSgaka.'

In addition to carrying no mood indicator, the verb of the restricting

clause is also apparently limited to a choice between only -Ja 'medial' or -na 'distal' deictic aspect.2

132

My corpus contains two clear cases of relativization into the

object position, one with a post-nominal restricting clause and one with

a pre-nominal restricting clause. In 259, ga'kSnas* 'word' is the head

noun and the object of guk 'pick up' in the restricting clause:

(259) (Eiaa ga'kSnaK makina-se' guk-an

nuk-za)-ri

this word

machine-loc pick.up-impfv aux-med-top

riwi-an

nuk-za na-' nan-no?

learn-impfv aux-med aux-neg aux-ig

•(They) are learning the words that they get out of the machine (tape recorder), aren't they?'

Note that topic marking (—ri) comes at the end of the restricting clause

rather than on the head noun itself.

The other example of relativization into the object position shows

a pre-nominal restricting clause. SVO word order is quite rare in main

clauses, but the most frequent pattern for forming relatives does not

suggest gapping or movement of the head noun. Therefore I consider the

head of the relative clause in 260 also to be internal to the

restricting clause, except that here it occurs at the end of the

restricting clause.

(260) (guiadzina-se* ga-na tSiwa)-ri wanak-akl nuk-z-aba'

puma-erg

eat-dist goat-top bring-perC aux-med-loc

•where ithey) had brought the goat that the puma ate*

When example 259 above is changed into a relativization into the

locative/indirect object, aakina 'machine' retains its case-marking

according to its role in the restricting clause (marked by -se*

'locative'), and -ri 'topic' remains at the end of the restricting

clause, but aakioa moves to initial position in the restricting clause:

133

(261) («akina-se* ga'kanami guk-2n nuk-za)-ri

machine-loc word

pick.up aux-med-top

grabadora

auga ni.

tape.recorder rpt cert

•The machine that they get words out of is called a tape recorder.'

The fact that aakina in 261 is case-marked for its role in the

restricting clause while the topic marker occurs at the end of the

restricing clause provides additional evidence that the head noun in

such clauses is internal to the restricting clause.

To summarize briefly, most relative clauses in text are

relativizations into the subject position with a subject-initial,

internally-headed restricting clause. Case and topic marking on the end

of the restricting clause rather than on the head noun itself support

such an analysis. Two examples of relativization into the object

position show both post-nominal and pre-nominal restricting clauses.

The example of relativization into the locative, again, shows a

post-nominal restricting clause with topic-marking on the end of the

restricting clause.

8.2 Locative nominalized clauses.
The postpositions -ek* and —aba* may cliticize to verb final clauses with no mood marker to refer to a place where something takes or took place, e.g., avion wa'nS—z-eki (plane fall-med-loc) 'where the airplanes fall (the airport).' (See sections 4.4 and 4.5 for more on

134

these case markers.) 262 illustrates a locative clause within the

context of the main clause.

(262) (Peri zS-dzua papa zin-eki) a'tSun-na-ri,

dog gen-blood flat be-loc arrive-dist-top

'He arrived where there was dog blood on the ground...'

—na 'distal' deictic aspect is used in locative clauses to name a

location where an event happened in the past:

(263) an-zoza-na

(tSinu ga-n-eki).

pt.ref-go-dist pig eat-dist-loc

'He went to where (something) ate the pig.'

-aba' 'locative' nominalizes a clause to name an area rather than a

place or point. A number of examples involving -aba' have motion verbs

in the embedded clause resulting in something like 'along where it

went,' as in 264:

(264) (an-zoza-n-aba *)

ta

kingui eigui kusar-t-ri

pt.ref-go-dist-loc straight same also deer-top

an-nak-an

nu'-na.

pt.ref-come-impfv aux-dist

'The deer came straight back by the same way it had gone.*

Locative nominalized clauses may occur between main clause

constituents, as any other locative element does.

(265) Sabastian-di (kusari kS-zagi-n-aba') Sebastian-top deer periph-pass-dist-loc

it5on-an nus-e'-ri, go.up-impfv aux-then-top

'Sebastian went up to where the deer passed...'

135 8.3 Complementation.
There are several types o€ complementation in Ika, with a range of variation in how restricted the complement must be. That is, the complement may be completely unrestricted, as in a direct quotation where any valid utterance may serve as the complement to the quotative verb, while other main verbs require that their verbal complement carry a particular suffix, or no suffix at all. Some verbs of speaking and cognition take direct quotation complements, that is, the clauses which they take as complements could themselves stand as independent sentences. Other verbs take non-finite complements (having a v^rb with no mood marking). Indirect questions form another type of complement, combining some features of declarative marking and other features of interrogative marking. Motion verbs take a verbal complement indicating the purpose of the motion; the embedded verb in such clauses has a restricted grammatical form. Verbs *".tb 9 particular suffix may show resultant state, serving as the complement to a copula (e.g., 'he is gone" vs. *he went'). The verb a'dSun 'want' takes the most restricted complement — a verb which can not have any suffixes.

136

8.3.1 Verbs with full sentence complements. The verbs a'zan 'to

think,' za 'to say,' and aoga 'reportative' take full sentences as

guotative complements. There is no restriction on the complement: it

may be one sentence or more; declarative, imperative, or interrogative.

The quotation is direct in the sense that it does not change according

to the person quoting or the time when the quotation is made. The

quotation is usually a regular utterance but may be an onomatopoetic

word or a 'pro-quote' such as eimei 'like this.' Example 266 has za

'say' as the verb with its quotative complement:

(266) "KankSnan nai-n

zei-kua," n<§-k3-za-n-ame' ,

jungle walk-impfv go-must 10-periph-say-dist-because

'Because he said to me, "Let's go hunting" ...'

The next two examples illustrate complements which are

interrogative and imperative, respectively.

(267) "T§ua me-'dzun-o?" na-ke-i-e'-ri,

see 20-want-ig 1O-periph-say-then-top

'He said to me, "Do you want to see it?"...'

(268) "3n-g<5-u!"

ka-za-ri,

pt.ref-do-aux per iph-say-top

'He said to him, "Do it!"...'

Although the complement of a verb like Sa 'say' is usually an

actual or possible utterance, it may also be an onomatopoetic word, or

an adverb, ei 'thus' or eimei 'like this', which stands in for a

quotation whose content is known. An example of an onomatopoetic

quotation is the word pi imitating the sound of an angry puma:

137

(269) Guidzina-ri "pi pi," keiwi

za-na.

puma-top

right.away say-dist

'The puma said "pi pi."'

Eiaei 'like this* may stand in for some actual quotation when the

participants in the situation know what has been said, or the speaker is

about to make a lengthy quotation, as when beginning to relate a story:

(270) Jose eimei

i-n.

Jose like.this say-wit

'Jos£ said it like this.'

Auga 'reportative' also takes full sentence complements but is never inflected for person:

(271) "Tigri gu5ka-za. Ana'nuga awSn' kawa jaguar kill-med animal big seem

gu5kS-za," auga guin na-ndi, kill-med rpt ? aux-since

'Since they say "It kills jaguars. It kills big animals."...'

8.3.2 Verbs with coapleaents not narked for aood. The verbs t§ua

'see,' za 'say,' and kawa 'seem' take complements which are sentences

lacking only mood indicators. The subject of the embedded verb is

different from the subject of the main verb. Example 272 illustrates

tSua 'see' with such an object complement:

(272) (Dzuia'-ri naz-an

nuk-za) neki t§u-' na-rua ni.

day-top walk-impfv aux-med cntr see-neg aux-IS cert

'I have not seen it walk around in the daytime.'

138

za 'say' with a complement not marked for mood means 'to make a

sound like X' or 'it sounds like X.' The implication is that someone

heard something happen, but ia 'say' is always inflected for third

person singular (i.e., unmarked), ruling out an interpretation as 'to

hear X.'

(273) Dze meina-ki katSana-za za-na. river stream-loc arrive-med say-dist

'It sounded as if it reached the stream.'

The arguments of the embedded sentence are case-marked for their role in

the embedded sentence rather than the main sentence. In 274, peri 'dog'

receives the ergative marking appropriate for the subject of the

embedded verb 'to find.'

(274) Peri-se' ka'tSona-za keiwi

i

dog-erg find-med right.away say:while

'It sounded like the dog found it...'

Kawa 'seem' takes a sentential complement as its only argument:

(275) Makari-se' ga-na kaw-in. vulture-erg eat-dist seem-wit

'It seems that a vulture ate it.'

Kawa takes the mood marking of a regular verb but is not marked for

person and is, in a sense, subjectless. Its usage shows that it means

'it seems to me,' but, grammatically, it is not marked for first person.

Kawa is also used as a copula for constructing adjective and adverbial

phrases. In 276, the first instance of kawa is copular while the second

takes the preceding sentence as its complement. (The na1 no is a tag

expecting a positive reply.)

139

(276) Iwa peibu-se'-ri diwan

kaw-i

tutusoma isa-za

now Kogi-erg-top different seem-while hat

sew-med

kawa na-' no. seem aux-neg ig

'Now it seems (to me) that the Kogis sew a different sort of hat.'

A second use of kawa means 'to have to X' and involves a complement

marked by —ikua 'must,' with kawa taking an object prefix to refer to

the person that has to do the action listed in the complement.

(277) Ribru mi-k3-tSk—ikua

na-kaw-in.

book 20-periph-look.for-must 10-seem-wit

'I have to hunt a book for you.'

The subject of the embedded verb is the same as the referent of the

object marker on kawa.

8.3.3 Indirect questions. The verbs a*zan 'to think (know),' awan 'to not be sure,' and tSua 'see' may take indirect question complements. There is no restriction on whether or not the subject of the indirect question is the same as the subject of the main verb. An indirect yes/no question has the same form as an independent yes/no question yet serves as the complement to a main verb which may take an indirect question complement: (278) Dzuia' kure nik-an-no awan-akuei.
day run do-impfv-ig not.sure-able 'I am uncertain whether they run around in the daytime or not.' Indirect content questions work somewhat differently. These complements have a question word yet take declarative mood marking (the particle ni 'certainty' or suffix —in 'witness'). A'.zan 'think' frequently appears

140

with the negative to mean 'to not know,' with an indirect content

question complement, as in 279:

(279) Ini ni neki wina-'za-*

na.

what cert cntr 3plO-think-neg aux

'They didn't know what it was.'

Example 280 illustrates a'zan in the positive:

(280) Azi u-ni'-ku-e

keiwi

a'zan-Sn nu'-n-adzu,

how aux-when-med-ig right.away think-impfv aux-dist-imm.scc

'As soon as she knew what she would do...'

I have encountered one example of tSoa 'see' with an indirect

question complement:

(281) Ini pa na keiwi

win-tSu-z-e'

nangua,

what flat be right.away 3plS-see-med-then and

'They saw something lying down...'

8.3.4 Motion verbs with purpose complements. Verbs of motion may take

a complement whose verb is marked only by -3n 'imperfective,' indicating

'go in order to X':

(282) Monu t5ai-n

Sn-zoza-na.

monkey shoot-impfv pt.ref-go-dist

'He went (in order) to shoot monkeys.'

The subject of the embedded verb must be the same as the subject of the

motion verb. The two actions are closely connected: in 282, the

'shooting' occurs at the place where the 'going* ends.

purpose may also be expressed with two clauses when the two events

involved are less closely related, in 283, the first clause expresses

141

the purpose, indicated by the modal -nguasi 'in order to,' and the

second clause the event prompted by the purpose.

(283) KSnii mus-an-guasi,

mura Sn-kM-ta'-na.

cane grind-impfv-in.order.to mule pt.ref-periph-look.for-dist

'He looked €or the mule in order to grind sugar cane.'

Note that the 'grinding' does not take place where the mule is found:

one action is the purpose for another, but there is no requirement that

the one action take place where the other action ends.

8.3.4.1 -ngua 'will* and purpose. The modal -ogua 'will' and -nguasi

'in order to' take a purpose complement. (See section 5.5.1.5 for more

on these modals.) Both constructions involve a verb marked by -Sn

'imperfective' followed by a 'verb' which is temporally prior to the

first verb (i.e., in 'go to look for,' 'go' precedes 'look for in time,'

and in 'will go,' the intention precedes the 'going'). Compare 284a and

b:

(284) a. Kani-i mus-an

nangua ni.

cane grind-impfv 10-will cert

'I will grind sugar cane.'

b. KSnii mus-an

zoza-na-rua ni.

cane grind-impfv go-dist-IS cert

'I went (in order) to grind sugar cane.'

142

8 . 3 . 4 . 2 Gua's 'cause' and purpose. The causative verb gua's is also

structurally similar to a motion verb with a purpose complement in that

the embedded sentence has a verb marked only by -Sn 'imperfective.' The

subject of gua's 'cause' and the subject of the embedded verb must be

different, however, in contrast to purpose complements.

(285) Apau iniki-se' ka-nak-an

neki

owner anyone-erg periph-come-impfv cntr

gua's-u' neika. cause-neg NPfoc

'It does not let anything come near its owner.'

8.3.5 Resultant state coapleaents. A verb marked only by -na 'distal'

deictic aspect may serve as a complement to zan, a copular verb, to

express the state resulting from an action. Example 286 illustrates a

resultant state complement with the verb zoza 'go.'

(286) Guidzina-ri an-zoza-na

zin-na.

puma-top pt.ref-go-dist cop-dist

'The puma was gone.'

With a transitive verb in the resultant state complement, the subject of

the main clause is the object of the embedded clause."*

(287) T§inu ga-na zar-i-ri, pig eat-dist cop-while-top

'The pig was eaten...'

The resultant state complement differs both from a regular

statement of an event in the past and from an anterior past (had done).

Example 288 contrasts an event in the past, as a perfect (anterior

past) , and as a resultant state:

143

(288) Past

Guiadzina zoza-na

puma

go-dist

'The puma went.'

Perfect

Guidzina zoz-aki nu'-na.

puma

go-per f aux-dist

'The puma had gone.'

Resultant State

Guiadzina zoza-na zin-na.

puma

go-dist cop-dist

'The puma was gone

—na on the embedded verb also supports an analysis of this construction

as a complement to the copula rather than as a compound tense: deictic

aspect markers may occur only once in a verb phrase, and as 288 above

shows, the copula may be marked for deictic aspect.

8.3.6 A'dzun 'want:'. The verb a'dion 'want' takes the most restricted complement of complement-taking verbs, namely a completely uninflected verb: (289) TSua na-'dzun-ni.
see 10-want-cert 'I want to see it.' To negate the construction ('to not want to X'), a'diun, not the embedded verb, takes the negative suffix: (290) Dzo'-ri tsua a'dzun-u' r.2r.-na ni. tail-top see want-neg aux-dist cert 'It didn't want to see the tail.' The only element that may come between the two verbs is aw, apparently an uninflected auxiliary verb.

144 (291) Wa'ka aw me-'dzun-o?
look aux 20-want-ig 'Do you want to look at it?' Note that the participant referenced by the object prefixes on a'dSun
4
must be the same as the subject of the verb in the complement.

8.4 Adverbial clauses of simultaneous action.

Adverbial clauses with a verb marked by —i 'while' indicate a

simultaneously-occurring action. The subject of the verb in the

adverbial clause must be the same as the subject of the main verb; the

subject noun phrase is case-marked for its role in the embedded clause.

(292) Peri-se'-ri win-was-i

zun-na.

dog-erg-top 3plS-chase-while go.down-dist

'The dogs went down chasing it."

Although the main verb is usually a motion verb, this is not a

requirement. In 293, the main verb is guak 'to kill':

(293) Guiadzina z'a gSmmi peri-se' ana-kuss-i

puma

gen child dog-erg pt.ref-bite-while

guak-akl nu'-na. kill-perf aux-dist

'The dog had killed the baby puma, biting it.'

Because -i 'while' is also used in clause chaining (to show that

the actions in two successive clauses temporally overlap), it is

sometimes difficult to determine whether a given case represents two

clauses in sequence or an adverbial clause. Clear cases of adverbial

clauses have nothing coming between the embedded verb and the main verb;

145

intervening material or the medial clause final clitic —ri 'topic*

indicates two clauses in sequence. Example 294 shows a medial clause

with -i. Note that the first clause ends in —ri 'topic' and a noun

comes between the two verbs:

(294) Mouga mSikSni "hau hau" zan' kS-dar-i-ri, two three yip yip just periph-bark-while-top

peri te nis-e'-ri, dog quiet do-then-top

'Barking at it two or three times, the dog got quiet...*

-i 'while' is also used to form a different sort of adverbial

phrase or clause. Constructions of the form NOUN COPULA—x indicate

'like a NOUN'; for example peri oar—i (dog copula-while) 'like a dog' in

295:

(295) Peri nar-i

o a'zina ni.

dog cop-while mad think cert

'It gets mad like a dog (does).'

These adverbial clauses may serve as predicate adjectives, as in 296:

(296) Gei nar-i

kawa nin uma'-ri.

fire cop-while cop cert eye-top

'(When you shine a light on it,) the eyes are like (i.e., shine like) a fire.'

1. The higher frequency of subject relatives is consistent with Comrie and Keenan's suggestion that, cross-linguistically, it is easier to relativize into the subject position: "in absolute terms subjects are the most relativizable of NP's" (Comrie and Keenan 1979:653) . In this instance, the principle has a statistical rather than a categorical effect (i.e., both subject and object relatives occur, but subject relatives are more common).
2. The other deictic aspect suffixes are used only with first and second person (section 5.6), and this probably accounts for the fact that I

146
have not observed them in relative clauses: It would be unusual for someone to say "I, who am ..." or "you, who are ..." 3. Comrie 1981:112-13 discusses the resultative construction as an instance of natural ergative-absolutive syntax. That is, in constructions involving resultant state, many languages show patterns in which the participant in focus is either the subject of an intransitive verb or the object of a transitive verb, irrespective of whether the language is considered to be basically nominative-accusative or ergative-absolutive. 4. The gloss 'want* for a'diun is actually somewhat misleading. The person 'wanting' is referenced as the object of the verb in the verb morphology, and the thing 'wanted' is presumably the subject. Thus a literal translation of die na-'dzun-ni (water 10-want-certainty) is 'Water is desirable to me' or something of the like. This struck me as odd until Adolfo Constenla pointed out that this is parallel to Spanish verbs such as gustar 'to like' which reference the exptiiancer as the object of the verb (e.g. El agua me gusta 'I like the water' or 'The water pleases me'). A number of other verbs follow this pattern, e.g. kanan 'to own' (literally 'to pertain to') and a'zun 'to swallow' (literally 'to go down one's throat'). In all of these cases, the sore animate participant is usually the object and the less animate participant is the subject.

9. PRAQiATICS.

This chapter discusses topics of a pragmatic nature: the handling of non-referential and impersonal subjects, the function of -se* •ergative* in reflecting the given-new distinction, two focus particles, and the pragmatic organization of clauses, including consideration of zero anaphora, the clitic —ri 'topic,' the linear order of clause constituents, the system of participant reference, and the use of optional auxiliary verbs.

9.1 Noo-referential subjects.

A construction involving a verb plus the copula zan indicates that

the subject is non-referential, that is, that no particular or specific

entity is being referred to. In 297, the speaker indicates that "one

can see" all of Bogota from a certain vantage point:

(297) Bogotci eima uraki-ri kinki-ri z6u-kit§4 z3n' t§u zar-i. Bogota this house-top really-top all-emph just see be-while 'You see all the houses in Bogota.'

Although the speaker had the experience himself, he conveys the event as

anyone would experience it. In 298, the same speaker discusses how

people care for a garden. The scene is presented as not referring to

any particular person:

(298) Dze dos-i

atSu-za

zar-i.

water spill-while care.for-med be-while

'Watering it, they care for it.'

-147-

148

The second person singular ai- object prefix is also sometimes used

non-referentially. In 299, a hunter conveys that he cannot tell what it

is that he is seeing, and uses a non-referential 'you':

(299) Ini ni neki me-'za-'

nann-akua ka-u' no.

what cert cntr 20-think-neg aux-must seem-neg ig

'It seems that you can't tell what it is, doesn't it.'

9.2 Off-stage subjects.

The verb suffix —kuaa 'impersonal' serves to indicate that the

subject of a given clause, though referential, is not currently

on-stage, in the sense of the participants in focus at a given point in

time. Often, the subject in such clauses is not in the 'cast' of a

narrative, but performs an action which affects one of the participants

in the story. For example, 300 comes from a narrative at the height of

the action and provides background: the shotgun shell, which fails to

fire, is one that was given to the hunter previously by some

unidentified party:

(300) In'gui kartutSu a'we-kuma-na

gui nan-na.

one shell give-impers-dist also be-dist

'A shotgun shell had been given to him. *

The participant which —kuaa references may be part of the cast of

characters in a narrative but temporarily out of focus. In one story,

some hunters split up into two groups, and one group becomes focal.

During this part of the story, the non-focal group is referenced by

-kuaa when they perform actions, as in 301:

149 (301) "Amase aw-in. Amase Sw-in,"
get.up aux-wit get.up aux-wit ke-i-kuma-z-e'-r i, per iph-say-impers-med-then-top '"It got up. It got up," was being said to them, ...' Native speakers sometimes use - k m a 'impersonal* for first or second person plural subject in elicited forms. For example, in response to a request for the equivalent of "we saw it," two forms may be given; 302a shows the first or second plural subject prefix while 302b has -kuaa 'impersonal' instead: (302) a. a-t§ua u-z-in
12plS-see aux-med-wit 'we saw it' b. t§ua u-kuma-z-in see aux-impers-med-wit 'we saw it' (or possibly 'it was seen') —kuaa 'impersonal,' then, makes reference to some unidentified, non-focal participant(s) as subject. 9.3 Ergative aarking and the given-new distinction.
When the subject of a transitive clause is referential and known but lower on a scale of 'givenness' than the object, an explicit noun phrase reference is marked by —se* 'ergative.' In terms of Giv6n 1983 on topic continuity, the object is more continuous than the subject with respect to the preceding discourse context (1983:9). For example, on one occasion I was talking to two Bintukwa men about a painting of some

150

pheasants. The birds were established as a discourse topic, and when I

tried to explain that people eat pheasant, the men asked me the

following:

(303) Iki ga-za kua ika-se' ga-za? man eat-med or man-erg eat-med

'they eat people or people eat them?'

With the bird as topic and given in the context, -se" 'ergative'

indicates that ik* 'man' is subject but not given information.

First references, especially to minor characters, often show

ergative marking. 304 illustrates an indefinite noun phrase reference

to a participant that appears only in this clause in the narrative:

(304) In'gui t§eirua-se'-ri wakuma-ri guako-u-na.

one man-erg-top

skunk-top kill-aux-dist

'A man killed a skunk.'

Reintroductions of participants also frequently show ergative

marking. In one story, one of the major participants (Jose) is not in

focus for a period of time as the speaker relates what another hunter, a

puma, and the hunting dogs are doing. When jos£ is next mentioned, the

name takes —se*:

(305) Jos^-se* eigui keiwi

t§ei-na.

Jose-erg also right.away shoot-dist

'Jose also shot it.'

Since the ergative marking is only relevant to transitive clauses,

occasionally the first mention or the reintroduction of a participant

shows no ergative marking because the participant enters the narrative

as the subject of an intransitive verb; but a subsequent reference to

the same character as the subject of a transitive verb may show -se*.

151

In 306, Sebastian is first mentioned by name in a story. The ergative

marking occurs on the noun phrase in the third clause because that

clause is the first reference to Sebastian as agent:

(306) a. Sabastian-di kusari kS-zagi-n-aba* Sebastian-top deer periph-pass-dist-loc

it§on-an nus-e'-ri, go.up-impfv aux-then-top

'Sebastian went up to where the deer passed by,'

b. dzirigakan-di i'ba

taggi ande'risa-na.

moutainside-top together meet.together-dist

'then they met each other.'

c. Ei u-z-e'

pari-ri, S3bastian-se'-ri tSaza u-na.

thus aux-med-then from-top Sebastian-erg-top shoot aux-dist

'At that point, Sebastian shot it.'

References to minor participants as agents usually have ergative

marking. Thus humans who appear only once in a story or animals with a

minor role (such as hunting dogs) usually are referenced by overt noun phrases with —se1.

Tracy and Levinsohn (1977) have investigated the function of —se*

in expository discourse. Their analysis revolves around the concepts of

grammatical paragraphs and the thematic participant of the paragraph

(usually the central character of the discourse). When some participant

other than the central character "occupies the subject role within the

paragraph, he is, as it were, displacing the central character from that

role, and as such has to be marked with the suffix —se* (change of

role)" (Tracy and Levinsohn 1977:7). In the terms of my analysis,

above, when the subject of a clause is not given information and

152 prominent in the preceeding discourse (i.e., not the central character or thematic participant of the paragraph), the subject noun phrase is marked by -se*.
—se' 'ergative' occurs most frequently in contexts where an overt subject noun prhase is unexpected, in terms of frequency and position of occurrence. In one sample of (mostly narrative) text, three quarters of the transitive clauses had no overt subject noun phrase (177/238=74.37%). If one noun phrase occurred, it was more likely the object than the subject (117 clauses with one noun phrase; in 89, that noun phrase is object, 76.07%). Zero anaphora is one reflection of givenness in Ika discourse. The subject is usually absent and given in the discourse context. Thus, when the object is absent and the subject is present,the subject is less given than the object, and that subject is very likely to be marked as ergative (23 out of 28 subjects in SV transitive clauses, 82.14%). By contrast, when both subject and object noun phrases occur in a transitive clause, the subject is less likely to be marked as ergative (14 out of 33 clauses with both subject and object, 42.42% ergative marked).

For transitive clauses with overt subject noun phrases:

-se' no -se' % -se'

only subject occurs 23

5

82.14

both subject and

14

19

42.42

object occur

chi-square =10.01 p less than .005

Table 16 Ergative marking of subject noun phrases.

153 Even in clauses in which both subject and object occur, subjects which follow objects are more likely to be ergative marked (see table 17). Recognizing a general principle that given precedes new in linear order, these results suggest that the subject, again, is ergative marked when it is less given than the object.

For transitive clauses with both subject and object noun phrases present:

-se' no -se' % -se*

subject precedes object 7

19

26.92

object precedes subject 7

0

100

p is .0008 by Fisher's exact test

Table 17 Ergative marking with both s and O present.

An alternative explanation for the figures in the last two tables is that —se* serves to disambiguate subject from object in cases where the two might be confused — when only one noun phrase occurs or object precedes subject, and in fact —se* may in part serve such a function. However, because of the high incidence of zero anaphora and the resulting potential ambiguity, I would judge that disambiguation is not a major concern of Ika grammar.
Comrie notes that languages frequently show differential case marking for agents which are low in animacy or definiteness (1981:122-123). The assumption is that information flow in transitive clauses from agent to patient is from high to low animacy and definiteness. The pattern, here, of ergative-marked agents which are lower in givenness than the patient is similar; the information flow

154 from more to less given is expected, and new agents receive differential mar Icing.

9.4 Focus.

Two focus particles are neki 'contrary to expectation' and neika

'Noun Phrase focus.' Because contrast frequently involves what

unexpectedly did not happen, most clauses containing neki are negative.

In 307a 'I went to look for my mule' establishes the expectation that

the man will find his mule, contradicted in 3C!7b:

(307) a. Mura an-ka-tak-3n

zoza-na-rua.

mule pt.ref-periph-look.for-impfv go-dist-1S

'I went to look for my mule.'

b. Mura neki tSuza-' nar-i-ri,

mule cntr see-neg aux-while-top

'I didn't see the mule...'

Note that in 307 the two clauses have the same subject and same object,

but the action itself in 307b is the unexpected result. Especially in

cases where there is a change of subject from one clause to the next,

neki occurs just before the negated verb but may also appear at the

beginning of the clause to contrast the whole proposition with the

expectation, in 308, the hunter expects his gun to fire but it does

not; neki occurs at the beginning of the second clause as well as before

the negated verb:

155

(308) "T5ei-wa"

a'zar-e', neki husiri neki

shoot-about.to think-then cntr shotgun cntr

k-a*wi-u*

nan-na.

periph-fire-neg aux-dist

•He thought "I'll shoot," but his shotgun didn't go off.'

The concept of 'contrary to expectation,' however, is not

necessarily linked to negation. In some cases, two clauses are

contrasted even when negation is not involved. For example, in 309, the

first clause sets up an expectation that the hunter will go to see his

shotgun-trap, but by contrast he gets scared and goes instead to ask for

help in tracking his quarry:

(309) Asige' husiri tSu-3n zor-iza, neki tSoutSo kSnas-e' next.day shotgun see-impfv go-would cntr fear have-then

pari-ri, Dzono'sui keiwi

ga'-z-Sn

zoza-na.

from-top Donachui right.away message-say-impfv go-dist

'He wanted to go (would have gone) the next day to see the shotgun but instead he got scared and went to Donachui to talk about it.'

Just as neki 'contrary to expectation' may occur in the absence of

the negative, so negation may occur in contexts not involving contrast.

That is, the expectation may be that the event will not or did not

happen. This is the case where the same event is mentioned twice, both

with the negative. The first mention often involves neki while the

second mention does not. In 310, the statement 'we did not eat it'

occurs twice (with two clauses in between but not given here) , the first

time in a contrastive context and the second time merely as repetition,

without neki:

156

(310) an-neki

an-a-g-u'-nan

u-na. ...eiraa

pt.ref-cntr pt.ref-12plS-eat-neg-aux aux-dist that

kusSri-ri deer-top

an-a-g-u'-nSn

u-na

ni.

pt.ref-12plS-eat-neg-aux aux-dist cert

'We did not eat it...we did not eat that deer.'

Another contrastive element (also sometimes occurring with the

negative) is neika 'Noun phrase focus.' Hfeika selects one item out of a

set, either by way of contrasting two items or indicating which one is

intended out of the available possibilities. In 311, neika occurs twice,

in both cases to focus on certain dogs out of a pack:

(311) Peri umSn re'masi neika-ri a'ni win-was-i, dog more group NPfoc-top rock 3plS-chase-while

iwa mouga neika-se' nangua guiadzina win-was-i

zoza-na.

now two NPfcc-erg and puma

3plS-chase-while go-dist

'Most of the dogs chased the rocks (tumbling down the hillside), but two of them went chasing the puma.'

In some cases, neika occurs with the negative to set up a double

contrast, i.e. 'item-1 verb' versus 'item-2 not-verb.' For instance, in

312, the double contrast is 'eats ripe things' versus 'does not eat raw

things':

(312) Ku'nana ga-za ni. atSSkai nar-i

g-u*

ripe eat-med cert raw

cop-while eat-neg

gui neika ni. also NPfoc cert

'It eats ripe fruit. It does not eat raw fruit.'

157 9.5 The pragmatics of clause organization.
Zero anaphora, linear order, the topic marker -ri, principles of participant reference, and optional auxiliary verbs are all bound up together in the pragmatic organization of the Ika clause. Zero anaphora — no overt noun phrase or pronoun reference to a participant in discourse — is statistically the most common means for referring to entities in connected speech. There tends to be relatively little variation in word order per se, with different combinations of present and absent clause constituents providing most of the variety in the linear organization of elements in clauses. Noun phrases that do occur, and clauses as a whole, may be marked by the clitic -ri 'topic' to indicate their special pragmatic status, with noun phrases marked in this way usually located in clause-initial position. Zero anaphora, unmarked noun phrases, and noun phrases marked by -ri provide the three basic choices in the system of participant reference in discourse. The pragmatic topic-comment structuring of clauses also interacts with optional auxiliary verbs such that when the comment portion of a clause consists of only the verb phrase, that phrase is more likely to contain an optional auxiliary verb, giving the phrase a pragmatically marked structure.

158 9.5.1 Zero anaphora. In text, zero anaphora is the most common means of participant reference, with the result that the majority of clauses lack an overt noun phrase reference to the subject and/or object. Thus, it is not uncommon to find clauses such as 313, in which neither the subject nor the object are referenced by overt noun phrases or pronouns. (313) Guaka u-na.
kill aux-dist •He killed it.' In one collection of narrative and expository text, the overall rate of zero anaphora is 64.95% (493 out of 759 instances of particpant reference with no overt noun phrase or pronoun realization). Zero anaphora is significantly more common, however, with subjects than with objects. Table 18 compares zero anaphora for transitive subjects versus objects.

Constituent:

Consitituent is: Subject Object

present

61

122

absent

177

116

% zero anaphora 74.37

48.74

chi-square = 33.0

Table 18 Zero anaphora for subjects vs. objects.

The results in table 18 are not surprising, given that zero anaphora in general indicates the topicality of a participant, and the grammatical category subject, cross-linguistically, is often associated with the pragmatic category topic. Thus subjects, as 'naturally' more topical.

159 are more likely referenced by the topic indicating device of zero anaphora.
The rate of zero anaphora for subjects of transitives and of intransitives is not significantly different, as the figures in table 19 indicate.

"?ype of clause:

Intransitive Transitive

with subject

83

61

without subject

200

177

% zero anaphora

70.67

74.37

chi-square =0.88 p greater than .10

Table 19 Zero anaphora, transitive vs. intransitive subjects.

In general, zero anaphora represents the usual means of reference to a participant which figures in a series of clauses and may be treated as given information and topical.

9.5.2 The linear order o€ clause constituents. Figures on the linear order of clause constituents indicate that Ika is basically verb-final and that subject precedes object when both constituents occur, though only ten percent of the transitive clauses are SOV, strictly speaking. Table 20 gives information on the linear order of elements in intransitive and transitive clauses and also notes those clauses naving only a verb phrase.

160

Intransitive clauses:

V 200 SV 83 Total 283

Transitive clauses:

V 88

OV 89

SV 28

SOV 23

OSV

3

SVO

3

OVS

4

Total 238

Table 20 fiord order statistics.

Intransitive clauses are overwhelmingly subjectless, but all cases of noun phrase subjects occur pre-verbally. Only 6.6% of transitive clauses with a noun phrase subject show a post-verbal subject (4 out of 61). Indeed, only 2.5% of the object noun phrases are post-verbal (3 out of 122). Thus, Ika is strongly verb—final.
Due to the high rate of zero anaphora, only 33 transitive clauses out of 238 total provide evidence concerning the relative order of subject and object.1 Two-thirds of these clauses show an SOV order (23/33=69.70%). About half of the instances of SOV clauses occur at beginnings, in the opening clauses of stories, where participants are first mentioned in a text or are reintroduced after an extended absence, and in isolated clauses in quoted speech. All of these circumstances show a great deal of discontinuity with the preceding context, requiring noun phrases to make reference clear.

161 Tbe small number o€ clauses showing orders other than SOV offer little opportunity to investigate motivations for these alternative orders, but a number of the examples of post-verbal subjects occur in last mentions of a participant in a text.
9.5.3 -ri 'topic*. Tracy and Levinsohn (1977) list three functions for the clitic -ri, one of the most frequently occurring morphemes in Ika:
1. A signal of progression (1977:5): The suffix —ri may occur as the last suffix in a non-final clause, signalling progression along the chronological or logical linkage axis of the backbone of the discourse . . . (-ri makes) the action of the following clauses a new and distinct event of the backbone. Its absence indicates lack of progression along the backbone, and a consequent bundling of the actions of the following claue(s) with the previous ones.
2. A signal cf contrast when attached to adjectives 3. A signal of the Thematic participant (1977:6):
One participant is selected to be the thematic participant of each paragraph. This is indicated by the suffix -ri, attached to the final word of the noun phrase which refers to the participant. After reviewing these three functions, I will suggest that at the most general level, —ri serves to topicalize an element, to set off a clause, adjective, or noun phrase from surrounding material for pragmatic reasons.

162

9.5.3.1 Clause-final -ri — separating distinct events. Approximately

two-thirds of the examples of -ri in my corpus occur at the end of

non-final clauses. Tracy and Levinsohn mention this use of -ri as

indicating progression along the backbone of a discourse. When -ri

occurs at the end of a non-final clause, the next clause is interpreted

as a new and distinct event on the backbone of the discourse. In this

environment, -ri cliticizes to the last word in the verb phrase of a

non-final clause or to the end of the sentence introducer which begins a

new sentence (see section 7.3). The following two examples each contain

one sentence, with the individual clauses within each one indicated by

letters. 314a ends with —ri, indicating that 'the puma climbed a tree'

and 'Jose fired again' are distinct events on the story line. The

sentence introducer for the second sentence, however, does not carry

-ri, indicating that 'jos6 shot' and 'he killed it' would be bundled

together, without progression along the event line.

(314) a. Ei aw-i

nangua-ri, kan-se' eigui

thus aux-while and-top

tree-loc again

an-it5on-an

nus-e' nangua-ri,

pt.ref-go.up-impfv aux-then and-top

'(The puma) climbed a tree, and then'

b. Jose eigui keiwi

t§ei-na.

Jose again right.away shoot-dist

'Jose fired again.'

(315) a. Si u-z-e' nangua, guako-u-na.

thus aux-then and

kill-aux-dist

'And he killed it.'

163 Most cases in narrative involving -ri on the ends of clauses seem to serve this function of pragmatically separating two clauses which are to be considered distinct events. The clauses which are not separated by -ri likewise often show a lack of progression along the event line rather than distinct actions. Some clauses grouped together by the lack of -ri involve repetition, for example "He went to look for the puma. He went up to Tima'ka" and "He killed it. Having killed it." Other cases involve two aspects of a single event, such as "he went down. He arrived" and "jos6 shot it. He killed it." Still other groups of clauses involve description rather than events: "Blood dripped out of its mouth, and it just stood there" and "its stomach had lots of meat in it. This they gave to the dogs." Some aspects of the grouping or separating of clauses by -ri do not make as much sense in terms of this analysis, however. For example, the context for one of the examples given in the last paragraph contains three clauses which appear to be essentially all repetitions of the same event, yet the use of —ri at the end of the second clause groups the first two as separate from the third: He went to look for the puma. He went up to Tima * ka. He went up to where the goat that the puma had
killed had just been brought. Again, in the same hunting story in which "blood dripped out of its mouth" and "it just stood there" are grouped together, "the puma just stood there" and "its tongue was hanging down" are not. These apparent contradictions suggest that this use of —ri is not so much a rule of

164 grammar as a resource available to speakers to control the flow and pace of a narrative or other discourse. Thus the grouping of clauses not only reflects principles such as repetition, description, and stages in a single event but also reflects the speaker's choices, which cannot be wholly predicted.

9.5.3.2 -ri and contrast. Tracy and Levinsohn offer the following

example of —ri on an adjective to show contrast:

(316) a. In'gui-ri p£ri-ri tikeki naza. one-top dog-top behind walk

'Certain dogs walk behind;'

b. Ei aw-e'-ri

in'gui-ri peri uman sanusi

thus aux-then-top one-top dog more ahead

"zei-n nS-ngua" a'zina. go-impfv 10-will think

'Other dogs want to go further ahead.' (Tracy and Levinsohn, example 2)

Similar examples occur in my corpus but are rare.

9.5.3.3 -ri and topicality, -ri on nouns sets a phrase apart within the clause, often in clause initial position, as topic, theme, or point of departure for what follows. Tracy and Levinsohn describe this function as marking the 'thematic participant' of the paragraph. Their analysis leans heavily on the notion of the grammatical paragraph, a concept that is problematic in practical terms, even if one subscribes to the notion that the paragraph is a grammatical unit. That is, the presence of —r?. may help identify a stretch of talk that has coherence

165 around the topic so marked, but it is more doubtful that one could identify the paragraphs and then use that information to help determine the placement of —ri.
A less specific characterization of the function of —ri on noun phrases is that for cases involving overt noun phrase reference, -ri indicates that the participant concerned is topical within the clause and relatively more important in the context than a participant whose noun phrase reference is not marked by -ri. Zero anaphora is the usual indicator of topicality, but in situations where an explicit noun phrase is needed to make reference clear, —ri serves to indicate that the participant is being treated as the topic in the clause. The next section pursues the relationship between zero anaphora, -ri, and unmarked noun phrases within the system of participant reference.
9.5.4 participant reference. Participant reference can be taken as the set of principles that govern or influence the choice of means by which entities are referred to in discourse. The term 'referred to' must be interpreted broadly enough to include zero anaphora — cases in which an entity is not overtly mentioned in a clause but is part of the case frame of the verb. In Ika, there are essentially three choices for participant reference: (i) an unmarked noun phrase, (ii) a noun phrase marked by —ri 'topic,' and (iii) zero anaphora. After first summarizing Tracy and Levinsohn's observations concerning participant reference in expository discourse, I will present some quantitative data concerning the use of these three means of reference. I will conclude that

166 unmarked noun phrases are used for participants which are non-topical and which usually have a short-term presence in the discourse; that zero anaphora is the usual means for referring to topical and given participants; and that —ri marks noun phrases that refer to topical participants in cases where an overt noun phrase is needed to make reference clear.
Tracy and Levinsohn summarize the patterns of participant reference as follows, participants are divided into two basic sets — thematic and non-thematic within a given stretch of text. Thematic participants can only be ones that occupy a significant discourse role (usually the central character or some character related to the central character). The thematic participant is indicated by -ri attached to the end of the noun phrase which refers to the participant, in the opening sentence of each new paragraph (1977:8). Within the body of the paragraph, there is no overt reference to the thematic participant (zero anaphora). In the final sentence of a paragraph, all three means of referring to participants may be used with the thematic participant — overt reference with or without —ri, or zero anaphora. Non-thematic participants are handled by means of overt noun phrases unmarked by —ri: "the presence of a nonthematic participant in a paragraph is indicated by his being overtly mentioned, but the reference carries no —ri marker" (1977:8).

167 9.5.4.1 Topic continuity. Giv6n has suggested that there are three types of main topics in thematic paragraphs ("a string of clauses whose aain/priaary topic remains the same" 1983:9) and relates these types to the degree to which the entity involved is relatively continuous or discontinuous with the preceding and following discourse context. The three types of main topics are (1983:9): (a) Chain initial topic:
(i) Characteristically a newly-introduced or newlyreturned topic; thus
(ii) Characteristically a discontinuous topic in terms of the preceding discourse context; but
(iii) Potentially — if an important topic — a rather persistent topic in terms of the succeeding discourse context.
(b) Chain medial topic: (i) Characteristically a continuing/continuous topic in terms of the preceding discourse context; and also (ii) Characteristically persistent — but not maximally so — in terms of the succeeding discourse context, even when an important topic.
(c) Chain final topic: (i) Characteristically a continuing/continuous topic in terms of the preceding discourse context; but (ii) Characteristically a non-persistent topic in terms of the succeeding discourse context, even if an important topic. Two tests which Giv6n suggests for measuring the continuity of
topics in discourse involve referential distance back to the last reference to the topic, and the topic's persistence in the following discourse context. Giv6n describes referential distance as follows (1983:13):
This measurement assesses the gap between the previous occurrence in the discourse of a referent/topic and its current occurrence in a clause, where it is marked by a

168 particular grammatical coding device. The gap is thus expressed in terms of number of clauses to the left. Topics which are more discontinuous with respect to the preceding discourse context have a higher referential distance. The measure that Giv6n suggests for persistence in the subsequent discourse involves (1983:15) the number of clauses to the right — i.e. in subsequent discourse from the measured clause — in which the topic/participant continues an uninterrupted presence as a semantic argument of the clause, an argument of whatever role and marked by whatever grammatical means. These measures help determine the relative (dis-)continuity of the available grammatical devices for coding topics and thus enable one to make conclusions regarding the function of the available devices in marking the different types of topics listed above.
9.5.4.2 Topic continuity in Ika discourse. In order to measure topic continuity in Ika discourse, I have examined noun phrases, noun phrases plus —ri, and zero anaphora in an eleven-clause window of text — the preceding and succeeding five clauses around a given clause. I used a narrative and an expository text, totaling 113 clauses and 169 references to participants. For each participant identifiable as part of the case frame of a verb, I noted the grammatical means of referring to that participant and the participant's presence in the preceding and following five clauses. In the tables below, the grammatical means are given as NP (unmarked noun phrase), -ri (noun phrase plus -ri 'topic'), and 0 (zero anaphora). Table 21 gives the figures for the average number of clauses back to the last occurrence of the participant for the

169 three coding devices. Note that an unmarked noun phrase shows the most discontinuity with the previous context (highest average distance back to last occurrence), that zero anaphora shows the most continuity with the previous context (lowest average distance back to last occurence), and that noun phrases marked by -ri stand in between the two.
NP 4.33 clauses -ri 2.61 clauses 0 1.43 clauses Table 21 Average distance back to last occurence.
Thus, zero anaphora occurs with topics that have usually been mentioned in the immediately prior discourse context, relative to topics referred to by noun phrases. In addition, -ri occurs on noun phrases in situations involving greater continuity with the previous context, relative to unmarked noun phrases
Table 22 gives the figures on the average number of clauses in which a participant has an uninterrupted presence in subsequent discourse, according to the grammatical coding device. Zero anaphora shows the greatest continuity in the following context, unmarked noun phrases show the least persistence, and, again, noun phrases marked by -ri show an intermediate amount of persistence.

170
NP .98 clauses -ri 1.41 clauses 0 2.18 clauses Table 22 Persistence of topics in subsequent discourse.
The figures from these two tables give support to Tracy and Levinsohn's observations on participant reference. The minor role of participants referenced by unmarked noun phrases is seen in the relatively long distance back to a last reference and the short amount
2 of uninterrupted presence in the following discourse. The evidence concerning —ri is not conclusive with regard to the concept of marking the thematic participant of a paragraph, but the figures do show that noun phrases marked by -ri have a greater degree of continuity with respect to the following discourse. The data also show that zero anaphora codes established topics, as seen in the high degree of continuity both in the preceding and following discourse.
In relation to Giv6n's types of main topics, above, zero anaphora is the preferred coding device for chain-medial topics, having a relatively high amount of continuity with both the prior and following context. —ri would seem to be the coding device for chain-initial topics, showing a greater discontinuity with the prior context than zero anaphora but more persistence than unmarked noun phrases, unmarked noun phrases would seem to be the means for coding minor topics rather than major ones. On the whole, they show relatively little continuity in text, which is an indication of their minor pragmatic status. This

171 study does not shed light on the matter of chain-final topics, but it appears that this is one area in which word order interacts with topic continuity. I commented above that post-verbal subjects often involve participants that are moving off a scene (section 9.5.2, on word order). In particular, chain —final topics appear to be ones that are both postposed and marked by -ri.
9.5.5 Optional auxiliary verbs at id pragmatic structuring, in the discussion of optional auxiliary verbs in the verb phrase above (section 5.1.2), I suggested that optional auxiliaries serve a pragmatic function of highlighting the lexical verb. This analysis rests in part on a conception of the pragmatic structuring of Ika clauses. In the last section, I used the term 'topic* in a very general sense — any entity which plays a role in a clause. One may also speak of the topic of a clause as a particular item around which the clause revolves, the item that the clause is 'about.' Topics in this sense are usually considered to be given information and definite. I stated above that zero anaphora is the usual means for referring to topics, with —ri specifically marking noun phrases as topical for those cases in which an overt noun phrase is needed. In this sense, a starting point for considering the pragmatic structure of Ika clauses is to recognize topic versus comment, and marked topics (-ri) versus unmarked topics (zero anaphora). My conclusion concerning optional auxiliary verbs is that they produce a marked structure in the comment portion of a clause, highlighting the lexical verb itself.

172 Dooley 1982 investigates the tendency to use constituent structure in Guarani to show pragmatic structure and suggests that all languages will similarly have some indication of pragmatic structure. He holds that in pragmatic terms, Guarani sentences may be divided up into various constituents such as connectives, settings, topic, and a pragmatic nucleus (the only obligatory part o^ the utterance). Dooley's discussion of pragmatically marked structures in Guarani shows parallels to the Ika use of optional auxiliary verbs (1982:312):
Marked pragmatic structuring can be produced in Guarani in several ways. By far the most common means is a marked expression: an expression becomes marked when (a final segment of) the pragmatic nucleus is given a binary constituent structure which highlights that expression. This binary constituent structure is prominently indicated by marked word-order, intonation, or other special features, with the marked expression as one constituent. I will call the other, non-highlighted constituent the remainder constituent. The marked expression always precedes the remainder constituent; and this may be the general rule for languages in which marked expressions occur. My analysis of optional auxiliary verbs in Ika is that they serve to produce pragmatically marked expressions having a binary constituent structure, with the lexical verb as the marked expression and the optional auxiliary verb and the rest of the verb phrase as the non-highlighted, remainder constituent. Dooley notes that for Guarani the usual pragmatic nucleus is an unmarked topic plus core, the core being "roughly described as the most informative pragmatic component" (1982:310). I suggest that a similar situation holds with Ika clauses. A noun phrase marked by -ri serves as a marked topic and participants referenced by zero anaphora serve as unmarked topics, with the rest of the clause serving as the core, verb

173 phrases with optional auxiliaries represent a marked core, highlighting the verb as the most informative part of the clause, leaving auxiliary verb(s) with the rest of the information in the clause as the "remainder constituent." Much remains to be done in this area, but an example will help indicate the direction in which this analysis is pointing.
Example 317 contains three clauses in two sentences. The first clause has a 0 subject as unmarked topic and otherwise only a verb phrase. The verb phrase contains an optional auxiliary, highlighting the verb as the informationally most important element in the clause. The second and third clauses, in the second sentence, each contain a marked topic noun phrase followed by an unmarked core. Note that in each of these clauses, it is not the verb but the locative word that is informationally most important, and the verb phrase does not contain an optional auxiliary. The marked noun phrases focus on the contrast in participants involved, and the rest of each clause gives the details concerning the participant in focus. The parentheses indicate my conception of the pragmatic constituency of each clause.

174

(317) a. (TOPIC (MARKED-CORE REMAINDER)

( 0 (zoza

u-na. )

(they) go

aux-dist

"They went.•

b. (MARKED TOPIC (CORE

)

(a-ri

(meina keiwi

zori-e'-ri,)

he-top

stream right.away go-then-top

'He went along a stream,'

C. (MARKED TOPIC (CORE

)

(mouga-ri

(awa'rei zoza-na.)

two-top

below go-dist

'and the other two went along below.'

Optional auxiliaries are found most frequently in clauses containing

only a verb phrase — clear cases of the verb being the informationally

most important part of the proposition. This marked structure is found

less often with verb phrases which already have an obligatory auxiliary

verb=, possibly because such a phrase already has the lexical verb

separated toward the left and the rest of the grammatical material to

the right on an obligatory auxiliary verb. There would be less need in

such cases to create a marked structure in order to highlight the

lexical verb. Firmer conclusions concerning optional auxiliary verbs

and pragmatic structuring will have to await a separate study.

1. The lower rate of verb-only clauses among transitives as opposed to intransitives is presumably due to the greater potential for confusion when both subject and object of a transitive clause are absent. Since zero anaphora for subjects is approximately the same for transitives and intransitives, while for objects it is lower, it may be that objects are chosen more often for explicit noun phrase reference in order to prevent this confusion over the identity of the subject versus the object.
2. The higher figure for referential distance with unmarked noun phrases is partly due to the fact that first introductions of participants

175 yield the highest amount of distance (with 6 as the maximum number in my study) and unmarked noun phrases are the basic choice for the first mention of a participant.

10. CONCLUSION.
No language has ever been completely described, and relatively few have been described in any detail when one considers the total number of languages in the wcrld. This grammar of Ika is intended not to give the final word on the language but to offer the first broad treatment of grammatical phenomena in ika. All the conclusions in the preceding chapters should be treated as suggestive and in need of further investigation, though I have always attempted to be as accurate and complete as possible within the constraints of my data base and an imperfect grasp of the language. I hope that further research by myself and others will result in the correction of any errors in this study and shed further light on the many fascinating phenomena that I have seen without yet being able to understand. Several major areas definitely warrant further investigation. The morphophonemic system is one of these areas, and the adequate analysis of Ika morphophonemics will necessitate compiling data on the alternative forms of a large number of roots and the majority of the affixes, to enable generalizations concerning the patterns of interaction between morphemes in combination.
There are a number of details concerning the clause-level that will need additional work. Chief among these matters, in my mind, are the pragmatic factors concerning zero anaphora, the ubiquitous clitic —ri, word order, and optional auxiliary verbs. The observations in the chapter on pragmatics are only a beginning in this rich area. Clearly, much of the work in this area will have to be discourse-based and would
-176-

177

benefit from observation of language in use by the Bintukwa in everyday

interaction.

_

Complex sentence structures form another area in which much more

work is needed. My intention has been to present at least the basics of

Ika syntax with a view to creating an interest among syntacticians in

the syntax of relatively little-known languages. Specialized techniques

will be necessary to secure the evidence needed from otherwise

infrequently-occurring structures such as verbal complements and

relative clauses.

I have given no systematic attention in this study to the whole

question of discourse genre and ways of speaking. There is firm

evidence that the type of discourse and the social setting for talk have

a definite effect on the grammatical structures that will be found in

the data (for example, cf. Schieffelin 1979). Thus, perhaps the

greatest need, in order to make further progress in understanding Ika

grammar, is to supplement the data base so as to ensure a corpus that is

representative of the way that Ika is used in a wide range of social

circumstances, including, especially, observations of language in use in

situations where language itself is not in focus (cf. Labov 1975 on the

limitations of the normal procedures used in descriptive fieldwork).

The Ika language deserves the additional research that I have

outlined here as well as in other areas. I hope that this study will

serve as a foundation for such research and will stimulate corrections

as well as extensions into new areas of the grammar.

11. ABBREVIATIONS.

1 2 3 1pl 2pl 3pl 12pl 0 S 1:would 3D aux ben cert cntr compar cop dist emph erg excl gen ig imm.scc impers impfv incep lim loc med neg NPfoc perf periph pro prox pt.ref recip rpt top wit

first person singular second person singular third person singular first person plural second person plural third person plural first or second person plural object subject first person singular for the
modal 'would* three dimensional noun class
indicator auxiliary verb benefactive certainty contrary to expectation comparative copula distal deictic aspect emphatic ergative exclusive genitive interrogative immediate succession impersonal imperfective inceptive limitative locative medial deictic aspect negative Noun Phrase focus perfect peripheral participant pronoun proximal deictic aspect point of reference reciprocal/reflexive reportative topic witness

-178-

179 BEEBREHCES
Allen, Barbara J., Donna B. Gardiner, and Donald G. Frantz. 1984. "Noun incorporation in Southern Tiwa." U A L 50. 292-311.
Blake, Barry J. 1977. Case marking in Australian languages. (Australian Institute of Aboriginal Studies, Linguistic Series No. 23). Canberra: Australian Insitute of Aboriginal Studies.
Comrie, Bernard. 1981. Language universals and linguistic typology. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Comrie, Bernard, and Edward L. Keenan. 1979. "Noun phrase accessibility revisited." Language 55. 649-664.
Constenla umafia, Adolfo. 1981. Comparative Chibchan phonology. University of Pennsylvania dissertation.
Constenla Umafia, Adolfo. 1982. "Sobre la construcci<5n ergativa en la lengua guatusa." Revista de Filologia y Linguistica de la Universidad de Costa Rica 8. 97-101
Dixon, B. M. W., ed. 1976. Grmmtical categories in Australian languages. (Australian Institute of Aboriginal Studies, Linguistic Series No. 22). New Jersey: Humanities Press.
Dixon, R. M. W. 1979. "Ergativity." Language 55. 59-138. Dixon, R. M. W. 1982. Where have all the adjectives gone? Berlin:
Mouton. Dooley, Robert A. 1982. "Options in the pragmatic structuring of
Guarani sentences." Language 58. 307-331. Fillmore, Charles J. 1975. Santa Cruz lectures on deizis, 1971.
Bloomington: Indiana University Press. Giv6n, Talmy, ed. 1983. Topic continuity in discourse: quantitative
cross—language studies. Amsterdam: John Benjamins. Givdn, Talmy. 1984. Syntax, a functional-typological introduction.
Amsterdam: John Benjamins. Greenberg J. H. 1966. "Some universals of grammar with particular
reference to the order of meaningful elements." In Greenberg, ed. 1966. 73-133.

180 Greenberg, J.H., ed. 1966. Dniversals of language. Cambridge, Mass.:
MIT Press. Grimes, Joseph E. 1972. "Outlines and overlays." Language 48.
513-24. Hopper, Paul J., and Sandra A. Thompson. 1980. "Transitivity in syntax
and discourse." Language 56. 251-299. Hudson, Grover. 1980. "Automatic alternations in non-transformational
phonology." Language 56. 94-125. Jij6n y CaamaHo, Jacinto. 1943. "Las lenguas del sur de Centro America
y el norte y centro del oeste de Sud-Am6rica." El Ecuador Interandino y Occidental 3. 390-661. Key, Mary Ritchie. 1979. The grouping of American Indian languages. Tubingen: Gunter Narr Verlag. Labov, William. 1975. Mhat is a linguistic fact? Lisse: Peter de Ridder Press. Landaburu, Jon. 1985. "La construcci6n de la referencia del sujeto en Ika (Arhuaco de la Sierra Nevada de Santa Marta)." Paper presented at the XLV Congress of Americanists, Bogota, 1985. Lehmann, W.P. 1972. "Converging theories in linguistics." language 48. 266-75. Lehmann, Winfred P. 1978. "The great underlying ground-plans." In Lehmann, ed. 1978. 3-56. Lehmann, winfred p., ed. 1978. Syntactic typology: studies in the phenomenology of language. Austin: University of Texas Press. Longacre, Robert E. 1972. Hierarchy and universality of discourse constituents in New Guinea languages: discussion. Washington, D.C.: Georgetown University Press. Loukotka, Cestmir. 1935. Clasificaci<5n de las lenguas sudamericas. Prague. Loukotka, Cestmir. 1938. "Intrusi6n de las idiomas Centro-Am4ricas en America del Sur." Anales de la universidad de HariOo 2. 243-264. Loukotka, Cestmir. 1968. Classification of South American Indian languages. Los Angeles: UCLA Latin American Center.

181 Mason, John. 1950. "The Languages of South American Indians."
Handbook of South American Indians, ed. by J. Steward, vol. 6. 157-317. McQuown, Norman A. 1955. "The indigenous languages of Latin America." American Anthropologist 58. 501-70. Reichenbach, Hans. 1947. Elements of symbolic logic. New York: New York Free Press. Rivet, Paul, and Cestmir Loukotka. 1952. "Langues de l'Amerigue du Sud et des Antilles." Les langues du sonde, ed. by A. Meillet and M. Cohen. 1100-600. Paris: Centre de la Recherche Scientifigue. Shafer, Robert. 1962. "Aruakan (not Arawakan)." Anthropological Linguistics 4:4. 31-40. Schieffelin, Bambi. 1979. How Kaluli children learn what to say, what to do, and bow to feel: An ethnographic study of the development of communicative competence. Columbia University dissertation. Silverstein. 1976. "Hierarchy of features and ergativity." in Dixon, ed. 1976. 112-171. Stout, Mickey, and Ruth Thomson. 1971. "Kayap6 narrative." IJAL 37. 250-256. Tovar, Antonio. 1961. Cat£logo de las lengua de America del Sur. Buenos Aires: Editorial Sudamerica. Tracy, Hubert p., and Stephen H. Levinsohn. 1977. "participant reference in lea expository discourse." Discourse grammar: studies in indigenous languages of Colombia, Panama, and Ecuador. ed. by R. E. Longacre and F. Woods. 3-24. Dallas: Summer Institute of Linguistics and the University of Texas at Arlington. Tracy, Hubert P., and Martha Tracy. 1973. "Arhuaco." Aspectos de la cultura material de grupos etnicos de Colombia, Tomo I. 317-32. Bogota: Ministerio de Gobierno. Vinalesa, Padre Jos£ de. 1952. "Indios Arhuacos de la Sierra Nevada de Santa Marta." Bogota: Editorial Iqueima. Wheeler, Alva. 1972. "Proto-Chibchan." Comparative studies in Amerindian languages, ed. by E. Matteson, et. al. 93-108. The Hague: Mouton.

IHDKX

-aba* 53, 114, 133 accompaniment 50, 98 adjective 5, 26, 31, 43, 51 adposition 4 adverb 33, 145 adverbial clause 10, 144 —adzu 'immediate succession' 124 a'dzun 'want' 143 agent 10ff, 151 agreement 67ff -ak£ 76ff alternative yes/no question 109 -aae* 'because' 126 an- 'point of reference' 100ff anterior 76ff, 142 aspect
deictic 87ff temporal 76ff article 44 attributive noun 45 aoga 'reportative* 136 auxiliary verb 33, 61ff obligatory 62ff optional 64ff, 103, 171ff azi 'how' 116
-an 'imperfective' 76ff, 118, 140, 142
bek* 'where' 115 beaa 'which one' 115 benefactive 96 biga 'how many' 115 bin zan 'when' 114, 116 Bintukwa 1, 3, 23 bitransitive verbs 9, 28, 48, 50 bindi 'how much' 115 borrowing from Spanish 33, 36, 40,
41, 119 case marking 44, 46ff, 130 causative 91, 142 Chimila 1 clauses 10ff
connecting 122ff, 86 declarative 105ff imperative 117ff interrogative 108ff

relative 7, 26, 130 clause chaining 122 clause-connecting suffixes 86,
122ff cliticization 46, 52, 118, 162 comparative 7, 99 complements 135ff
full sentence 136 indirect question 139 not marked for mood 137 purpose 140 resultant state 142 Comrie, Bernard 146, 153
and Edward Keenan 145 conjunction 37, 50, 122, 126 consonants 14 Constenla, Adolfo 1, 12, 38, 45,
146 content question 112ff contrast 154-r 164 copula 31, 118, 138, 142, 147 CV patterns 21, 22 declarative clause 105ff deictic aspect 87ff, 109, 145 definiteness 41, 44, 45, 153 deixis 78, 87ff, 101 deletion 20
demonstrative pronouns 35, 52, 53 dipthongs 14 Dixon, R. M. W. 1, 2, 11ff, 13, 71 Dooley, Robert 172 -ek£ 'locative' 52, 133 -e' 'then' 123 epenthesis 20 equative 99 ergative-absolutive 11, 146 ergativity 10ff, 27, 29, 49, 149ff existenial 72, 94 Fillmore, Charles 102 focus 154 full sentence complements 136 future imperative 119 genitive 5, 55 given/new information 149ff Giv6n, Talmy 149, 167, 170

-182-

Grimes, Joseph 129 Greenberg, Joseph 5 Guarani 172
Hoppe10r2, Paul and Sandra Thompson
hortatory 120 -i 'while* 123, 144 iari 'why* 116 idioms 97, 116 immediate imperative 117 imperatives 10, 61, 117f£
future 119 hortatory 120 immediate 117 imperfective 76f£ impersonal verbs 29, 83 -in 'witness' 88, 104, 105ff, 139 inceptive 77, 104 indirect question 107, 116, 139 ini 'who,' 'what' 113 iniba' 'what day' 114 instrument 50
interrogative pronouns 35, 113 intransitive verbs 9, 11, 12, 27,
159, 174 irrealis 80, 103 iwa 'about to' 82, 104 iza 'would' 85 -kin 'limitative' 51 —fcua 'must' 80 -fcuei 'able to' 81 Kayap<S 129 k3- 'peripheral participant' 93£f,
96 Keenan, Edward and Bernard Comrie
145 kinship 55 Kogi 1 -ku 'medial deictic aspect' 87ff —kuaa 'impersonal' 148 Labov, William 177 Landaburu, Jon 34, 104 leading yes/no question 110, 121 Lehmann, Winfred 5 Levinsohn, Stephen and Hubert
Tracy 49 limitative 51 locationals and noun classes 51,
71 ff

183
locative 48, 52, 53, 94 logical clause connectors 126 Longacre, Robert 128 Malayo 1 o a H ' shaman' 2 modal suffixes 80ff mood 79 ff morphology 6 morphophonemics 16ff motion verbs 101 -n 'by means of* 55, 59 -na 'distal deictic aspect' 87ff,
131, 134, 142 narrative 126, 127, 107, 101, 129,
148, 158, 162 -ndi 'since/if* 127 negation 8, 110, 120, 154 neutral yes/no question 108 -ngua 'will' 82ff, 109, 141 -nguasi 'in order to* 82ff, 141 ni 'certainty* 105ff, 139 -nik 'when' 119, 124 nominalized clause 52, 54, 133 nominative-accusative 10, 29 non-referential subjects 147 noun 25 noun classes 71ff noun phrase 5, 12, 26, 27, 36,
39ff, 50, 149, 157 numerals 36, 40ff object 9, 100, 130, 146, 174
indirect 9 prefixes 11, 29, 69, 92, 93, 96,
148 off-stage subjects 148 OV languages 5, 7 pari 'from' 57, 126 participant reference 165 perfect 76ff perfective 76ff personal pronouns 34 phonology 13ff, 23, 104 possessor ascension 95 postpositions 4, 38, 46ff, 117 pronouns 34
demonstrative 35, 52, 53 interrogative 35, 113 personal 34 purpose complements 140

quantifiers 36, 39 questions 8, 23, 62, 108ff
content 112ff indirect 107, 116, 139 yes/no 108ff, 121 quotation 31 reciprocal 98 reflexive 98 relative clause 7, 26, 130, 145 repetition of adjectives 43 of verb 76, 125. 129 resultant state complement 142 -ri 'topic' 157, 161ff, 168, 171 -se* •ergative' 48ff, 149ff 'locative' 48ff sentence introducer 61, 128 sentential objects 30, 135ff Shafer, Robert 1 -sin 50, 98 Solis, Abran Izquierdo 3 SOV 4, 122, 160 Spanish, borrowing from 33, 36, 40, 41, 119 Stout, Mickey and Ruth Thomson 129 stress 14 subject affixes 9, 68, 89, 130, 145, 147ff, 159, 174 syllable structure 15 tag 110, 121, 138 temporal clause connectors 123 temporal aspect 76ff Thompson, Sandra and Paul Hopper
102
Thomson, Ruth and Mickey Stout 129 time words 53 topic 130, 157, 158, 164, 171 topic continuity 149, 167 Tracy, Hubert 3, 34, 103
and Stephen Levinsohn 49, 151, 161, 164, 166
transitive verbs 9, 27, 100, 142, 149, 159, 174
transitivity 102 typology 4ff verb phrase 37, 60ff, 131 verbs 27ff
auxiliary 33, 61ff, 171ff

184
bitransitive 9, 28, 48, 50 copular 31, 118, 138, 142, 147 intransitive 9, 11, 12, 27 motion 101, 144 transitive 9, 27, 100 vowels 14 -w 'proximal deictic aspect' 87ff -wi'na 'prohibited 81 word classes 25ff word order 4, 10, 153, 157, 159 yes/no questions 108 zani 'to be from' 58 zero deictic aspect 87ff temporal aspect 76ff zero anaphora 152, 157, 166, 168, 171 zei 'genitive* 55 -za 'medial deictic aspect' 87ff, 119, 131

