RECONSTRUCTING GRAMMAR

TYPOLOGICAL STUDIES IN LANGUAGE (TSL) A companion series to the journal “STUDIES IN LANGUAGE”
Honorary Editor: Joseph H. Greenberg General Editor: Michael Noonan
Assistant Editors: Spike Gildea, Suzanne Kemmer

Editorial Board:

Wallace Chafe (Santa Barbara) Bernard Comrie (Leipzig) R.M.W. Dixon (Canberra) Matthew Dryer (Buffalo) John Haiman (St Paul) Kenneth Hale (Cambridge, Mass.) Bernd Heine (Köln) Paul Hopper (Pittsburgh) Andrej Kibrik (Moscow)

Ronald Langacker (San Diego) Charles Li (Santa Barbara) Andrew Pawley (Canberra) Doris Payne (Oregon) Frans Plank (Konstanz) Jerrold Sadock (Chicago) Dan Slobin (Berkeley) Sandra Thompson (Santa Barbara)

Volumes in this series will be functionally and typologically oriented, covering specific topics in language by collecting together data from a wide variety of languages and language typologies. The orientation of the volumes will be substantive rather than formal, with the aim of investigating universals of human language via as broadly defined a data base as possible, leaning toward crosslinguistic, diachronic, developmental and live-discourse data.

Volume 43
Spike Gildea (ed.) Reconstructing Grammar Comparative Linguistics and Grammaticalization

RECONSTRUCTING GRAMMAR
COMPARATIVE LINGUISTICS AND GRAMMATICALIZATION
Edited by
SPIKE GILDEA
Rice University, Houston
JOHN BENJAMINS PUBLISHING COMPANY AMSTERDAM/PHILADELPHIA

8

TM

The paper used in this publication meets the minimum requirements of

American National Standard for Information Sciences — Permanence of

Paper for Printed Library Materials, ANSI Z39.48-1984.

Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data

Reconstructing grammar : comparative linguistics and grammaticalization / edited by Spike Gildea.

p. cm. -- (Typological studies in language, ISSN 0167-7373 ; v. 43)

Papers presented at the 7th Rice University Symposium on Linguistics, held Mar. 26–29, 1997,

Rice University, Houston, Tex.

Includes bibliographical references and index.

1. Comparative linguistics--Congresses. 2. Historical linguistics--Congresses. 3. Grammar,

Comparative and general--Grammaticalization--Congresses. I. Gildea, Spike. II. Rice University

Symposium on Linguistics (7th : 1997 : Houston, Tex.) III. Series.

P143.R32 1999

410--dc21

99-055068

ISBN 90 272 2944 9 (Eur.) / 1 55619 658 X (US) (Hb; alk. paper)

CIP

ISBN 90 272 2945 7 (Eur.) / 1 55619 659 8 (US) (Pb; alk. paper)

© 2000 – John Benjamins B.V. No part of this book may be reproduced in any form, by print, photoprint, microfilm, or any other means, without written permission from the publisher.

John Benjamins Publishing Co. • P.O.Box 75577 • 1070 AN Amsterdam • The Netherlands John Benjamins North America • P.O.Box 27519 • Philadelphia PA 19118-0519 • USA

Table of Contents

Preface

vii

Areal typology and grammaticalization: The emergence of new verbal

morphology in an obsolescent language

1

Alexandra Y. Aikhenvald

Florescence as a Force in Grammaticalization

39

Wallace Chafe

On the Genesis of the Verb Phrase in Cariban Languages: Diversity

through Reanalysis

65

Spike Gildea

Internal reconstruction: As method, as theory

107

T. Givón

The Concept of Proof in Genetic Linguistics

161

Joseph H. Greenberg

Grammaticalization chains across languages: An example from

Khoisan

177

Bernd Heine

The accidental intransitive split in the Cariban family

201

Sérgio Meira

The reordering of morphemes

231

Marianne Mithun

Language and Language Family Index

259

Name Index

261

Subject Index

265

Preface
Most of the papers in this volume draw exclusively on data from indigenous languages spoken in North and South America; two papers draw in part (Givón) and in whole (Heine) on data from languages spoken in Africa. Although the prefatory comments that follow refer explicitly only to languages of the Americas, they hold true for minority languages spoken in Africa (and most other parts of the world) as well.
The languages of the Americas show great typological and genetic diversity, and although they are far from exhaustively described, for some linguistic families suﬃciently detailed information is available to have allowed comparative reconstruction of sound systems and lexicon. While grammatical study of these languages has contributed somewhat to typological and theoretical linguistic databases, the origins of many of the diverse grammatical patterns remain unknown. Comparative linguists often do not address morphosyntactic patterns in their comparisons, or do so in only the most general of terms. In the absence of regular laws of grammatical change — comparable to regular laws of sound change — it is diﬃcult for a traditional comparativist to clearly identify cognates: for example, can an instrumental nominalizer and an inﬁnitive really be considered semantically similar enough to be potential cognates? What about a nominalizer and a tense marker? What about an adverbializer and a tense marker? What about a free lexical item and a tense marker? The list goes on. In the past, some have even suggested that grammar cannot be reconstructed, thereby declaring the impossibility of really knowing anything about the grammatical past of those languages which were not documented historically (and for which the process of change is thus not attested in actual historical data).
However, within grammaticalization theory — much of which was originally based on attested historical change — linguists have identiﬁed many consistent patterns in the evolution of grammar, including the almost universal directionality from independent, concrete lexical item to bound, abstract grammatical morpheme. This allows us to identify likely cognates and, from among these, to

viii

PREFACE

identify which is the likely source and which are innovative forms. We have also learned a great deal about the mechanisms of change, including reanalysis, analogical extension, and contact-induced grammatical change, and we can now recognize the sorts of modern grammatical patterns indicative of each process. This makes it possible for us to approach comparative data with real hope of reconstructing the sources of the great diversity seen in modern languages.
Interestingly, the case studies which form the database for grammaticalization theory have usually relied on either attested historical data or on internal reconstruction. In the process of internal reconstruction, the historical linguist identiﬁes a likely source for a given grammatical morpheme, usually a free lexical item with similar phonological shape and a concrete meaning which plausibly contains the seeds of the more abstract grammatical meaning of the morpheme in question. Evidence for plausibility is usually provided by analogy to some attested case in which a similar source form evolved into a semantically similar grammatical morpheme.
But an additional (and sometimes more important) test of plausibility is the reconstruction of a series of stages through which the formerly free lexical item evolved to become the bound morpheme attested today — that is, one must oﬀer a plausible scenario for how the evolution actually occurred. Again, in the absence of attested historical data showing which stages existed in a prior epoch of the language in question, one must become a typologist to motivate the evolutionary scenario. The usual recourse has not been to ﬁnd an entire analogous chain of stages in some attested historical case-study (such data are not readily available), but rather, for each individual stage, to identify a language in which an analogous construction exists. Thus, a chain of unrelated analogous constructions can be pieced together to illustrate what the evolutionary scenario might have been in the original language under investigation (and by analogy, one might assert that each of the languages which provides an analogous construction for the chain must be at its diﬀerent, respective stage of a parallel historical evolution). Insightful examples of the use of these methods on a broad scale can be found in works such as Heine (1993) and Bybee, Perkins and Pagliuca (1994). Comparative data has not usually been used at any point in the process.
My own work in reconstructing the history of Cariban grammar began with exactly this procedure: when I began studying the Panare language, even with my minimal understanding of the grammar of other Cariban languages, it was clear that a great deal of grammatical change had taken place somewhere to make Panare look so diﬀerent from, for example, Carib of Surinam and Hixkaryana. Utilizing the methods of internal reconstruction, I argued that the innovative clause types were the ones in Panare, and that they had come about

PREFACE

ix

via reanalysis of nominalizations into main clause tense and aspect (Gildea 1989a-b, 1993a-b). The internal evidence from Panare hinted at which patterns in other languages might be innovative and which conservative, but could not be conclusive for any language except Panare. Even for Panare, critics of the reconstruction questioned whether any conclusions could be drawn without bringing comparative evidence to bear as well (e.g. Derbyshire 1991; Álvarez 1995, 1996).
Attempts to argue with skeptics were further complicated by the fact that judgements about the plausibility of internal reconstructions are heavily theorydependent (cf. Givón’s contribution to this volume) and therefore require the skeptic to assimilate a large and growing body of literature on grammaticalization in order to properly evaluate the argumentation. And not all of those who read through the grammaticalization literature come away fully convinced that grammatical reconstruction itself is plausible: the posited stages of grammaticalization can be seen as mere hypotheses, plausibility judgements too dependent on intuition and poorly-deﬁned notions like “similar” and “analogous”.
Nonetheless, my original internal reconstruction made several predictions about the nature of posited source constructions in pre-Panare, and suggested directions of further change that might be expected in more innovative languages than Panare. When I gathered the available comparative data, I found exactly the predicted source constructions to be widespread throughout the family, and the anticipated further changes attested in a few languages (Gildea 1992, 1998). The existence of these comparative patterns constituted a reality check on the internal reconstruction and made it vastly more reliable in the eyes of skeptics. Further, the comparative patterns disconﬁrmed some of my earlier hypotheses about Panare grammar, and by revealing source morphology and constructions which had been lost in modern Panare, greatly enriched the grammaticalization scenario (e.g. the innovative progressive, reconstructed to the wrong source in Gildea 1989a, repaired in Gildea 1998 [ch. 12, especially cf p. 205, note 3). In sum, combining the methods of internal reconstrucion with comparative study of grammatical patterns yielded more satisfying results than internal reconstruction alone, both in my own eyes and in the eyes of skeptics.
The papers in this volume represent an attempt to bring together researchers working in grammaticalization theory, comparative linguistics, or both, with the database focused (as much as possible) on the indigenous languages of North and South America. These papers were presented in preliminary form at the Seventh Rice University Symposium on Linguistics, held at Rice University in Houston, Texas, March 26–29, 1997, entitled The Interface Between Comparative Linguistics and Grammaticalization Theory: Languages of the Americas. Participants in

x

PREFACE

the symposium addressed the issue of how to reconstruct grammatical patterns in languages with little or no attested historical data, in particular focusing on the perceived beneﬁts of using comparative data in this endeavor. The contributions by Aikhenvald, Chafe, Gildea, Heine, Meira and Mithun draw upon comparative data to reconstruct grammatical patterns in a way which apparently could not have been done in the absence of a comparative database; in contrast, the contribution by Givón oﬀers a spirited defense of internal reconstruction and the contribution by Greenberg reminds us that even comparative reconstruction does not arrive at the level of real “proof”.
In the remainder of this preface, I summarize the contributions of each chapter to the overall theme of the symposium; of course, each contains its own theoretical discussions, which are germane to additional issues in both historical and synchronic typology.
Aikhenvald looks at language change in both genetic and areal context: Tariana (Arawakan) shows two distinct types of grammaticalization, one in which serial verb constructions yield innovative auxiliaries, the other in which verb compounding leads to innovative new aspectual and switch reference verbal morphology. Comparative work shows that the serialization is common in the Arawakan family, but that the compounding is unique (in Arawakan) to Tariana. Inspection of other languages spoken in the area reveals that compounding is an areal phenomenon, and the Tariana compounding appears to have been created under the inﬂuence of Tukano, the sociolinguistically dominant language of the region. A ﬁnal issue which arises is that Tariana may be in the midst of the accelerated change which sometimes accompanies language obsolescence, such that the borrowed changes might be very recent arrivals, and are perhaps more productive than might otherwise be expected.
Chafe introduces the term ‘ﬂorescence’ to describe the sort of elaboration which takes place in two separate grammatical subsystems in Iroquoian. From a posited Proto-Iroquoian-Caddoan system that distinguished only Agent/Patient for nonspeciﬁc third persons (leaving speciﬁc third persons unmarked), third person verbal preﬁxes ﬂowered into a system of 3 genders and 3 numbers for speciﬁc third person agents and 3 genders and 2 numbers for speciﬁc third person patients. The second area of ﬂorescence was in noun incorporation, which, from arguably more modest beginnings in Proto-Iroquoian, became incredibly productive in the northern Iroquoian branch of the family. As Chafe argues, however, it appears that this productivity does not arrive at grammatical licence to incorporate any noun into any verb — apparently each combination is treated by speakers as a separate lexical item, so despite the great productivity of the

PREFACE

xi

system, it does not constitute a case of grammaticalization per se, but rather of proliﬁc lexicalization (a theme which arises again in Meira’s contribution).
Gildea reconstructs the constituency relations that give rise to ﬁve diﬀerent patterns of constituency in the verb phrases of modern Cariban languages. The most productive source is the Genitive-Noun relation, in which the noun is etymologically a nominalized verb and the possessor (the Genitive) is a notional argument of the verb root that has been nominalized. Diﬀerent sorts of nominalizations are possessed by diﬀerent notional arguments, so that after the nominalizations are reanalyzed as main clause verbs, the reanalysis yields SV/OV (absolutive-V) verb phrases, OV verb phrases, and in one construction, an AV verb phrase. One modern ergative clause type shows no evidence for a verb phrase; the inﬂected form of the verb in this clause type evolved from an unpossessible participle form of the verb. And ﬁnally, modern reﬂexes of the Proto-Carib verbal system indicate that we must reconstruct an OV verb phrase when A is third person, but no arguments internal to the verb phrase when A is not third person. This range of patterns and their sources could not have been discovered in the absence of comparative data, but it must be said that the individual reconstructions could as well have been done by internal reconstruction as comparative, especially in the absence of intermediate stages in the reanalyses.
Givón explicitly embraces internal reconstruction and provides theoretical arguments in favor of taking internal reconstruction seriously even in the absence of comparative data. He suggests that comparative reconstruction is not better, but simply diﬀerent, and that most important hypotheses about grammatical change in any given language can already be formulated on the basis of data internal to that language (an assertion which is consistent with my own experience). Thus, Givón eschews any data from related languages as he tackles his own “Mount Everest of Internal Reconstruction”: the layers of grammaticalization that have formed the complex verbal morphology of Tolowa (Athabaskan), with 15 preﬁx slots and one suﬃx slot. As he concludes, his reconstruction is “the best hypothesis compatible with the synchronic facts of the language, with Tolowa’s typological situation, and with what is known about universals of syntactic change and grammaticalization.” Yet even from the top of the mountain, Givón recognizes “It may well be that comparative evidence… may force us to modify this complex hypothesis in whole or in part.” If future comparative reconstruction is done on the Athabaskan verb complex, it will be interesting to see how well the hypothesis based on internal reconstruction holds up.
Greenberg argues against the position of the skeptic, the one who always wants more “proof” before accepting a hypothesis as interesting. He argues that what

xii

PREFACE

counts as “proof” in historical linguistics has changed dramatically over the years, and that we should therefore take with a grain of salt the current fashion in favor of fairly conservative methodology. While he explicitly addresses issues of genetic relatedness rather than reconstruction of grammar, his argument is relevant to the current collection in two ways: ﬁrst, if the goal of science is to seek “proof”, then comparative linguistics is suﬃciently short of the standard that the diﬀerence between Givón’s internal reconstruction and any comparativist’s comparative reconstruction will be insigniﬁcant, as neither will ever reach the standard of “proof”. But second, if the goal of science is to use the tools at hand to create the best picture possible of an object of study, then even though our reconstructions of grammar will never be more than hypotheses, they can nonetheless be very interesting hypotheses, worth the trouble of developing and testing to whatever extent possible. By this reasoning, internal and comparative reconstructions would both be equally valid undertakings (although not necessarily equally reliable!).
Heine, invited as an outside participant to this symposium otherwise solely of Americanists, provides a nice case-study of grammaticalization chains across related languages. Portmanteau morphemes indicating person, number and gender show diﬀerent clausal distribution in the languages of the Khoe (Khoisan) family, occurring variously as nominal clitics, free pronouns, nominal modiﬁers or within the verb phrase. As Heine shows, the chain begins with a marker only of speciﬁc third person pronouns, then becomes obligatory on third person pronouns and begins to occur optionally with demonstrative attributes, and ﬁnally arrives at a stage where the markers are obligatory with all pronouns and demonstrative attributes, and occur optionally with numeral attributes. As Heine explains, such cross-linguistic chains are interesting both because they allow us to more easily understand synchronic patterns in the related languages (i.e. “why” the languages that mark numeral attributes also mark demonstrative attributes), and also because they allow us to hypothesize certain historical reconstructions that are “beyond the scope of alternative methods of historical analysis” — simply put, looking only at the most advanced language in the chain, we might have guessed the source of the morphemes, but we could not have deduced the order in which they began occurring on diﬀerent parts of speech.
Meira discusses the evolution of an apparent Split-S system in several languages of the Cariban family. The systems are synchronically perplexing because, although verb morphology clearly identiﬁes two categories of intransitive subjects (SA and SO), none of the expected semantic features of such systems can be found in any of the languages in question (i.e. these are clearly not agent-patient or

PREFACE

xiii

active-inactive systems). Why would such a system have evolved in the absence of a motivating function? Using the methods of internal reconstruction, Meira shows that the source of most SA verbs is a morphological detransitive, which derives reﬂexive, reciprocal, and middle-type verbs from transitive verbs; for unknown historical reasons, the detransitive morpheme requires that S be indicated with the same (or similar) morphology as the A of transitive verbs. Following a typologically well-attested path, many of the reﬂexive verbs undergo semantic change, becoming a new series of middle verbs and replacing etymologically prior underived intransitive verbs. As this lexical innovation moves through the lexicon of each language, at some point it becomes suﬃciently frequent that there appears to be typical, productive agent-patient or active-stative system. But as Meira shows, this is simply an illusion created by the SA-like morphology which arrives as a travelling companion with the innovative middle verbs.
Mithun considers the contribution of comparative data to the question of how inﬂectional morphemes might change their order in the verbal complex, being “externalized” to a position outside of derivational morphemes. Mithun’s two case-studies come from morphology organized in typologically distinct ways, the templatic type organization of Iroquoian and the layered type organization of Eskimoan. In Yup’ik (Eskimoan), certain derivational suﬃxes (nominalizers) were reanalyzed as inﬂectional suﬃxes; those derivational morphemes which normally followed these aﬃxes were then “outside” of the inﬂectional marker. In the layered morpheme structure of Yup’ik, the nominalizers always had the option of occurring at the end of the complex of derivational morphemes, immediately preceding person-marking suﬃxes; similarly mood markers frequently occurred ﬁrst in the complex of inﬂectional suﬃxes, just following the derivational complex and just preceding the person-marking suﬃxes. Once the nominalizers were reanalyzed as mood, they simply stopped occurring earlier in the derivational complex and were reanalyzed from the last position in the derivational complex to the ﬁrst position (joining prior mood markers) in the ﬁrst position in the inﬂectional complex. In Cherokee (Iroquoian), an old causative/ instrumental nominalizer was reanalyzed as an inﬁnitive (perhaps under the inﬂuence of contact with Muskogean or Caddo). The problem is that while instrumental is an inner derivational suﬃx in the templatic-type morphology of Cherokee, the inﬁnitive is an outer inﬂectional suﬃx. The mechanism for the apparent “jump” again appears to be fortuitous adjacency: all the derivational suﬃxes which occur between the instrumental and the inﬂectional suﬃes are optional, and thus the innovative function (the inﬁnitive) would have frequently been adjacent to the other inﬂectional suﬃxes, providing the opportunity for

xiv

PREFACE

reanalysis of the same forms into two diﬀerent categories, the conservative internal derivational aﬃx and the innovative external inﬂectional inﬁnitive.
This collection showcases interesting descriptive and comparative work, all of which is based on ﬁeld work by the researchers in question. One hopes that in future research, more linguists will consider the beneﬁts of bringing both a comparative perspective and an understanding of grammaticalization to their ﬁeld work.

References
Álvarez, José. 1995. “Split ergativity and NP/pronominal aﬃx complementarity in Taurepán Pemón (Cariban)”. Presented at Summer Meeting of the Society for the Study of Indigenous Languages of the Americas, Albuquerque, NM, July 8–9.
Álvarez, José. 1996. “Construcciones progresivas en pemón e panare: ¿Nominalización o reanalisis?” Presented at IX Jornadas de Lingüística ALFAL-AsoVAC, Barquisimetro, November 17–23.
Bybee, Joan, Perkins, Revere and Pagliuca, William. 1994. The Evolution of Grammar: Tense, aspect and modality in the languages of the world. Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press.
Carlson, Robert (ed.). 1989. Proceedings of the Fourth Meeting of the Paciﬁc Linguistics Conference. Eugene, OR: Department of Linguistics, University of Oregon.
Derbyshire, Desmond C. 1991. “Are Cariban languages moving away from or towards ergative systems?” In Robert A. Dooley and J. Stephen Quackenbush (eds). 1–30.
Dooley, Robert A. and Quackenbush, J. Stephen. 1991. 1991 Work Papers of the Summer Institute of Linguistics, University of North Dakota Session, vol. 35. Dallas, TX: SIL.
Gildea, Spike. 1989a. Simple and Relative Clauses in Panare. University of Oregon, M.A. thesis.
Gildea, Spike. 1989b. “Structural correlates to functional change: A Panare nominalizer ‘surfaces’ as main clause aspect”. In Robert Carlson (ed.). 165–189.
Gildea, Spike. 1992. Comparative Cariban Morphosyntax: On the genesis of ergativity in independent clauses. University of Oregon, Ph.D. dissertation.
Gildea, Spike. 1993a. “The development of tense markers from demonstrative pronouns in Panare (Cariban)”. Studies in Language 17:53–73.
Gildea, Spike. 1993b. “SOV to VS in Panare: A historical explanation”. International Journal of American Linguistics 59:44–63.
Gildea, Spike. 1998. On Reconstructing Grammar: Comparative Cariban morphosyntax. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Heine, Bernd. 1993. Auxiliaries: Cognitive forces and grammaticalization. New York: Oxford University Press.

Areal typology and grammaticalization
The emergence of new verbal morphology in an obsolescent language
Alexandra Y. Aikhenvald
Australian National University
1. Introduction
The term grammaticalization has two meanings. In its ﬁrst sense it focuses on ‘how grammatical forms and constructions arise, how they are used’ and what are the most probable paths for their development; its second sense concerns the synchronic perspective, as ‘a syntactic, discourse pragmatic phenomenon, to be studied from the point of view of ﬂuid patterns of language use’ (Hopper and Traugott 1993: 1–2). Grammaticalization — which includes the development of grammatical items out of lexical ones — must be seen within the broad context of language change. One of the important factors which motivates language change is language contact, and especially diﬀusional phenomena within linguistic areas.
One of the most important problems in the analysis of grammaticalization concerns the relation between source and target, or input and output (cf. Heine, Claudi and Hünnemeyer 1991: 38). What are the factors which determine the source for the development of a particular grammatical category and how can these factors correlate with genetically inherited or areally diﬀused patterns? To what extent can the processes of language obsolescence aﬀect grammaticalization? Here I will try to answer these questions.
The purpose of this paper is twofold. First, I will describe the processes of grammaticalization in serial verb constructions and in verb compounds in Tariana, a highly endangered North Arawak1 language spoken by around 100 people in the linguistic area of the Vaupés, dominated by East-Tucano languages.2 This linguistic area is known for its rampant multilingualism due to exogamy

2

ALEXANDRA Y. AIKHENVALD

and the ensuing one-way diﬀusion of structural patterns from East-Tucano into other languages (Tariana and Makú). The processes of grammaticalization of compounded verb roots in Tariana are investigated from the point of view of their origin — genetic inheritance vs. areal diﬀusion. Then, I show how grammaticalization can be ‘sped up’ by intensive language contact and language obsolescence. That is, in the case of intensive areal diﬀusion language obsolescence goes together with ‘gain’, rather than with ‘loss’, of grammatical mechanisms — cf. discussion in Dorian (forthcoming).
Second, I consider several distinct processes of the grammaticalization of serial verb constructions and of compounded verb roots which lead to the emergence of new verbal categories in Tariana. These grammaticalization processes result in the creation of a new set of aktionsart, aspect,3 and switchreference clitics, on the one hand, and of auxiliary verbs and postpositions, on the other. They diﬀer both in their sources and in their end-products.
The paper is organized as follows. The grammatical proﬁle of Tariana is outlined in §2. The areal and genetic properties of serial verb constructions and of verb compounded structures in Tariana are discussed in §3. Three new verbal categories (Aktionsart markers, aspects, and switch-reference enclitics) which emerged in Tariana as the result of grammaticalization of compounded verb roots are looked at in §4. I also show how the same verb roots get grammaticalized in diﬀerent ways in verb compounded structures, and in serial verb constructions. Conclusions concerning typologically unusual properties of the new verbal morphological markers emerging in Tariana and of their grammaticalization patterns are given in §5.

2. Grammatical proﬁle of Tariana
2.1 Typological properties
Typologically Tariana is polysynthetic and predominantly head-marking, with a few elements of dependent-marking. It shares its head-marking properties with North Arawak languages, while the dependent-marking is the result of areal diﬀusion from East-Tucano languages (see Aikhenvald 1994). The open classes are nouns, verbs, and adjectives (which share a number of properties with nouns); adverbs are a semi-open class.
Tariana inherited a morphological distinction between active (SA) and stative (SO) intransitive verbs from Proto-Arawak. Active intransitive and transitive verbs obligatorily take cross-referencing preﬁxes to mark the A/SA constituent

AREAL TYPOLOGY AND GRAMMATICALIZATION

3

(following the terminology in Dixon 1994). Stative intransitive verbs have no preﬁxes. The constituent order is free, with a strong tendency towards verb-ﬁnal order.
2.2 Predicate structure in Tariana
2.2.1 The simple predicate Tariana has two types of predicates — simple predicates and serial verb constructions. Every verbal root belongs to either A/SA (preﬁxed) or SO (preﬁxless) type. Simple predicates have one preﬁx position and up to eight suﬃx positions. The preﬁx position can be occupied by cross-referencing preﬁxes (which mark person, gender and number), or negative ma-, or relative ka-. Tariana has a much more complicated verb structure than neighbouring North Arawak languages (Baniwa of Içana, Warekena, Bare: Aikhenvald 1995a, b; 1998).
The order of the eight suﬃx positions is as follows:
1. Thematic syllable 2. Causative -i-ta 3. Negative -kade 4. Topic-advancing -ni, Passive -kana, Purposive -hyu, Resultative -kanu 5. Verb-incorporated classiﬁer 6. Benefactive -pena 7. Reciprocal -kaka 8. Relativizers and nominalizers.
Suﬃxes may be followed by enclitics, which have the following properties: (a) enclitics can be omitted; (b) enclitics preferentially follow the verb, but they can also go on any focussed constituent; (c) most enclitics allow variable ordering; (d) enclitics longer than one syllable carry a secondary stress.
There is no productive verb compounding4 (unlike East-Tucano languages — see §3). A few compounded verbs get grammaticalized as markers of Aktionsart, aspect and sequencing enclitics. These are discussed in §§3–4. The most frequent and the functionally most unmarked order of enclitics is:
(I) mood (imperative, frustrative,5 conditional); (II) evidentiality fused with tense (see Appendix); (III) Aktionsart markers; (IV) aspect markers; (V) degree (augmentative, diminutive, approximative); (VI) markers of clause sequencing, some of which also mark switch reference.

4

ALEXANDRA Y. AIKHENVALD

An example of a simple predicate with three suﬃxes and two enclitics is given in (1):
(1) Na-mavi-ka-ita-kaka-sita-pidana. 3-be.bad-----.. ‘They have apparently transformed each other (into something)’.
2.2.2 Grammaticalization in serial verb constructions Tariana has productive verb serialization (Aikhenvald 1999c). These serial verb constructions (SVC) are known to include up to seven verbs. They are strictly contiguous (i.e. no other constituent can intervene between their components). Each component of a SVC is an independent phonological word, and they all receive the same inﬂection for person, number and gender of A/SA. All the components of a SVC have the same tense, aspect, mood, evidentiality and polarity value. The order of the components may be ﬁxed or not depending on the construction type. A SVC cannot consist of only stative verbs.
All enclitics tend to appear only once in a SVC, usually on the last component, with the exception of Aktionsart markers, referring to a SVC as a whole. The Aktionsart enclitics specify only the action of the component they occur on. See §4.1.
Serial verb constructions are of three types (cf. Durie 1997; Crowley 1987).
(1) A constructions consist of at least one verb from a closed class — a motion verb, a posture verb, a modal verb, or a verb of causation, and the other verb from an open class. An example of a directional SVC, with a motion verb, is shown in (2).
(2) Phe pi-nu. 2:enter 2-come ‘Come in!’
(2)  constructions consist of several verbs from open classes. They refer to a sequence of events (often including cause-eﬀect and goal-benefactive). (3)  constructions are those in which one verb is used to ‘modify’ the other. The ‘modiﬁer’ verb is often stative (see Aikhenvald 1999c).
The three construction types diﬀer in their argument sharing, constituent order, and, particularly, in how grammaticalization works. Symmetrical constructions undergo lexicalization and become idiomatic; the meaning of the whole can not always be recovered from the meaning of the parts — see Durie (1997).6 Asymmetrical and ambient SVCs tend to get grammaticalized.

AREAL TYPOLOGY AND GRAMMATICALIZATION

5

Their grammaticalization takes the following paths. Path (a) does not involve a change in word class, while (b) and (c) do. (a) A change from a full verb (albeit from a closed subclass) to an auxiliary in asymmetrical SVCs of the aspectual and modal types.
This is illustrated in (3); further examples are given in §4.3.2. In (3) the posture verb ‘stand’ becomes a durative marker in an asymmetrical SVC.

(3) Tuini-kene [na-hwa nema]. Bird-island 3-stay 3:stand ‘They stayed on the Bird Island for a long time’.

Other verbs of motion and posture tend to grammaticalize this way in serial verb constructions; thus, ‘go’ becomes an imperfective marker, and ‘sit’ denotes habitual. The verb ‘make, do’ gets grammaticalized as a marker of causation.
Similar processes of grammaticalization in asymmetrical SVCs are attested in numerous other parts of the world (see Bisang 1996, for East and Mainland South-East Asian languages; Dixon 1980: 430–1, for Australian languages; Emanatian 1992; Durie 1997). (b) A shift from a verb (albeit from a closed subclass) to a minor closed class (postpositions) in asymmetrical SVCs of directional type.
An example of this is -nukuitaka in (4). It is a fossilized form of -nuku ‘go down’. That it is a postposition and not a verbal form is shown by the fact that it takes the nominal possessive marker i- ‘indeﬁnite person’, which is almost never used with verbs. Note that motion verbs have to be transitivized to become subject to this grammaticalization (cf. the form -yeneta in (47) in §4.3.2).

(4) Diha i-nuku-ita-ka

alia-pidana

kaidoko.

he -come.down-- -.. beach

‘Near (lit. ‘-come down--’) it (their house), there was

a beach’.

This path of grammaticalization has been documented by Lord (1993) and Durie (1988).

(c) A shift from major open class (verbs) to semi-open class (adverbs) in
ambient SVCs. The SO verb khida ‘be ready’ can be used as an adverb, ‘ready, ﬁnished, over’, as shown in (5).

(5) Khida-naka di-sisa. ready-. 3:-end ‘It (the story) ends (lit. ready-end) here’.

All these grammaticalization paths agree with the principle of directionality of

6

ALEXANDRA Y. AIKHENVALD

category change involving serial verbs postulated by Lord (1993: 245), namely from major to minor category — (b) and (c) above — or from a full verb to an auxiliary, as in (a) above. They also conform to the unidirectionality of grammaticalization (increase in abstractness, development of grammatical meanings out of lexical meanings, and increase in ‘bondedness’ — Traugott and Heine 1991: 4–5). They involve change in meaning, but no phonological reduction (unlike the aspect and Aktionsart markers discussed in §4, grammaticalized components of serial verbs do not lose their primary stress) — contrary to the Parallel Reduction Hypothesis which suggests that ‘form and meaning covary’ in grammaticalization (Bybee, Perkins and Pagliuca 1994: 19–21; see §4.4).

3. Areal and genetic aspects of verb compounding and serialization in Tariana
3.1 Areal typology and grammaticalization
To date, the theory of grammaticalization has been oriented towards typological and cognitive treatment of mechanisms of grammaticalization. The study of areal diﬀusion and grammaticalization has been rather neglected, in spite of its obvious relevance to the ways in which grammaticalization may happen and the reasons why it occurs in one way and not in another way.
Linguistic areas are deﬁned in terms of shared structural features. Languages spoken within a linguistic area very often display a signiﬁcant degree of structural isomorphism (see Sherzer 1973: 760; Thomason and Kaufman 1988: 96). Diﬀusion of grammatical processes (termed ‘indirect’ diﬀusion by Heath 1978) may or may not be accompanied by some degree of lexical diﬀusion or actual borrowings (‘direct’ diﬀusion: Heath 1978). Linguistic areas diﬀer in the degree to which direct diﬀusion takes place. What is common to all of them is convergence of grammatical categories and the presence of calques (loan-translations). One would also expect processes of grammaticalization to operate in the same direction in genetically unrelated languages spoken within one linguistic area. Moreover, one might expect the diﬀusion of grammaticalization processes together with other grammatical categories within the same linguistic area. Indepth studies of patterns of areal diﬀusion of grammaticalization, alongside typologically established universal tendencies and cognitive explanations, can provide us with the reasons why a language has chosen this or that grammaticalization path.7
Tariana shares verb compounding and grammaticalization of compounded

AREAL TYPOLOGY AND GRAMMATICALIZATION

7

verbs with other languages spoken in the same area (East-Tucano and Makú), but not with closely related languages of the North Arawak family which do not belong to the Vaupés area. In contrast, the grammaticalization of serial verbs is shared with its North Arawak relatives.
The linguistic area to which Tariana belongs is characterized brieﬂy in §3.2. Verb serialization and verb compounding in languages of the area other than Tariana are considered in §3.3. Further evidence in favour of an areally diﬀused, and not genetically inherited, character of verb compounding in Tariana is given in §3.4.
3.2 The linguistic area of the Vaupés
Languages of three unrelated families are spoken in the basin of the Vaupés river (Brazil and Colombia): East-Tucano, North Arawak, and Makú. This area is characterized by mostly one-way areal diﬀusion from East-Tucano into the other languages (see Sorensen 1967; Aikhenvald 1996, 1999b).8
In particular, East-Tucano languages and Tariana display a striking number of structural similarities due to areal diﬀusion, mostly one-way, from EastTucano to Tariana. ‘Direct’ diﬀusion (i.e. lexical loans: Heath 1978) is almost non-existent, due to the inhibition concerning ‘language mixing’ viewed in terms of lexical interference and the borrowing of the phonological shape of morphemes (see Aikhenvald 1999b).
Other North Arawak languages spoken in the region of the Upper Rio Negro but outside the Vaupés area are Baniwa of Içana, Bare and Warekena of Xié.9
All speakers of Tariana are bilingual in at least one East-Tucano language (most often, Tucano). Tariana shows a considerable degree of structural isomorphism with East-Tucano languages — in phonology, grammatical categories, agreement patterns and semantics — though this isomorphism is not complete.
Tariana retains a considerable number of grammatical and lexical morphemes of Arawak origin and a predominantly suﬃxing word structure, with a limited number of preﬁxes, typical of the Arawak family. Tucano languages, in contrast, are entirely suﬃxing.
Another important characteristic of the Vaupés area (at least on the Brazilian side) is the growing endangerment of all languages other than Tucano.
Tariana is one of the most endangered of these languages (see Aikhenvald 1996). It is not spoken by children; even ﬂuent speakers of the middle generation speak Tucano between themselves.10 Language obsolescence has resulted in the loss of quite a few morphemes and categories of North Arawak origin. There are massive loan translations and grammatical calques from Tucano.

8

ALEXANDRA Y. AIKHENVALD

As I have shown elsewhere (Aikhenvald 1996), borrowed grammatical categories in Tariana verbs include evidentials fused with tense, a switchreference system, and a complicated system of moods and aspects. These are absent from other North Arawak languages of the region.

3.3 Verb serialization and verb compounding in the Upper Rio Negro

The data on verb serialization and verb compounding in the languages of three genetically unrelated families spoken in the region of the Upper Rio Negro — East-Tucano, North Arawak (other than Tariana), and Makú — are summarized in Table 1. Relevant examples are given in brackets.

Table 1. Verb serialization and verb compounding in North Arawak, East-Tucano and Makú

Serialization Grammaticalization Verb comin asymmetrical pounding SVC

Grammaticalization in verb compounding

A. North Ara- productive motion verbs > none

–

wak other than

aspect and direction

Tariana

markers; ﬁnish >

completive aspect

(6, 7, 8)

B. East-Tucano incipient (9) –

productive

motion verbs > directionals; other verbs > Aktionsart markers (10, 11, 12)

C. Makú

–

–

productive?

motion verbs become aspect and Aktionsart markers (Martins 1994)

Tariana (§§2–4) productive

motion verbs > not productive Aktionsart enclitics

aspect and direction

Switch-reference

markers and post-

enclitic

positions;

Aspect enclitics

other verbs > auxil-

iaries

A. Verb serialization in North Arawak languages other than Tariana. Productive verb serialization (not as all-pervasive as in Tariana) is found in all North

AREAL TYPOLOGY AND GRAMMATICALIZATION

9

Arawak languages. Verbs of motion tend to become aspect and direction auxiliary-like markers, and the verb ‘ﬁnish’ is used to express completive aspect. Grammaticalization of these verbs as aspect markers in asymmetrical SVCs in these North Arawak languages is illustrated with (6), from Bare; (7), from Warekena of Xié; and (8), from Baniwa of Içana.11

Bare:

(6) Hena [nihiwa-waka nu-vereka] nu-yaka-u abi.  1:go- 1-speak 1-parent- with ‘I am not going to talk to my mother’.

Warekena of Xié:

(7) [Ninapa-mia-hã

ni-buwuka-hã].

3:ﬁnish-- 3-cut-

‘They ﬁnished cutting (wood)’.

In (8), Baniwa -taita ‘ﬁnish’ is cognate with Tariana -sita discussed in §4.3.

Baniwa of Içana:

(8) [Šu-dzana Šu-taita]

Šua.

3:-cook 3:-ﬁnish she

‘She had cooked (tinamou birds)’.

B. Verb serialization and verb compounding in East-Tucano languages. EastTucano languages have incipient verb serialization; cf. (9), from Tucano (Ramirez 1997: 107).

(9) Sopé wehê bi’a-ya. door push close- ‘Close the door by pushing it’.

Verb compounding is very productive in East-Tucano languages where it yields aspect markers, valency changing markers and markers of Aktionsart. Not more than two verbs can cooccur in a compounded structure. Following the general suﬃxing tendency, the second component gets grammaticalized. Grammaticalization of verbs in verb compounding involves idiosyncratic semantic changes and phonological change — typically, the loss of the independent tone (Ramirez 1997 and p.c.).12
Verb compounding is used to express a variety of meanings, e.g. associated action in (10), from Barasano (see Gomez-Imbert 1988):
(10) ˜dahu.usa-tGsa13 .manioc.bread-be.last ‘make manioc bread for the last time’

10

ALEXANDRA Y. AIKHENVALD

Motion verbs tend to become directional markers, as in (11) (from Tatuyo: Gomez-Imbert 1988: 104).

(11) wéé-atí paddle-come ‘come paddling (towards the speaker)’

In (12), from Tucano (Ramirez 1997: 96), Aktionsart enclitic bi’a ‘everywhere, covering completely, closing up’ is the result of grammaticalization of the verb bi’a ‘close’ (also used in (9) above). It has no independent tone, unlike the verb in (9).

(12) Akôdo peha-bi’a-kã’-do’

weé’.

rain fall--- -.

‘The rain is falling everywhere’.

C. Verb serialization and verb compounding in Makú languages. Makú languages have no verb serialization. Verb compounds result in the development of numerous aspect markers. See Martins (1994) and Martins and Martins (1999), for details on Dâw and Hupda.
The data summarized in Table 1 show that it is likely that verb serialization in Tariana is genetically inherited. In contrast, verb compounding is most probably the result of a one-way areal diﬀusion from the East-Tucano languages.

3.4 Development of verb compounding in Tariana and loan translation

Verb compounds in Tariana and in East-Tucano languages show striking similarity in all ways but productivity. While verb compounding is extremely widespread in East-Tucano, in Tariana it is limited to a few cases discussed here, and in §4.14
Verb compounding in Tariana appears to be expanding, and to involve more and more verbs as the result of grammatical calquing (loan translations). Verb roots get spontaneously used as second components of verb compounds where they follow the fully inﬂected verb. The loss of preﬁxes follows the general tendency to lose non-Tucano categories in Tariana and to conform to a general suﬃxing tendency of the Tucano type.
An example of such an expansion is the way -yena ‘little by little’ was used by my consultants. This enclitic (loan translation of Tucano tiha ‘do little by little’) occurs with a very limited group of verbs (see §4.3). It was used spontaneously with the verb -nawa ‘stop raining’ (40); then the speakers remembered that it can be used with ‘burn’, ‘go out’ (ﬁre) and ‘speak’ (of a baby). Its use with other verbs — ‘go down’ (of a river in dry season), and ‘eat’ (real food: of

AREAL TYPOLOGY AND GRAMMATICALIZATION

11

a baby: 13) — were accepted only after one speaker, Olívia Brito, conscientious of the necessity of teaching me as much as possible, reminded the others of a corresponding construction with Tucano tiha ‘do little by little’ (14).15
Tariana
(13) Emite di-h\a-yena-naka. child 3:-eat-..-. ‘The child is eating little by little’.
Tucano
(14) Ba’ã-tiha-mi eat-do...-3::. ‘(The child) is eating little by little’.
Note that parallel grammaticalization patterns for the development of enclitics are not found in other Arawak languages of the region.
This suggests the following scenario for the development and grammaticalization of verb compounded structures in Tariana.
The second verb in two-verb sequences became fused with the ﬁrst one, losing its cross-referencing preﬁxes under the inﬂuence of East-Tucano patterns. These sequences were of diﬀerent kinds, and they probably gave rise to diﬀerent classes of verbal enclitics.
Reanalysis of verb sequences containing verbs with more ‘basic’ semantics such as -sita ‘manage; be able to’ and whyume ‘be last’ resulted in the creation of aspect and switch-reference markers. This reanalysis helps to ﬁll in the gaps arising from structural diﬀerences between Tariana and East-Tucano verb structure and to express categories absent from North Arawak but important in Tucano — e.g. aspect and switch-reference. For instance, -sita was used to match East-Tucano completive (Tucano -toha: West 1980: 56; see below §4.3.2 on -yena ‘little by little’).
Other verb sequences consisted of quite idiosyncratic combinations where a given verb could be used with just a couple of verbs, e.g. ‘cover the whole surface of something’, or ‘greet wagging one’s tail (for an animal)’, or ‘fall by being unstuck’. These idiosyncratic combinations are comparable to the way incorporation operates in, say, Boumaa Fijian (Dixon 1988: 227). Most verbs can incorporate only their prototypical objects, and some object-incorporated forms even acquire an idiomatic sense.
The second component gradually started losing its verbal status and got reanalyzed as an enclitic. Its combinatory possibilities increased (which agrees with the idea of ‘gain’, and not necessary ‘loss’ in grammaticalization; cf. Heine,

12

ALEXANDRA Y. AIKHENVALD

Claudi and Hünnemeyer 1991: 110–11, and also with the generally accepted correlation between productivity of a morpheme and its grammaticalization). It was still used as a modiﬁer because it still retained its independent stress and did not undergo any phonological reduction. The original verb was often quite rarely used anyway; with the development of an enclitic and in the context of general obsolescence of the language it tended to fall into disuse. This is a scenario for the development of Aktionsart enclitics out of rather rarely used verbs with ‘obscure’ semantics. Possibly, many if not all of the semantically idiosyncratic enclitics (discussed in the next section) could have been calqued directly from Tucano compounds — see §§4.1 and 4.4.
The diﬀerence between language change in ‘healthy’ and in endangered or obsolescent languages very often lies not in the sorts of change, which are typically the same (Campbell and Munztel 1989). Rather, it lies in the quantity of change, and in the speed with which the obsolescent language changes. As Schmidt (1985: 213) pointed out, “one distinguishing feature of the Dyirbal death situation is that vast amounts of change are compressed into a short timespan of about 25 years”. In the case of Tariana, the processes of grammaticalization of compounded verbal roots — which presumably had been taking place for a while during East-Tucano and Tariana coexistence in the same area before Tariana actually became endangered — are sped up by increasing loan-translations from Tucano in the context of obsolescence of Tariana and the reduction of spheres where it is used.
‘Direct calquing’ or loan translation and subsequent grammaticalization of the resulting structures has brought about an ‘unexpected’ phenomenon: rather than losing morphological markers as the result of language obsolescence, Tariana appears to be gaining new morphology (see the discussion on ‘gain’ rather than ‘loss’ of morphological complexity in obsolescent languages in Dorian forthcoming).

4. Grammaticalization of compounded verbs: the emergence of new verbal morphology
Verb root compounding in Tariana is restricted to a closed class of verbs, which can become further grammaticalized. This grammaticalization must be of a recent origin, since it has no parallels in the genetically related languages spoken in the same area (cf. §3), and it follows several lines. Some compounded verbs become grammaticalized as Aktionsart enclitics (§4.1). A switch-reference enclitic developed out of a grammaticalized compounded verb (§4.2), and three further

AREAL TYPOLOGY AND GRAMMATICALIZATION

13

Table 2. Aktionsart enclitics with corresponding verbs

Semantics

Enclitic

Corresponding verb

(i) Associated action 1. -d(h)ala ‘touch the surface, unsticking

or state

or scratching it’

2. -kolo ‘turn over, knock over’

3. -kusu ‘shake by pulling or pushing to

and fro’

4. -seku ‘slip all of a sudden’

5. -kawhi ‘do early in the morning’

6. -\u ‘feel a sharp pang of pain’ 7. -dhuli ‘bow; be folded into two’ 8. -ku ‘stay still, do something slowly or quietly’ 9. -su ‘jump up suddenly’ 10. -khuli ‘rub against someone in a friendly way, e.g. a cat’ 11. -khuli ‘slip out of hand’ 12. -holo ‘spill (water)’ 13. -liphe ‘stumble or occasionally step on something and let it go’ 14. -kaká ‘perform an activity without making noise’

-d(h)ala ‘come unstuck, peel, be scratched’ (SA) -kolo ‘roll, fall down’ (SA) -kusu ‘be shaken’ (SA)
-seku ‘slip over’ (SA) kahwi ‘wake up; be early in the morning’ (SO) – – –
– –
– – –
–

(ii) Type of object or location
(iii) Manner of action: breaking or cutting

1. -yali ‘spread over the ﬂat surface’ 2. -hala ‘spread on open space’

-yali-pana ‘cover’ (SA) hala ‘be open’ (SO)

1. -bosa ‘break by smashing; split’

–

2. -weri ‘crush by compressing (with a –

hit, or a bite)’

3. -wisa ‘break till it becomes ﬂat’; ‘crush –

by stepping on’

4. -taka ‘cut in two’

–

(iv) Directionals

1. -bili ‘inside’

–

2. -thepi ‘in(to) water’

–

3. -bisi ‘into ﬁre’

–

4. -tatha ‘up with force’

–

5. -yana ‘inside a trap’

–

6. -hu ‘away with a brusque movement’ –

7. -thani ‘to and fro’

–

8. -kha, -khani, -khã, -khana ‘away’

–

(v) Extent of action 1. -bala ‘in every direction, everywhere, –

or state

large extension’

2. -sa ‘tightly; very full’

–

3. -pana, -pã ‘all, the whole surface of’ –

4. -thuy ‘all, every’

–

14

ALEXANDRA Y. AIKHENVALD

verbs become grammaticalized as aspect markers (§4.3). The properties of the three groups of grammaticalized compounded verbs
are contrasted in §4.4.

4.1 The Category of Aktionsart enclitics

All Aktionsart enclitics share the following properties.
– They go on the main verb in an asymmetrical SVC. – In a symmetrical SVC they go on the verb they refer to. – Only a few of them undergo phonological reduction.
Aktionsart enclitics — listed in Table 2 — are rather idiosyncratic in their semantics and usage. Semantic and phonological changes correlating with diﬀerent stages of grammaticalization of Aktionsart enclitics are considered in §4.1.3. Only some of the Aktionsart enclitics have a corresponding verb in modern Tariana.
It can be easily shown that enclitics which correspond to an independent verb participate in a grammaticalization ‘chain’, from a fully independent verb to a grammatical element. The majority derive from an SA (active intransitive) verb, but a few derive from an SO (stative intransitive) verb. Their grammaticalization is discussed in §4.1.1.

4.1.1 The Grammaticalization of Aktionsart enclitics: an illustration
The stages (I to IV) of grammaticalization of enclitics, which come from an
active (SA) verb are shown in Chart 1, together with the number of the example which illustrates each stage.
Enclitics which come from a stative (SO) verb go through the same stages, with one diﬀerence: stages II and III are undistinguishable because stative verbs cannot take any cross-referencing preﬁxes (discussed in §2.2.1). See Chart 2.
The four stages of grammaticalization of an active intransitive (SA) preﬁxed verb are illustrated with -dhala ‘come unstuck, peel, be scratched’ (underlined).

(15) Diya-tupe-mia-pidana

di-dhala.

3::bark-:--.. 3:-come unstuck

‘Only the pieces of bark (of the tree) had come unstuck’.

(16) Diha di-kapi di-dhala-na

thui di-a.

he 3:-hand 3:-scratch-.. all 3:-go

‘His hands were scratched all over’.

AREAL TYPOLOGY AND GRAMMATICALIZATION

15

Chart 1. Grammaticalization of Aktionsart enclitics: from independent SA verb to an enclitic

Stages

Morphosyntactic status Phonological Position with respect

status

to (an)other verb root

I. Independent predi- full verb cate (15)

primary stress –

II. Component of a full verb symmetrical SVC (16)

primary stress precedes or follows

III. Modiﬁer verb (17) verbal root without primary stress precedes or follows cross-referencing preﬁxes

IV. Enclitic (18)

verbal root without secondary stress follows cross-referencing preﬁxes

Chart 2. Grammaticalization of Aktionsart enclitics (Group 1): from independent SO verb to an enclitic

Stages

Morphosyntactic status Phonological Position with respect

status

to (an)other verb root

I. Independent predi- full verb cate (19)

primary stress –

II. Component of a symmetrical SVC: associated state (20)

full verb

primary stress precedes or follows

III. Enclitic (21)

verbal root without secondary stress follows cross-referencing preﬁxes

(17) \amema diha i-phina-pe-nuku

dhipa,

two:. he -thigh--../ 3::grab

di-api

dhala di-pe-pidana.

3:-pull  3:-leave-..

‘He grabbed (the dead body’s) thighs, pulled them, unsticking

(them) from the body’.

16

ALEXANDRA Y. AIKHENVALD

(18) Halemi di-ni-d(h)ala

di-nuku-i-nipe

di-na

always 3:-do- 3:-fall-- 3:-.

‘He (the forefather) always let him (the son who turned into a ﬁsh)

come unstuck (as this type of ﬁsh naturally does) and fall (oﬀ the

canoe)’.

The three stages of grammaticalization of an Aktionsart enclitic derived from an
SO verb are illustrated with kahwi ‘wake up, be early in the morning’ in examples (19)–(21).

(19) Kahwi-tha

phia?

be awake-..: you

‘Are you awake?’ (a morning greeting)

(20) Kayu ma:vi-peni

i-sape-ka

kahwi.

so bad- 2-speak-.. be awake

‘You (people) say bad things when you are awake (or: early in the

morning)’.

(21) Halite

i-peya

ku:na

white:. -be ﬁrst ﬁsh.poison

na-tuda-kawhi-pidana

na-kasu nama.

3-crush-.-.. 3:go- 3:poison.ﬁsh

‘Before dawn they were going to crush the ﬁsh poison early in the

morning to poison ﬁsh’.

Most of these Aktionsart enclitics derive from verbs with very speciﬁc meanings. This seems unusual, since linguistic expressions serving as a source for grammaticalization tend to have fairly general meanings (Heine, Claudi and Hünnemeyer 1991: 38–9). We will return to this in §4.1.3.

Chart 3. Grammaticalization of Aktionsart enclitics: from a modiﬁer verb in an ambient SVC to an enclitic

Stages

Morphosyntactic status Phonological Position with respect

status

to (an)other verb root

I. Modiﬁer verb in an verbal root without ambient SVC (22) cross-referencing
preﬁxes

primary stress precedes or follows

II. Enclitic (23)

verbal root without cross-referencing preﬁxes

secondary stress follows

AREAL TYPOLOGY AND GRAMMATICALIZATION

17

Enclitics which are not employed as independent predicates (though they could have been, in the past — see §4.4) can be used as modiﬁer verbs in ambient serial verb constructions, or as enclitics. These two stages of grammaticalization are shown in Chart 3. Relevant examples are given in brackets.
The two stages of grammaticalization are illustrated by the directional -thepi ‘into water’ (underlined). In (22) it is used as a modiﬁer verb in a serial verb construction (in square brackets), and in (23) it is used an an enclitic to the verb.

(22) Upi-mi-a

i-dia i-a-pita

old-- 2-stay 2-go-

i-dia-mha

ihia di-a-pidana

2-stay-.. you: 3:-say-..

di-wasa di-wasa-tatha

3:-slip 3:-slip-..

[thepi

di-nuku

di-a].

. 3:-go.down 3:-go

‘You are staying where you were before, he said (the magic ﬁsh),

[and] he jumped up, jumped up and into the water he went’.

(23) Du-hwa-thepi

du-a du-aphua hu

3:-fall-. 3:-go 3:-dive 

du-nuku

du-a-pidana.

3:-go.down 3:-go-..

‘She (the girl transformed into a snake-woman) fell into water, dived

away and went down’.

This enclitic cannot be used as an independent predicate. (23a) is ungrammatical.

(23a) *Diha thepi. he . ‘????He went to water’.

However, unlike aspect, tense-evidentiality marking or sequencing enclitics, these enclitics can be used as a one-word response to a ‘clariﬁcation’ question. Such a question to clarify (22) or (23) could be (24). The one-word answer is (25). Note that the enclitic carries a primary stress; in this case it may be possible to consider it a modiﬁer verb rather than an enclitic (stage I in Chart 3).

(24) Kani-nihka

na?

where-.: 3:go

‘Where did they (the ﬁsh, or the girl) go?’

18

ALEXANDRA Y. AIKHENVALD

(25) Thepi. . ‘To water’.

4.1.2 The Semantics of Aktionsart enclitics Aktionsart enclitics fall into ﬁve semantic groups:

– manner of action, which involves breaking or cutting;
– directionals, which often combine information about the type of action, e.g.
brusque or forceful movement; – extent of action or state;16 – a broad category of associated action:17 to do something while doing
something else, or while something else takes place (two events taking place simultaneously), e.g. step on something and      ; do something , wag one’s tail while         (of an animal), etc; – type of object or location, e.g. clean the   of a garden, or put something onto a  .

There are quite a few restrictions on which verbs combine with which enclitics. The Aktionsart enclitics which refer to ‘breaking’ are used with verbs of breaking or cutting. The enclitic -holo ‘spill (water)’ is used with verbs which describe activities associated with water, e.g. -anu ‘take liquid out of a vessel, e.g. canoe or pan’, or -nua ‘spill liquid’. The enclitic -liphe ‘stumble or occasionally step on something and then let it go’ and -seku ‘slip all of a sudden’ are used only with motion verbs (e.g. -phua ‘step’, -kani ‘walk’).
Some Aktionsart enclitics are even more idiosyncratic in their meanings and consequently in the verbs they combine with. For instance, -khuli ‘rub against someone in a friendly way’ (e.g. a cat, or a dog) is apparently used only with the verb -peta ‘for an animal to wag its tail in greeting’. In (26), this verb is used to describe a ‘greeting’ customary for mythical snake-people.

(26) Di-simani-nuku

di-sata-ka-pidana

3:-son.in.law-../ 3:-greet--..

di-peta-khuli-pidana.

3:-wag.tail.in.greeting-....

.-..

‘Greeting his son-in-law, he (the snake-man) wagged his tail rubbing

against (the son-in-law) in a friendly way’.

The clitic -yali ‘spread over ﬂat surface’ occurs only with -ni ‘do’ or -wena ‘spill, scatter’, illustrated in (27).

AREAL TYPOLOGY AND GRAMMATICALIZATION

19

(27) Kaido-ne di-wena-yali

di-sue

sand- 3:-scatter-.. 3:-stay:

te di-\ale.

until 3:-disappear

‘He (the Moon) scattered (the spot) with sand until (the light)

disappeared’.

A certain degree of semantic change goes together with the grammaticalization of Aktionsart enclitics.
There is no semantic diﬀerence between a verb when used independently and when used as a component of a serial verb construction, i.e. between stages I and II in Chart 1 and 2. Enclitics which do have a corresponding verb may display a slight semantic diﬀerence between stages I and II (independent verb and a component of a SVC), on the one hand, and stages III and IV (modiﬁer verb and enclitic), on the other hand. This diﬀerence is best described as semantic speciﬁcation (in the sense of Traugott 1988) whereby one component of the source remains unaﬀected, but the meaning becomes more complex. This semantic speciﬁcation is largely unpredictable. For instance, kahwi as a verb means ‘wake up early in the morning’ and the corresponding enclitic means ‘do early in the morning’. The source verb hala means ‘be open’; the corresponding enclitic refers to spreading and extending onto an ‘open space’. In examples like (31) below it is used almost as a verbal classiﬁer, similarly to the ‘areal’ preﬁx in Athabascan languages (see Thompson 1993): it refers to the shape of the chest (as an ‘open surface’).
The same morpheme used as a verb (with cross-referencing preﬁxes) and as an enclitic or modiﬁer (without cross-referencing preﬁxes) diﬀer syntactically. A verb has its independent arguments, while the enclitic or a modiﬁer does not; consequently, the former describes the action of S (SA/SO), while the corresponding enclitic or a modiﬁer describe the action and may apply to an absolutive argument of the main verb — S, as in (28) or, more often, O, as seen in (18) above.

(28) Nu-phua-seku

nu-a-mahka.

1-step-.... 1-go-...

‘I stepped and slipped all of a sudden’. (cf. English ‘I went and

slipped down the stairs’)

The diﬀerence between the same root when used as a modiﬁer verb and as an enclitic (between stages III and IV in Chart 1; between stages II and III in Chart 2; and between stages I and II in Chart 3) relates to pragmatic organization of the narrative.
Compare (17) and (18) above, for enclitics with a corresponding active verb,

20

ALEXANDRA Y. AIKHENVALD

and (22) and (23) above, for those without. The diﬀerence between these pairs is determined by whether the particular
aspect of the action is contrasted to something else or not. The direction, or the manner of action, has to be contrastive for the verbal root to be used as an independent modiﬁer. Consequently, in (22) the direction, ‘into water’, is contrasted to the previous location of a magic ﬁsh on the surface; in (23) no contrast is implied. In (17), the action of ‘unsticking’ the thighs of a dead body is contrastive, because of its unusual character and the physical force it involved (as explicated by the narrator, Graciliano Brito). In (18), the kind of action (‘unsticking’) does not imply any particular eﬀort: the son of the ancestor turned into a sort of ﬁsh which usually clings to the bottom of canoes, and ‘unsticking’ them is what one usually does. Relatively independent morphemes — i.e., verbal modiﬁers — are more contrastive than dependent enclitics.
This ﬁts in with the notion of ‘pragmatic enrichment’ and ‘pragmatic bleaching’ in grammaticalization (see Hopper and Traugott 1993: 87). The more grammaticalized the element is, the less pragmatic eﬀect — such as contrastiveness — it carries. This is why enclitics are less pragmatically ‘marked’, that is, less contrastive, than the same morphemes used independently.
The enclitics which have no corresponding verb in the language undergo optional segmental phonological reduction in rapid speech; for example, ﬁnal -ana reduces to -ã. Thus, -khana ‘away’ becomes -khã, and -pana ‘all’ becomes -pã. Most of the verbs listed in Table 2 are rarely used and are not even familiar to all the speakers, e.g. -seku ‘slip over’ and -kusu ‘be shaken’. Speakers who do not know these verbs nevertheless use the forms derived from them as preﬁxless modiﬁers and enclitics (that is, as stages III and IV in Chart 1). The verb -yali ‘cover’ is rarely used by itself; it tends to be accompanied by the Aktionsart enclitic -pana ‘all’. The analysis of the text corpus also shows that the verbal roots listed in Table 2 are more often used as enclitics or preﬁxless modiﬁers (stages III and IV) than as verbs (stages I and II).
The fairly idiosyncratic meaning of most Aktionsart enclitics relates to the fact that they most probably arose as the result of calqueing Tucano verb compounding structures — see §3 and §4.4.
4.2 Grammaticalization of a switch-reference enclitic
One switch-reference enclitic, -whyume (pronounced as -hyume in rapid speech) ‘after.S(ame) S(ubject)’ is derived from a stative (SO) verb whyume ‘be over, be last.18 Chart 4 shows the two stages of its grammaticalization: from a full verb to an enclitic. Unlike stative verbs which become grammaticalized as Aktionsart

AREAL TYPOLOGY AND GRAMMATICALIZATION

21

enclitics (Chart 2), -whyume is not used in serial verb constructions. Its grammaticalization is more straightforward since it involves only two stages.19
(29) shows the use of -whyume as an independent predicate.

(29) Hı˜ whyume. this be.over/last ‘This is all (or: this is over)’.

In (30) the same root is used as a switch-reference enclitic. In rapid speech it undergoes phonological reduction and metathesis in the ﬁrst syllable and is pronounced as -hyume, or -yuhme.

(30) Inali na-mavi-ka-hyume

nhema-thani-pidana.

rat 3-be.bad:-. shout-..-..

‘After they transformed in rats, they started shouting around’.

One predicate can contain two diﬀerent enclitics which both come from grammaticalized verb compounded structures. In (31), one is Aktionsart -hala, and the other switch-reference -whyume. The latter occupies the ﬁnal position.

(31) Diha amana-pidana nawiki-ya-maka-nuku

he dolphin-.. person--.-../

di-\a-hala-whyume-pidana

nawiki

3:-put.on-. -.-.. person

di-ma:vi-ka

di-\u

di-nu-pidana.

3:-bad- 3:-go.up 3:-come-..

‘After the dolphin put on the human shirt (on the open surface of his

chest), he turned into a man and came upstream’.

The grammaticalization of the switch-reference same-subject enclitic from an
independent SO verb involves a certain degree of semantic speciﬁcation in the change of meaning from the full verb (‘be over, be last’) to the enclitic (‘after’).

Chart 4. Grammaticalization of switch-reference enclitic -whyume

Stages

Morphosyntactic status Phonological Position with respect

status

to (an)other verb root

I. Independent predicate full verb (29)

primary stress –

II. Enclitic (30, 31)

verbal root (phonologi- no independent follows

cally ‘eroded’)

stress

22

ALEXANDRA Y. AIKHENVALD

This enclitic is very frequently used. Unlike Aktionsart enclitics with a corresponding verb (Table 2), whyume is used as an independent verb and as an enclitic with the same frequency.
4.3 Aspect enclitics
4.3.1 General properties Aspect enclitics share the following properties which distinguish them from Aktionsart enclitics: (a) aspect enclitics usually go on the last component in an asymmetrical SVC, and not on the main verb; (b) aspect enclitics cannot function as independent words. (A complete list of verbal aspect enclitics in Tariana is given in Table 5, in the Appendix.)
Tariana has three verbs which, when compounded, get grammaticalized as aspect enclitics. These are given in Table 3.

Table 3. Aspect enclitics and corresponding verbs

Semantics of Form of Gloss

enclitic

enclitic

Verb Semantics as an Semantics as a part independent verb of an asymmetrical SVC

completed -sita action relevant to present

‘anterior’ -sita ‘manage’

‘ﬁnish’, ‘perfective’

not quite com- -mayã pleted

‘almost’ -mayã ‘cheat, forget, do ‘do wrongly’ a wrong thing’

short duration, -yena little by little

‘little by -yena ‘pass’ little’

‘pass from one state to another, exceed’; ‘up’

In §4.3.2 we examine diﬀerent routes of grammaticalization of the aspect enclitics which come from grammaticalized compounded verbs and show how they were grammaticalized. In §4.3.3 we contrast the three aspect enclitics.
4.3.2 Grammaticalization of aspect enclitics The grammaticalization chains from verb to aspect enclitics are parts of more complex structures. They involve polygrammaticalization – a situation wherein one morpheme is the source of more than one chain (see Heine 1992: 354; Craig 1991). A classic example of polygrammaticalization is the verb bang ‘go’ in Rama

AREAL TYPOLOGY AND GRAMMATICALIZATION

23

(Chibchan; Craig 1991). It has been grammaticalized as an argument marker and as a tense-aspect marker. Similarly, the auxiliary ‘be at’ in Ewe got grammaticalized as a preposition and as a present progressive/ingressive marker (Heine 1992: 355).
The three verb roots undergo polygrammaticalization, and grammaticalize diﬀerently in verb compounds and asymmetrical SVCs (see Diagrams 1–3). In verb compounds, they become aspect enclitics. In asymmetrical serial verb constructions they become auxiliary verbs. Only one of them, -yena, has also grammaticalized as a postposition in a directional serial verb construction.
These instances of polygrammaticalization can be accounted for by the ‘simultaneous’ functioning of the three verbal roots shown in Table 3 as enclitics and as components of asymmetrical serial verb constructions. Aktionsart enclitics do not undergo polygrammaticalization of this sort. They function as components of symmetrical serial verb constructions which are not grammaticalized in the same way (see §2.2.2).
Grammaticalization of verbs to aspect enclitics involves the development from an independent predicate and/or verb from an open class in an asymmetrical serial verb construction to an enclitic; this means a shift from a major open class (verbs) to a closed class of grammatical morphemes. This passage involves (a) change in meaning and (b) phonological change or reduction. This is illustrated with examples below.
As an independent verb -sita means ‘manage, be able’, as in (32).

(32) Ne-ma-sita-kade-sina. --manage--... ‘He ﬁnally did not manage (it) (was unable to do it)’.

The enclitic -sita is very widely used to refer to the action just ﬁnished and relevant at the moment of speech or of the narrative (cf. anterior, or perfect: Bybee, Perkins and Pagliuca 1994). In rapid speech this enclitic often undergoes irregular metathesis and phonological reduction -sta, wta, or -ewta. It is used with dynamic and stative predicates — see (33) and (34). When used with an asymmetrical serial verb construction, it refers to it as a whole, and goes on the last component, as in (33). SVCs are in square brackets.

(33) Diha kenadunu-ne uni-se [di-aphua-pidana

he turtle- water- 3:-dive-..

di-nuku

di-a-sita].

3:-go.down 3:-go-

‘The turtle had already dived down into the water

(lit. dive-go.down-go)’.

24

ALEXANDRA Y. AIKHENVALD

(34) Kay na-ni na-musu na nhe

so 3-do 3-go.out 3:go 3:enter

na-pidana

diha inali hiro-penu-ne

3:go-.. he rat grandmother-.-

du-yeka-pidana-sita.

3:-know-..-

‘So they (Tariana ancestors disguised as women) went out (of their

hiding) and came inside (the house where the Rat lived), the Rat’s

grandmother already knew (who they were)’.

The verb -mayã means ‘make a mistake, forget, cheat, do or say the wrong thing, almost do something’ as an independent verb — see (35).

(35) [Na-mayã na] na-inu-kasu. 3-do.wrong 3:go 3-kill- ‘They cheated in order to kill him’.

The enclitic -mayã is rather rare. It is mostly used with dynamic verbs (e.g. verbs of falling). Its meaning is ‘something negative almost happened but the agent (A/ SA) managed to prevent it’. What was done to prevent this has to be stated as well; and the whole is one serial verb construction — see (36) and (37). This enclitic undergoes phonological reduction in rapid speech, pronounced as -may«6.

(36) Ha-na-nuku

nu-hweta-mayã

this-.-../ 1-fall:-

nhupa-ka.

1:grab-..

‘I almost dropped this long one (pen) but managed to grab it’.

(37) Wadena nu-\ami-mayã nu-mi\a nuka. just.about 1-die- 1-ﬂoat 1:arrive ‘I almost died (by drowning) (but) managed to ﬂoat’.

As an independent verb -yena means ‘pass, go past’ — see (38).

(38) Wasã ita-whya

wa-yeneta hipa-nuku

let’s canoe-. 1-pass: rapids-../

pa-yena-kasu.

--

‘Let’s make the canoe pass (over the rapids) to pass the rapids’.

Like any motion verb, it is often serialized (Aikhenvald 1999c). In (39) it is used as the main verb in an asymmetrical SVC.

AREAL TYPOLOGY AND GRAMMATICALIZATION

25

(39) iya [di-yena di-a]. rain 3:-pass 3:-go ‘The rain passed.’ (i.e. went past; it did not rain at all after all)

The enclitic -yena ‘little by little’ is used with just a handful of verbs (‘stop raining’, ‘burn, go out’ (of a ﬁre), ‘go down’ (of a river in dry season), ‘speak’ (of a baby), ‘eat’ (real food: of a baby). Its means ‘doing something little by little, passing from one state to another’ — see (40) and (41). See §3.4. In rapid speech it is reduced to -y6na, or -yna.

(40) Iya di-nawa-yena-naka. rain 3.-stop.raining-..-. ‘The rain is stopping little by little passing (one sees fewer and fewer drops)’.

(41) uni [di-wa-yena

di-nuku

di-a].

water 3:-come in-.. 3:-go.down 3:-go

‘Water dries out little by little’ (lit. goes down into the river)’.

Another, independent, grammaticalization process involves grammaticalization of verbs from a closed class within an asymmetrical serial construction. The three verbs behave in a slightly diﬀerent way. The verbs -sita and -mayã get grammaticalized as auxiliaries only, while -yena also becomes a postposition. This path follows the principles of grammaticalization in asymmetrical SVCs outlined in §2.2.2. It involves change in meaning, but not in phonological shape.
In aspectual serial verb constructions, -sita means ‘ﬁnish’, and often just marks completed action, similar to perfective.
Unlike the enclitic -sita, the corresponding verb in asymmetrical constructions is used only with dynamic predicates. See (42).

(42) Pune-nuku

di-api

di-waketa

straw-../ 3:-pull 3:-join:

[di-tutu-pidana

di-sita

dita]

3:-tie-.. 3:-ﬁnish 3::take

di-anapita.

3:-put.on.back:

‘He pulled and joined the bits of straw, ﬁnished tying it up, took it

and put it on his back’.

The ‘anterior’ meaning of enclitic -sita is sometimes very close to that of perfective or completed -sita as a component of an asymmetrical aspectual SVC. This sometimes resulted in an almost complete interchangeability of the enclitic

26

ALEXANDRA Y. AIKHENVALD

and the SVC. See (43).

(43) Naha \umuku na-ina-kahwi-pidana

[na-ina

they mash 3-drink--.. 3-drink

na-sita] (or: na-ina-sita) nesa

3-ﬁnish (or: 3-drink-) 3:go.upstream

na-pidana.

3:go-..

‘They drank the mash early, they ﬁnished drinking (or: they had

drunk) and went upstream’.

The development of anterior to perfective is well attested in the languages of the world (see Bybee, Perkins and Pagliuca 1994: 81–8; 94–7). This ‘polysemy’ of sita may be indicative of its comparatively recent development as an enclitic from an independent verb.
The causativized version of the verb -mayã is often used in asymmetrical serial verb constructions of the modal type in the meaning ‘pretend to do something’ (but not do it), ‘almost do something’. See (44).

(44) [Dima

di-maye˜

di-hwa-pidana].

3::sleep 3:-do.wrong: 3:-sit-..

‘He pretended that he was asleep (sitting) (but he was not)’.

As the closed-class component of an asymmetrical SVC the verb -yena has the following meanings:

– pass from one state to another, become:

(45) [Khenunikana na-yena] pa-h\a-nipe sede-ka. unhappy 3-become -eat- :- ‘They became unhappy, because there was no food’.

– ‘exceed’

This is the most frequent one. It is the only way Tariana has to express superlatives.

(46) Makana-ka-mha

[nu-sape-ka

nu-yena].

dry--.. 1-talk- 1-exceed

‘I am thirsty because I have talked too much’.

Similarly to other motion verbs which regularly get grammaticalized as postpositions in asymmetrical directional SVCs, -yena has to be transitivized (see §2.2.2). As a postposition it means ‘ahead of’, see (47). Criteria for the postpositional status of these fossilized verbal forms are given in §2.2.2, for (4).

AREAL TYPOLOGY AND GRAMMATICALIZATION

27

(47) Pa-pulikuda yamina i-yeneta-ka-pidana

pima.

one-. along -pass:--.. sound

‘There was a sound ahead of (lit. -pass:-) the long side

of the hill’.

4.3.3 Grammaticalization of the three aspect enclitics: a comparison Of the aspect enclitics described in the preceding section, only -sita is frequently used. The independent verb -sita is equally frequent. The other two enclitics, -mayã and -yena, are rarer than the corresponding verbs. The use of the clitic form often depends on the choice of a particular main verb. All three aspect enclitics undergo phonological reduction in rapid speech.
Semantically, the passage from independent verb to enclitic involves metaphorical extension and change towards a more abstract meaning, which is what is expected in grammaticalization processes (see Nikiforidou 1996; Heine, Claudi and Hünnemeyer 1991: 41ﬀ.)20
All three aspect enclitics participate in polygrammaticalization as illustrated in the following diagrams (relevant examples are indicated with numbers).

independent verb -sita ‘manage, be able to’, ‘finish’ (in SVC)

aspect enclitic -sita, -ewta, -wta ‘anterior’ (33, 34) auxiliary verb -sita ‘perfective’ (42, 43)

Diagram 1: Polygrammaticalization of -sita

independent verb -mayã ‘make mistake, forget, do/get wrong, almost do’

aspect enclitic -mayã, -m$y6˜ ‘almost happen’ (36, 37)
auxiliary verb -mayã ‘pretend’ (44)

Diagram 2: Polygrammaticalization of -mayã

28

ALEXANDRA Y. AIKHENVALD

independent verb -yena ‘pass, go past’

aspect enclitic -yena, -y6na, yna ‘do little by little’ (40, 41) auxiliary verb -yena ‘become’ (45)
auxiliary verb -yena ‘exceed’ (46)
postposition -yeneta (from -yena-ita) ‘ahead of’ (47)

Diagram 3: Polygrammaticalization of -yena ‘pass’

4.4 Grammaticalization of compounded verbs in Tariana: a comparison
Grammaticalization of compounded verbs in Tariana results in creation of new verbal enclitics of three groups: Aktionsart markers, switch-reference, and aspect. The three diﬀer in their semantics and in phonological properties: Aktionsart clitics undergo suprasegmental reduction (they lose the primary stress) and little segmental reduction, while other enclitics undergo segmental reduction. The three groups of enclitics also diﬀer with respect to their frequency, and the ways in which they undergo polygrammaticalization.
However hard it is to compare semantic changes from independent verb to enclitic, it seems intuitively clear that switch-reference and aspect enclitics undergo more change than Aktionsart enclitics. In fact, the meaning of some Aktionsart enclitics is sometimes almost exactly the same as that of the independent verb. This is never the case with the other groups.
Another point of contrast is frequency and general use of an enclitic and of a corresponding verb. With Aktionsart enclitics, the verb is less frequently used than the enclitic; some verbs are plainly rare. The switch-reference enclitic is used as frequently as the verb. Aspect enclitics diﬀer in this respect: the enclitic -sita is as frequently used as a verb; -mayã and -yena are more often used as verbs than as enclitics. These properties are summarized in Table 4 below.
Table 4 shows that the grammaticalization of the three verbal categories followed rather diﬀerent paths. It follows from the previous discussion and from the comparative data in Table 4 that the Parallel Reduction Hypothesis suggested in Bybee, Perkins and Pagliuca (1994: 19–21) which predicts a simultaneous semantic and phonological reduction in grammaticalization does not always work.
The three types of enclitics also diﬀer in terms of ‘sharing arguments’ with the main verb. The switch-reference enclitic whyume marks the same subject. Aspect enclitics also refer to the same subject as the verb. In contrast, Aktionsart enclitics describe the action of O or S.

AREAL TYPOLOGY AND GRAMMATICALIZATION

29

Table 4. A comparison of verbal enclitics from compounded verbs

Aktionsart Aspect

Switchreference

Semantic change

little

Segmental reduction or change

little

Suprasegmental reduction (loss of primary stress) yes

Polygrammaticalization

no

Source verb used as frequently as the enclitic

no

Infrequent use and obsolescence of the source-verb yes

Rare use of the enclitic but not of the source-verb no

yes

yes

yes

yes

yes

yes

yes

no

yes (-sita) yes

no

no

yes (-mayã, no

-yena)

Another unusual property of grammaticalized verb roots in Tariana is the way in which these roots are chosen. It is generally accepted that ‘the source concepts’ in grammaticalization are of frequent and general use, this being due to their being ‘fundamental’ elements. They can often be deﬁned as belonging to the basic level of categorization, like verbs of physical state such as ‘sit’, ‘stand’ and ‘lie’ (Heine, Claudi and Hünnemeyer 1991: 33). It is also accepted as a general rule that ‘categories of the subordinate level are unlikely to serve as source concepts’ (Heine, Claudi and Hünnemeyer 1991: 33). Or, as Sweetser (1988: 402) puts it: ‘The generalization seems to be that lexical items naming subordinate level categories are not the ones likely to be grammaticized; and a cursory examination of the semantically commonest auxiliary verbs (‘have’, ‘be’, ‘take’, ‘give’, ‘make’, ‘come’, ‘go’) certainly includes no subordinate-level items’.
The data from Tariana described above show that the grammaticalization of compounded verbs in most cases scarcely ever involved any basic-level or fundamental elements. The grammaticalization of Aktionsart enclitics involves such speciﬁc and quite ‘subordinate level’ concepts as ‘come unstuck, peel, be scratched’, ‘roll over’, ‘be shaken’, ‘cover’, ‘wake up’ and ‘be open’.21 The verbs which became grammaticalized as aspect markers (‘manage’, ‘cheat’, ‘pass’) and as a switch-reference enclitic (‘be last’) are also more semantically ‘speciﬁc’ than predicted by Sweetser. In contrast, ‘basic level’ verbs, such as ‘come’, ‘go’, ‘leave, go out’, ‘stand’, ‘sit’, ‘make, order’, become grammaticalized as auxiliarylike markers in asymmetrical serial verb constructions (§2.2.2 (a)); verbs of motion became grammaticalized as postpositions (§2.2.2 (b)). This shows that there are diﬀerent mechanisms of grammaticalization at work within this one language.
From this evidence it is important to point out that while some languages tend to grammaticalize basic lexical items, others grammaticalize more speciﬁc

30

ALEXANDRA Y. AIKHENVALD

ones. These preferences may be accounted for by the organization of the lexicon in a given language: while some languages have numerous general lexical verbs, others tend to have more ‘speciﬁc’ ones (as pointed out by Bernd Heine, p.c.). This distinction between ‘general’ and ‘speciﬁc’ corresponds roughly to Dixon’s opposition between ‘nuclear’ and ‘non-nuclear’ verbs (Dixon 1982: 73). Thus, for instance, English does have the nuclear or general verbs ‘break’ and ‘carry’. These verbs do not involve any particular speciﬁcation of the manner in which the breaking or carrying is done (whether it is splitting, or smashing, or breaking in two; or whether the object is carried on one’s shoulder, or on one’s back, or in a basket, etc.). In contrast, Tariana has a dozen verbs which refer to breaking and a dozen more for carrying which specify the manner in which the action is performed. A sentence like ‘he broke a piece of wood’ or ‘she carried a basketful of bananas’ must obligatorily specify the manner of breaking or of carrying. Thus, in a language like Tariana, the grammaticalization of semantically highly speciﬁed lexical verbs can be considered a logical consequence of the inherent semantic structure of the lexicon. Consequently, knowledge of the semantic organization of lexicon is crucial for a linguist’s ability to hypothesize which lexical items might be likely to take part in the creation of new grammatical morphemes.
A further observation is in order. Aktionsart enclitics and aspect enclitics which result from grammaticalization of compounded verbs are calques from Tucano. All the Aktionsart enclitics in Tariana which do have corresponding verbs also correspond to compounded verbs in Tucano, e.g. Tariana -kawhi ‘do early in the morning’, kawhi (SO verb) ‘be early in the morning, wake up’, Tucano wã’ka ‘do something early in the morning’ (Ramirez 1997: 183). Consider the almost complete correspondence of Tucano toha ‘do already; have done already’, and Tariana -sita ‘anterior’ in the following example:
Tariana:
(48) nu-h\a-ka-sita. 1-eat-..- ‘I have eaten’.
Tucano (Ramirez 1997: 97):
(49) ba’â toha-apG. eat -..:.. ‘I have eaten’.

AREAL TYPOLOGY AND GRAMMATICALIZATION

31

However, as we have seen in §3.3, in Tucano compounded verbs are an open class while in Tariana grammaticalized verb compounding is restricted.
Those enclitics which do not have a corresponding verb in modern Tariana are also exact translation equivalents of Tucano compounded verbs. For instance, the translation equivalent of Tariana -weni ‘crush by compressing’, with no verbal equivalent, is Tucano verb tı˜’a (Ramirez 1997: 179).
It is possible that other aspect enclitics in Tariana for which there are no corresponding verbs in the modern language also go back to compounded verbs, and ultimately, to calqueing from Tucano; for instance, Tariana -daka ‘noncompleted, on-going action: yet, still’ corresponds to Tucano compounded verb dı˜’i (Ramirez 1997: 97) ‘yet’, and -niki ‘completed’ corresponds to Tucano pe’o ‘do completely’.22
An unusual property of Tariana is that diﬀerent verbs are grammaticalized in serial verb constructions and in verb compounding structures. While grammaticalization within serial verb constructions follows familiar patterns, verb compounding structures in most cases involve grammaticalization of quite diﬀerent verbs. In addition, when the same verbs undergo grammaticalization in serial verb constructions and in compounded structures, the results are quite diﬀerent.

5. Conclusions
Verb serialization in Tariana is likely to be genetically inherited. In contrast, verb compounding is most probably the result of a recent one-way areal diﬀusion from East-Tucano languages (especially Tucano, the main lingua franca of the area). Grammaticalization in serial verb constructions involves verbs with more general, ‘superordinate’ semantics (in the sense of Sweetser 1988; see §4.4), while grammaticalization in verb compounded structures is unusual in that it involves verbs with quite ‘speciﬁc’ semantics.
A few verbs grammaticalize in more than one way (i.e. undergo polygrammaticalization). One grammaticalization path conforms to a genetically inherited pattern; the other one follows an areally diﬀused direction.
Grammaticalization in serial verb constructions follows typologically wellattested paths. In contrast, grammaticalization in verb compounded structures — which results in the creation of new and recent verbal morphology — is somewhat unusual. The majority of verbs which get grammaticalized this way have a very speciﬁc meaning — contrary to our general expectation that only elements with a ‘basic’ meaning become grammaticalized. The roots of this unusual phenomenon may possibly lie in the organization of Tariana lexicon. Also, the

32

ALEXANDRA Y. AIKHENVALD

productivity of verb compounding in Tariana appears to be increasing due to the growing number of calques (loan-translations) from Tucano in the situation of language obsolescence.
Verb root compounding and the grammaticalization of compounded verb roots in Tariana are due to massive one-way grammatical diﬀusion into an obsolescent language spoken in a multilingual environment. The unusual interaction of genetically inherited and areally diﬀused patterns accounts for the fact that grammaticalization processes in this language are somewhat unusual from the point of view of generalizations and hypotheses made in the literature on grammaticalization.
This study has shown how the rise of new verbal morphology in a language, out of grammaticalized verb roots, can be inﬂuenced by interaction of the four factors:
(i) general typologically well-attested and natural tendencies; (ii) genetic inheritance manifested in patterns shared with genetically related
languages; (iii) areal diﬀusion; (iv) language obsolescence.
The interaction of these four factors in a situation of obsolescent languages spoken in a situation of intensive monolateral diﬀusion from dominant languages adds to the unpredictability and uncontrollability of grammaticalization in languages which “change syntactically and semantically according to their own inner, inscrutable laws” (Matisoﬀ 1991: 447).

Notes
1. The genetic unity of Arawak languages was ﬁrst recognized by P. Gilij in 1783. Though there are no doubts as far as genetic aﬃliation of the majority of Arawak languages, there are, however, still problems concerning internal genetic relationships within the family and possible genetic relationships with other groups. The denomination of the family has been the subject of a controversy between Arawak scholars for some time. The majority of native South American scholars use the name Arawak (Aruak) to refer to the group of unquestionably related languages. However, a number of scholars, mainly North-Americans, prefer to use the term Arawak(-an) to refer to much more doubtful genetic unities of a higher taxonomic order, and reserve the term Maipuran, or Maipurean for the group of undoubtedly related languages (see Payne 1991). Here I disregard these attempts, and keep the denomination Arawak for the family of deﬁnitely related languages, following Rodrigues (1986). Also see Aikhenvald (1999a).
2. This paper is based on data obtained during ﬁeldwork on North Arawak and East-Tucano languages of the Upper Rio Negro, Brazil, in 1991–1997. My text corpus of Tariana consists of appr. 700 pp. (135 stories of diﬀerent genres). I am grateful to all my teachers of the

AREAL TYPOLOGY AND GRAMMATICALIZATION

33

indigenous languages of the Amazon — Cândido, José, Jovino, Graciliano, and Olívia Brito (Tariana), Humberto Baltazar and Pedro Ângelo Tomas (Warekena), the late Candelário da Silva (Bare), late Marcília Rodrigues, Afonso, Albino and João Fontes, Celestino da Silva and Cecília and Laureano da Silva (Baniwa), the late Tiago Cardoso (Desano, Piratapuya) and Alfredo Fontes (Tucano). I am very thankful to R. M.W. Dixon, Nancy Dorian, Bernd Heine and Spike Gildea for useful discussion and comments, and to Henri Ramirez and Paul Frank for assistance in providing materials on Tucano languages. My warmest thanks go to Silvana and Valteir Martins without whose help this work would not have been possible.
Abbreviations used are:  — agentive;  — animate;  — anterior;  — auxiliary;  — causative;  — classiﬁer;  — complementizer;  — completive;  — demonstrative;  — diminutive;  — Diﬀerent Subject;  — existential;  — feminine;  — feminine;  — frustrative;  — impersonal;  — indeﬁnite;  — inferred;  — instrumental;  — intentional;  — interrogative;  — locative;  — masculine;  — negative;  — non-feminine;  — nominalizing; . — non-visual; . — non subject case;  — plural;  — possessive;  — present;  — prolonged action; . — recent past; . — remote past;  — sequential;  — singular;  — Same Subject;  — serial verb construction;  — thematic; ../ — topical non-subject;  — visual.
3. I use aspect in a fairly narrow sense, to refer to the temporal composition, or completion of event. The term Aktionsart is used to refer to other characteristics of actions and states, e.g. do repeatedly, do quickly.
4. It has been argued that verb root compounding is the same as root serialization; see Durie (1997) for a uniﬁed account of verb serialization and root compounding. I have argued elsewhere (Aikhenvald 1999c) that in Tariana the two are synchronically diﬀerent mechanisms.
5. Frustrative mood refers to the action carried out in vain, or with no result.
6. An example of such a lexicalized symmetrical SVC is: dima nih\a di-emhani-pidana kuphenuku (3::sleep 3:eat 3:-walk-.. ﬁsh-../) ‘He went ﬁshing for several days’ (lit. he slept, ate, walked with respect to ﬁsh).
7. The role of areal typology and grammaticalization has been to a certain extent underestimated, perhaps, because of the complexity of the two. These issues are in fact discussed in some wellknown works on areal typology, such as Heath (1978) but not overtly in the context of grammaticalization. Recently, an excellent study of areal patterns of grammaticalization in nouns and in verbs in East and Mainland South East Asian languages has been undertaken by Bisang (1996). He showed that paths of grammaticalization are indeed an important part of areal phenomena; and that the areal diﬀusion is a viable explanation for the emergence of grammaticalized categories shared by genetically unrelated languages spoken in one area. Shared grammaticalization paths in East and Mainland South East Asian languages include development of classiﬁers out of nouns, demonstrative adverbials or relative markers out of nouns; development of resultative verbs to tense-aspect-mood markers, conjunctional verbs and directional verbs, and the development of causative verbs to conjunctional verbs (Bisang 1996: 555–563; 575–578). All these grammaticalization paths are typologically well-founded and very plausible; each of them is attested elsewhere in the world, and it is the whole set that characterizes the entire old linguistic area of East and Mainland South East Asian languages. Also see Matisoﬀ (1991).
8. Dâw, Hupda and Yuhup (the Makú languages spoken in the Vaupes linguistic area) also show a few patterns of one-way diﬀusion from East-Tucano languages, especially when compared with Makú languages spoken outside the area. For instance, their predominantly suﬃxing

34

ALEXANDRA Y. AIKHENVALD

structure, as compared to a combination of suﬃxing and preﬁxing in Nadëb (a Makú language spoken outside the area), can be attributed to Tucano inﬂuence (see Martins and Martins 1999). The one-way character of this diﬀusion can be accounted for by the fact that speakers of Makú languages used to know at least one Tucano language, but not vice versa.
9. Of these, Baniwa and Tariana are very closely related; they share c. 80% of their lexemes. However, their grammatical structure is very diﬀerent.
10. The ‘etiquette’ of the Vaupés demands that children speak their father’s language with their father and his brothers; the middle generation speakers of Tariana (aged from over 45 to 25) obey this rule. It is probably not the case that they acquired the language imperfectly; rather, the spheres where it is currently used are drastically reduced.
11. The same tendency is also found in other North Arawak languages spoken to the north of the Upper Rio Negro region, in Colombia, e.g. Piapoco (Klumpp 1995: 179–80).
12. As observed by Ramirez (1997), some compounded verbs tend to undergo further phonological simpliﬁcation, e.g. the loss of root-initial vowel, e.g. baa-apé ‘play to swim’ (swim-play) becomes baa-pé.
13. The symbol ~ stands for nasalization as a prosodic feature in Tucano languages.
14. There is only one straightforward example of a compounded verb root which consists of two SA verb roots in my corpus. Tariana has two lexical verbs: -\u ‘to go up, climb’ and -penu ‘to make noise, move with a noise’. The verb -\u-penu- is used in the sense of ‘to tremble; lit. go up and make noise’. In this case, the compounded verb root -\u-penu has no cross-referencing preﬁxes, the use of which is obligatory when any SA verb is used as an independent predicate. This type of compounding is semantically comparable to symmetrical serial constructions.
15. This verb is widely used in verb compounds in Tucano, with the meaning of small extent of action (‘do, or happen little by little’) — see Ramirez (1997: 105–6).
16. These overlap semantically with augmentative -pu which goes onto a diﬀerent slot in the verb structure — see §2.2.1. The augmentative, basically, is used to mean ‘do a lot’, or ‘really do, do indeed’.
17. The term ‘associated action’ was coined under the inﬂuence of the term ‘associated motion’ used by Australianists; see Koch and Simpson (1995). Its basic meaning is ‘doing something while moving somewhere’; cf. ‘coming’ and ‘going’ aspects in Yidiny (Dixon 1977: 219).
18. Other switch-reference enclitics are given in Table 6, in the Appendix.
19. The verb whyume is often used as a modiﬁer, e.g. whyumite (whyume-ite) (‘be last-:) ‘the last one’.
20. Another problem is the comparison between the output of diﬀerent grammaticalization processes illustrated in Diagrams 1–3. The passage from independent verb to postposition probably yields a more ‘abstract’ result (in the sense of Heine, Claudi and Hünnemeyer 1991: 48) than other outputs; however, this is a separate problem.
21. That these verbs are semantically speciﬁc does not necessarily mean that they are not frequently used. On the contrary, they appear to be commonly used, though a thorough frequency study of their occurrence in Tariana texts still remains to be done.
22. In Tucano most, but not all, verbs which can occupy the second ‘modiﬁer’ position in a compounded structure can also be used as independent predicates (Ramirez 1997: 95). It is possible that the aspect and Aktionsart enclitics which do not have a corresponding independent verb in Tariana never had one.

AREAL TYPOLOGY AND GRAMMATICALIZATION

35

Appendix. A selection of Tariana verbal categories

Table 5. Aspect enclitics in Tariana

Semantics

completion

non-completed, on-going completed, complete involvement of S/O completed, ﬁnished (perfective-like) not quite completed

duration

durative, prolonged repetitive short duration, little by little habitual, prescribed customary, usual

Form
-daka -niki -sita -mayã
-nhi -pita, -ta -yena -hyuna -kape

Table 6. Switch-reference sensitive enclitics in Tariana

Same Subject

Diﬀerent Subject

-hyume/-yuhme ‘after, because’ -nikhe ‘during, in spite’

-kayãmi ‘after’ -nisawa, -kanada ‘during’

Gloss
‘still, yet’ ‘completive’ ‘perfective’ ‘almost’
‘prolonged’ ‘repeated’ ‘little by little’ ‘habitual’ ‘customary’

References
Aikhenvald, Alexandra Y. 1994. “Case-marking in Tariana”. Nordic Journal of Linguistics 17: 201–17.
Aikhenvald, Alexandra Y. 1995a. Bare. Munich: Lincom Europa [Materials 100]. Aikhenvald, Alexandra Y. 1995b. “Person marking and discourse in North Arawak
languages”. Studia Linguistica 49: 153–95. Aikhenvald, Alexandra Y. 1996. “Areal diﬀusion in North-West Amazonia: The case of
Tariana”. Anthropological Linguistics 38: 73–116. Aikhenvald, Alexandra Y. 1998. “Warekena”. In Desmond C. Derbyshire and Geoﬀrey
K. Pullum (eds), Handbook of Amazonian Languages, vol. 4. Berlin: Mouton de Gruyter. 225–439. Aikhenvald, Alexandra Y. 1999a. “Arawak”. In R.M.W. Dixon and Alexandra Y. Aikhenvald (eds), The Amazonian Languages. Cambridge: CUP. 65–106. Aikhenvald, Alexandra Y. 1999b. “Areal diﬀusion and language contact in the IçanaVaupes basin, north-west Amazonia”. In R.M.W. Dixon and Alexandra Y. Aikhenvald (eds), The Amazonian Languages. Cambridge: CUP. 385–416. Aikhenvald, Alexandra Y. 1999c. “Towards the typology of verb serialization and verb compounding: The case of Tariana”. Studies in Language 23: 479–508.

36

ALEXANDRA Y. AIKHENVALD

Bisang, Walter. 1996. “Areal typology and grammaticalization: Processes of grammaticalization based on nouns and verbs in East and Mainland South East Asian languages”. Studies in Language 20: 519–98.
Bybee, Joan, Perkins, Revere and Pagliuca, William. 1994. The Evolution of Grammar. Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press.
Campbell, Lyle and Muntzel, Martha. 1989. “The structural consequences of language death”. In Nancy Dorian (ed.), Investigating Obsolescence. Studies in language contraction and death. Cambridge: CUP. 181–96.
Craig, Colette. 1991. “Ways to go in Rama: A case study in polygrammaticalization”. In Traugott and Heine (eds.), vol. 2. 455–92.
Crowley, Terry. 1987. “Serial verbs in Paamese.” Studies in Language 11: 35–84. Dixon, R.M.W. 1977. A Grammar of Yidiny. Cambridge: CUP. Dixon, R.M.W. 1980. Australian Languages. Cambridge: CUP. Dixon, R.M.W. 1982. Where Have All the Adjectives Gone? And other essays in semantics
and syntax. Berlin: Mouton de Gruyter. Dixon, R.M.W. 1988. A Grammar of Boumaa Fijian. Chicago, IL: University of Chicago
Press. Dixon, R.M.W. 1994. Ergativity. Cambridge: CUP. Dorian, Nancy. Forthcoming. “The study of language obsolescence: Stages, surprises,
challenges.” Languages and Linguistics 2. Durie, Mark. 1988. “Verb serialization and “verbal prepositions” in Oceanic languages”.
Oceanic Linguistics 27: 1–23. Durie, Mark. 1997. “Grammatical structures in verb serialization”. In Alex Alsina, Joan
Bresnan and Peter Sells (eds), Complex Predicates. Stanford: CSLI. 289–354. Emanatian, Michele. 1992. “Chagga ‘come’ and ‘go’: Metaphor and the development of
tense-aspect”. Studies in Language 16: 1–34. Gomez-Imbert, Elsa. 1988. “Construcción verbal en barasana y tatuyo”. Amerindia 13:
97–108. Heath, Jeﬀrey. 1978. Linguistic Diﬀusion in Arnhem Land. Canberra: Australian Institute of
Aboriginal Studies [Australian Aboriginal Studies: Research and Regional Studies #13]. Heine, Bernd. 1992. “Grammaticalization chains”. Studies in Language 16: 335–68. Heine, Bernd, Claudi, Ulrike. and Hünnemeyer, Frederike. 1991. Grammaticalization: A
Conceptual Framework. Chicago: University of Chicago Press. Hopper, Paul J. and Traugott, Elizabeth C. 1993. Grammaticalization. Cambridge: CUP. Klumpp, Deloris. P. 1995. Vocabulario Piapoco-Español. Bogotá: Asociación Instituto
Lingüístico de Verano. Koch, Harold and Simpson, Jane. 1995. “Grammaticalisation of motion in Australian
languages”. Paper presented at the Annual Meeting of Australian Linguistic Society, Canberra. Lord, Carol. 1993. Historical Change in Serial Verb Constructions. Amsterdam and Philadelphia: John Benjamins [Typological Studies in Language 26].

AREAL TYPOLOGY AND GRAMMATICALIZATION

37

Martins, Silvana A. 1994. Análise da morfosintaxe da língua Dâw (Makú-Kamã) e sua classiﬁcação tipológica. Florianópolis, Brazil, MA thesis.
Martins, Silvana A. and Valteir, Martins. 1999. “The Makú language family”. In R.M.W. Dixon and Alexandra Y. Aikhenvald (eds), Amazonian Languages. Cambridge: CUP. 251–67.
Matisoﬀ, James A. 1991. “Areal and universal dimensions of grammatization in Lahu”. In Traugott and Heine (eds.), vol 2. 383–453.
Nikiforidou, Kiki. 1996. “Modern Greek as: A case study in grammaticalization and grammatical polysemy.” Studies in Language 20: 599–632.
Payne, David L. 1991. “A classiﬁcation of Maipuran (Arawakan) languages based on shared lexical retentions”. In Desmond C. Derbyshire and Geoﬀrey K. Pullum (eds), Handbook of Amazonian Languages, vol.3. Berlin: Mouton de Gruyter. 355–500.
Ramirez, Henri. 1997. A fala Tukano dos Yepâ-masa. Tomo 1. Gramática. Manaus: Inspetoria Salesiana.
Rodrigues, Aryon D. 1986. Línguas Brasileiras. Para o conhecimento das línguas indígenas. São Paulo: Ed. Loyola.
Schmidt, Annette. 1985. Young People’s Dyirbal. An example of language death from Australia. Cambridge: CUP.
Sherzer, Joel. 1973. “Areal linguistics in North America”. In Tom Sebeok (ed.), Current Trends in Linguistics, vol.10. The Hague: Mouton. 749–95.
Sorensen, Arthur P. Jr. 1967(1972). “Multilingualism in the northwest Amazon”. American Anthropologist 69: 670–84. (reprinted in 1972 J. B. Pride and J. Holmes (eds), Sociolinguistics. Penguin Modern Linguistics Readings: 78–93)
Sweetser, Eve E. 1988. “Grammaticalization and semantic bleaching”. Proceedings of the Fourteenth Annual meeting of Berkeley Linguistics Society. General Session and Parasession on Grammaticalization: 389–405.
Thomason, Sarah G. and Kaufman, Terrence. 1988. Language Contact, Creolization and Genetic Linguistics. Berkeley: University of California Press.
Thompson, Chad. 1993. “The areal preﬁx hu- in Koyukon Athabaskan”. International Journal of American Linguistics 59: 315–33.
Traugott, Elizabeth C. and Heine, Bernd. (eds). 1991. Approaches to Grammaticalization. Amsterdam and Philadelphia: John Benjamins [Typological Studies in Language 19.1/2].
Traugott, Elizabeth C. 1988. “Pragmatic strengthening and grammaticalization”. Proceedings of the Fourteenth Annual meeting of Berkeley Linguistics Society. General Session and Parasession on Grammaticalization: 406–16.
West, Birdie. 1980. Gramática popular del Tucano. Bogotá: Instituto Lingüístico de Verano.

Florescence as a Force in Grammaticalization
Wallace Chafe
University of California, Santa Barbara
A language is like a forest. Its diverse features — phonological, morphological, semantic, and so on — are like a community of plants that ﬂourish together in a particular environment at a particular time, its composition continually modiﬁed through internal competition and changes in the environment until, if external factors do not intervene, there arrives a climax stage in which the plants and the environment have entered a state of mutually supportive equilibrium. Further environmental changes, if they occur, will then disturb that equilibrium, precipitating another round of innovations.
Like forests, languages may develop toward a climax stage where particular combinations of features, like plant communities, may ﬂourish to deﬁne a particular language type. I think it is useful to think in terms of the ﬂorescence of linguistic features in this sense — the ﬂowering of features that come to dominate the form a language takes. Here I intend to illustrate ﬂorescence as a force in grammaticalization with examples that give the Northern Iroquoian languages their distinctive cast, focusing on the proliferation of pronominal preﬁxes and noun incorporation. In both respects these languages exhibit an exuberance that is obvious to anyone who observes their structure. I will suggest that these features reached a climax stage in the languages of the Five Nations of the Iroquois. I will also suggest that the ﬂorescence of these two features can proﬁtably be understood in terms of responses to certain aspects of Northern Iroquoian culture. Finally, I will show how a recent change in the external environment, the current overwhelming inﬂuence of English, is causing a further typological shift.
The Iroquoian language family is split north and south into two distinct branches. In the south are the several dialects of Cherokee, in the north the more numerous but relatively closely related languages of the Northern Iroquoian branch. Glottochronology suggested that this north-south split took place between

40

WALLACE CHAFE

three and four thousand years ago (Lounsbury 1961), although I suspect that this time depth may be exaggerated. Among the northern languages the deepest split separates Tuscarora from the rest. It may be between one and two thousand years ago that the ancestors of the Tuscarora migrated southward into an area in the eastern part of what is now North Carolina. Early in the eighteenth century they moved back north to be accepted as the Sixth Nation of the Iroquois, joining the original Five Nations made up of the Mohawk, Oneida, Onondaga, Cayuga, and Seneca. Those ﬁve, plus the slightly more divergent Huron, constitute what linguists sometimes call Lake Iroquoian because of their proximity to the Great Lakes. In other words Lake Iroquoian consists of Northern Iroquoian minus Tuscarora. At the time of ﬁrst European contact there were other Lake Iroquoian languages. We know next to nothing about most of them, but we do have small vocabularies of Susquehannock (Mithun 1981) and Stadaconan, the latter often called Laurentian (Mithun 1982). Figure 1 summarizes the relationships between the extant Iroquoian languages, with Huron added. Cayuga is in parentheses because there is some evidence that it split oﬀ from the Lake languages at an earlier time, only to be reintegrated into that group in such a way that it attained eventually a close aﬃnity to Seneca (Chafe and Foster 1981). I have also suggested in Figure 1 that there is a remote relationship between Proto-Iroquoian and Proto-Caddoan, and that relationship will have some bearing on the discussion to follow. (For more on the possibility of this relationship see Chafe 1976.)
Cherokee and the Northern Iroquoian languages have, in general, quite similar verb morphologies. Both are polysynthetic, with simple and complex verb stems to which are attached various aspect suﬃxes and pronominal preﬁxes, as well as a number of optional prepronominal preﬁxes. The verb stems may be expanded with various derivational elements that are similar across the family in nature and sometimes in form. There are, however, two ways in which the verbs of the Northern Iroquoian languages are more elaborate than those of Cherokee: the northern languages have larger sets of pronominal preﬁxes and they make greater use of noun incorporation as a way of expanding the verb stem. In both respects the northern languages show a ﬂorescence of typological devices whose seeds must have been present at the Proto-Iroquoian stage, as evidenced by their somewhat more modest manifestations in Cherokee.

1. Pronominal Preﬁxes
The elaboration of the pronominal preﬁx system that took place in Northern Iroquoian is conﬁned to the third person preﬁxes. In fact the ﬁrst and second

FLORESCENCE AS A FORCE IN GRAMMATICALIZATION

41

(Proto-Iroquoian-Caddoan)

(Proto-Caddoan) Proto-Iroquoian

Cherokee

Proto-Northern-Iroquoian

Tuscarora

Proto-Lake Iroquoian

Huron

Five Nations Iroquoian

Seneca (Cayuga) Onondaga Oneida Mohawk Figure 1. The Iroquoian Language Family

person preﬁxes are slightly more elaborate in Cherokee than in the north. In ﬁrst and second persons all the Iroquoian languages distinguish singular, dual, and plural number, and diﬀerentiate agents from patients. In the dual and plural all these languages make an inclusive-exclusive distinction in the agent preﬁxes. But only in Cherokee is this inclusive-exclusive distinction carried over into the patient preﬁxes, where the northern languages have simply undiﬀerentiated ﬁrst person dual and ﬁrst person plural forms. The extension of the inclusive-exclusive distinction to the patient preﬁxes seems to have been a Cherokee innovation.
When it comes to third person, however, the northern languages show a system more elaborate than anything in Cherokee, not only in the intransitive agent and intransitive patient preﬁxes but also in the various transitive preﬁxes that combine agents with patients. This elaboration involved the addition of third person gender distinctions. In the most general terms it can be said that while Cherokee has only an undiﬀerentiated third person category, the Northern Iroquoian languages distinguish three third person genders: masculine, feminine, and neuter. But these three are by no means of equal status, and the ways in which they arose in the northern languages are complex. Their development illustrates aspects of grammaticalization whose interest extends beyond the details of this one language family.
I sketched a possible scenario for the development of the intransitive third person preﬁxes in an earlier paper (Chafe 1977), where I traced the origins of the Iroquoian systems back to a very remote Iroquoian-Caddoan reconstruction.

42

WALLACE CHAFE

The following scenario diﬀers somewhat from that earlier one, taking into account an alternative analysis suggested by Michael Cysouw (manuscript), particularly with respect to the interpretation of Huron.
At the remote Iroquoian-Caddoan stage there would seem to have been a preﬁx, whose shape was *yi- for agents and *yu- for patients, that was used to refer to what I will call here nonspeciﬁc third persons, with functions similar to those of French on or German man. In a more recent paper (Chafe 1990) I described the multiple uses of the Caddo reﬂexes of these preﬁxes, which I called the “defocusing” preﬁxes, and which in Caddo are clearly derived from the forms *yi- and *yu-. The evidence for any other third person preﬁx at this speculative Iroquoian-Caddoan stage is unclear. While it makes good sense to reconstruct these two nonspeciﬁc preﬁxes, ordinary third person reference may have had no overt marking, as suggested in Figure 2.

Nonspeciﬁc Speciﬁc

Agent *yiZero?

Patient *yuZero?

Figure 2. Hypothetical Third Person Preﬁxes in Proto-Iroquoian-Caddoan

By the time of Proto-Iroquoian it would seem that an overt marker for a speciﬁc third person had been added, since all the Iroquoian languages do mark third person in some way (in addition to retaining the nonspeciﬁc marker). For agents, at least, this new third person marker may at ﬁrst have had the shape *ka-, alternating perhaps with *ya-. In Cherokee today third person ka- alternates with a-, from which the initial y has been dropped. The alternation between these two forms is determined in unpredictable ways by the following stem. Whether there was a corresponding third person patient marker in Proto-Iroquoian is less clear, and it is possible that patients remained without a marking at this stage, which is represented in Figure 3.

Nonspeciﬁc Speciﬁc

Agent *yi*ka-/*ya-

Patient *yuZero?

Figure 3. Third Person Preﬁxes in Proto-Iroquoian

Cherokee today has a third person marker for both agents and patients. It also has nonspeciﬁc marking, but the existing literature on Cherokee does not

FLORESCENCE AS A FORCE IN GRAMMATICALIZATION

43

describe clearly either its form or function. Scancarelli (1987: 85) remarks, “Further study of these generic [i.e. nonspeciﬁc] subject forms is needed, including work directed toward understanding their relation to other unspeciﬁed subject constructions.” In any case, modern Cherokee appears to have the third person preﬁxes shown in Figure 4.

Nonspeciﬁc Speciﬁc

Agent akika-/a-

Patient ou-

Figure 4. Third Person Preﬁxes in Cherokee

There are two other features that must have been involved in the expression of third person referents at the Proto-Iroquoian stage. One is the presence of number marking. There was probably at least a way of distinguishing singular and plural third persons, judging from the fact that at least that distinction is maintained in all the Iroquoian languages today. Probably dual number, on the other hand, was distinguished in Proto-Iroquoian only with ﬁrst and second persons, being extended to third person later within some but not all of the Northern Iroquoian languages. Proto-Iroquoian must also have had a set of socalled transitive preﬁxes for agent-patient combinations: ways of saying “I see you”, “he sees me”, and the like. All the Iroquoian languages have such preﬁxes, which show some resemblances. As with the intransitive preﬁxes, however, Proto-Iroquoian probably did not include in its transitive preﬁxes the elaboration of third persons that is found in the Northern Iroquoian languages.
The following events seem now to have taken place within the Northern Iroquoian branch, beginning with a simple system like that shown in Figure 3. Between that system and the one that can be hypothesized for Proto-NorthernIroquoian it is convenient to hypothesize two intermediate stages, which I will call stages 1 and 2 of Pre-Proto-Northern-Iroquoian. Taking account of the development of a diﬀerent vowel system in Northern Iroquoian, I will from this point on substitute *e for earlier *i and *o for earlier *u.

Nonspeciﬁc Speciﬁc

Agent *ye-/*ya-
*ka-

Patient *yo*ko-

Figure 5. Third Person Preﬁxes in Pre-Proto-Northern-Iroquoian, Stage 1

44

WALLACE CHAFE

At intermediate stage 1 there had arisen an almost symmetrical system in which y meant ‘nonspeciﬁc’ and k meant ‘speciﬁc’, while a meant ‘agent’ and o meant ‘patient’. One irregularity remained, however: the retention of *ye- as the most common way of representing a nonspeciﬁc agent. This system is shown in Figure 5. At some point, however, there was a curious shift in the patient forms, so that *yo- came to be used for speciﬁc third persons and *ko- for nonspeciﬁc. In some environments this *ko- came to be preﬁxed with *ya-, as if speakers wanted to make it clear that this was not *ko- in its earlier function, but a *yakind of *ko-. This reversal of the patient forms is shown in Figure 6.

Nonspeciﬁc Speciﬁc

Agent *ye-/*ya-
*ka-

Patient *(ya)ko-
*yo-

Figure 6. Third Person Preﬁxes in Pre-Proto-Northern-Iroquoian, Stage 2

With Figure 6 we are not yet at the stage of Proto-Northern-Iroquoian. For the latter it is necessary to posit a change that, for the ﬁrst time in the history of the family, contained the seeds of a sex-based gender system. It involved the introduction of a separate and unique marker for masculine singular, with the shapes *hra- for agents and *hro- for patients. Where these forms came from is not clear. Added to Figure 6, this new element yielded the system shown in Figure 7. It created an opposition between masculine singular humans and all other third persons, regardless of number. This is essentially the system exhibited by Huron.1

Nonspeciﬁc Maculine
Nonmasculine

Agents Sg. Pl.
*ye-/*ya*hra
*ka-/*wa-

Patients Sg. Pl.
*(ya)ko*hro-
*yo-

Figure 7. Third Person Preﬁxes in Proto-Northern-Iroquoian

The various Northern Iroquoian languages elaborated this system in somewhat diﬀerent ways, but all of them except Huron went further in extending the

FLORESCENCE AS A FORCE IN GRAMMATICALIZATION

45

nonspeciﬁc form to feminine singular referents as well. Each language must be described separately, but it will suﬃce here to illustrate in Figure 8 the antecedent forms of the system that arose in Seneca.

Nonspeciﬁc Masculine Feminine Neuter

Agents

Sg.

Du.

*ye-

*hra-

*hni-

*ye*ka-/*wa-

*kni-

Pl.
*hrati*wati-

Patients

Sg.

Nonsg.

*(ya)ko-

*hro-

*hroti-

*(ya)ko*yo-

*yoti-

Figure 8. Reconstructed Third Person Preﬁxes in Pre-Seneca

Thus, from an earliest system in which third person was not overtly marked at all except for a pair of nonspeciﬁc preﬁxes, the Lake Iroquoian languages developed a system that had added three genders and, in the agent preﬁxes, three numbers. The genders, however, did not show an evenhanded symmetry. Outside of the singular no distinction was made between feminine and neuter. Furthermore, the feminine singular forms were left homophonous with the nonspeciﬁc forms, from which they originated.2
In fact, in Mohawk, Oneida, and Onondaga the situation is even more complex with respect to diﬀerentiation of the sexes. Feminine singular in those languages may be expressed with either the originally nonspeciﬁc form (ye-) or the neuter form (ka-). The choice between the two is determined by various factors, described for Wisconsin Oneida by Abbott (1984), that appear to be essentially the same for Mohawk and Onondaga. The feminine preﬁx “is used to convey the impression that the female referred to is small, graceful, dainty, or petite, and [the neuter preﬁx] is used to convey the impression the female is large, awkward, or aggressive” (Abbott 1984: 127). Abbott quotes Karin Michelson (1982) as suggesting that in Canadian Oneida the neuter preﬁx sometimes conveys “an indiﬀerent or detached attitude, sometimes a lack of respect, and sometimes an acknowledgment that the referent has authority or power over the speaker” (quoted in Abbott 1984: 128). The neuter preﬁx need not convey disrepect, however, and once established by a particular speaker for a particular individual is generally maintained over a lifetime. “With so many positive characteristics associated with [the feminine preﬁx] and with so many if not negative at least not positive characteristics associated with [the neuter], it would seem that using [the neuter preﬁx] for some females would have connotations of

46

WALLACE CHAFE

rudeness. But this is only true if the speaker has established the practice of consistently using the [nonspeciﬁc form] in the past. Otherwise informants insist that there is nothing rude or disrespectful in the use of [the neuter form]” (Abbott 1984: 128–129).
In historical perspective it would appear that speakers of the Northern Iroquoian languages had a diﬃcult time settling on a way to represent feminine singular. In all those languages except Huron feminine singular is at least sometimes expressed with the same preﬁx that is used in the defocusing function, as if a woman were being called ‘one’. Mohawk, Oneida, and Onondaga share with Huron the alternative strategy of sometimes using the same preﬁx that is used for animals and inanimate objects, as if a woman were being called ‘it’. This handling of feminine singular is in decided contrast to the introduction of a special new form for masculine singular.
The diﬀerence between the treatment of masculine singular and feminine singular is even more starkly emphasized if one looks at the transitive preﬁxes in Northern Iroquoian, and especially those in the Lake Iroquoian languages. For one thing, when ﬁrst and second person referents are combined with third person referents (‘I saw him’, ‘he saw me’, and the like), it is only when the third person referent is masculine singular that all of the possible ﬁrst and second person distinctions are made. Figure 9 lists the preﬁxes that pair a ﬁrst or second person agent with a third person patient. In the ﬁrst column are the preﬁxes in which the patient is masculine singular, in the second column are those in which the patient is any human third person other than masculine singular, that is, either feminine singular or any variety of nonsingular. Similarly, Figure 10 shows combinations of third person agents with ﬁrst and second person patients. Obviously the masculine singular category stands out.
Two things are noteworthy in the development of pronominal preﬁxes in the Northern Iroquoian languages. One is that these languages have built up systems with a total inventory of somewhere between sixty and seventy preﬁxes, where at ﬁrst there was something much more modest with an elaboration of ﬁrst and second persons but very little for third person. This is one example of the exuberant kind of development I am calling ﬂorescence. In addition, the bulk of the elaboration in third person involved elaboration centered on the category of masculine singular. To explain that development it is revealing to look at Northern Iroquoian culture patterns that must have been at place when they occurred.
Of course we have no historical records from the time, perhaps a thousand years ago, when these systems became established. The earliest written descriptions of a related culture have been handed down to us from the ﬁrst and second voyages of Jacques Cartier in 1534–36 (Biggar 1924), but more extensive records

FLORESCENCE AS A FORCE IN GRAMMATICALIZATION

47

Patient

Masculine Singular Anything Else

Agent First Singular

he-

khe-

Exclusive Dual Exclusive Plural

shaknishakwa-

yakhi-

Inclusive Dual Inclusive Plural

shetnishetwa-

yethi-

Second Singular

hehs-

she-

Second Dual Second Plural

shesnisheswa-

yetshi-

Figure 9. First and Second Person Agents with Third Person Patients (Lake Iroquoian)

began to accumulate a century later when French missionaries began their activities in eastern Canada. We have very rich descriptions of Huron culture, especially, contained in documents now referred to as the Jesuit Relations (Thwaites 1896–1901). From the descriptions the Jesuits and others provided in the seventeenth century it would appear that the basic structure of Huron society was little diﬀerent from that of the Five Nations Iroquois.

Agent

Masculine Singular

Feminine Singular

Anything Else

Patient First Singular

hak-

yo˛ k-

ho˛ k-

First Dual First Plural

sho˛ knisho˛ kwa-

yo˛ khi-

Second Singular

hya-

yesa-

ho˛ sa-

Second Dual Second Plural

shesnisheswa-

yetshi-

Figure 10. Third Person Agents with First and Second Person Patients (Lake Iroquoian)

Bruce Trigger, in his monumental work on the history and ethnography of the Huron (Trigger 1976), remarks that “the most basic distinction in Huron

48

WALLACE CHAFE

society was that made between the sexes … Almost every task was considered to be either exclusively men’s work or exclusively women’s work, and every Huron was expected to be familiar with all or most of the tasks appropriate to his or her sex. For the most part, men engaged in tasks that required considerable physical strength, or which took them away from home for long periods. Women performed tasks of a more routine nature that kept them in, or close to, their villages” (Trigger 1976: 34). Elsewhere Trigger says, “In addition to hunting and ﬁshing, clearing land, building houses, and manufacturing tools, the major activities that men engaged in were trading, waging war, and government. These activities frequently brought men into contact with Huron from other villages and with foreigners. Particularly as a result of their trading activities, Huron men were more aware of cultural diﬀerences than Huron women were, and were accustomed to tolerating such diﬀerences. While women were the guardians of family life and its traditions, men were charged with the responsibility for safety and order, which involved maintaining their village’s links with the outside world” (Trigger 1976: 45).
Of special importance were council meetings, attended only by men, where “decisions were made that inﬂuenced many aspects of village life … The council arranged public feasts, dances, and lacrosse matches, and decided for whom special curing rites requiring village participation would be performed. The council also undertook to see that no one was in need and coordinated communal projects, such as constructing palisades and relocating the village. All legal disputes arising between members of the diﬀerent clan segments that lived in the village were adjudicated by the council” (Trigger 1976: 56–57).
Elisabeth Tooker remarks in her ethnography of the Huron based on the Jesuit Relations and other sources, “The ‘old men’ in a village decided all matters within the village and their advice was tantamount to an order … One 50-year-old Huron man, after he had been told that he could not go to the seminary, emphasized this attitude in his reply to the Jesuits. He told them: ‘It seems to me that you are not right to prefer children to grown men. Young people are not listened to in our country; if they should relate wonders, they would not be believed. But men speak; they have solid understanding, and what they say is believed. Hence, I shall make a better report of your doctrine, when I return to my country, than will the children that you seek’’’ (Tooker 1964: 42). Elsewhere Tooker says, “Despite the extensive characterization of Iroquois society as being a matriarchy, women had, usually, no voice in council meetings. They exercised their inﬂuence behind the scenes, not directly by speaking or attending council meetings. Even today women do not speak in the Longhouse” (Tooker 1964: 48). As noted by Annemarie Shimony for Longhouse ceremonies

FLORESCENCE AS A FORCE IN GRAMMATICALIZATION

49

on the Six Nations Reserve in Ontario, “Women often do know the ritual speeches and addresses … but they never perform in public” (Shimony 1961: 89).
On the Cattaraugus Seneca Reservation in New York in 1956 I recorded an account by Roy Jimerson of a seventeenth-century rivalry between the Seneca and their neighbors the Kahkwa, in the course of which the Kahkwa were defeated and absorbed into the Seneca population. Much of this account was centered on an athletic contest, a test of male prowess, that was viewed by an entire Seneca town. Of particular interest was the way the audience was distributed. Mr. Jimerson’s account can be translated as follows: “They formed a circle; in front stood the chiefs and the warriors. And behind them stood the mothers. And diﬀerent still were the children.” In other words it was the men who had the front row seats, with the women behind them, and the children presumably behind the women.
All this is to suggest that sex roles were distributed in Iroquois society in such a way that men were conspicuous and invested with decision-making powers, whereas women stayed in the background. This is not at all to say that women were unimportant or undervalued. Quite the contrary, it would seem that women were responsible for keeping life going, both from day to day and from generation to generation. But it was males who stood out as ﬁgures against the female ground. It would seem that the pronominal preﬁx system that developed in these languages clearly reﬂects these diﬀerences in the roles of men and women.

2. Noun Incorporation
Mithun (1984) described four types of noun incorporation that are observable in various languages around the world. In Type I there is nothing more than the lexical compounding of nouns with verbs. In Type II this compounding is accompanied by the promotion of an otherwise oblique argument to the status of a core argument. In Type III the incorporation is used in discourse as a way of backgrounding less salient nominal referents; one can speak of pragmatic incorporation. In Type IV incorporated nouns are used as semantic classiﬁers; there is classiﬁcatory incorporation.
Mithun hypothesized a path of historical development whereby each of these four types might evolve into the next type, although a language might also stop at any stage. This path would imply, for example, that a language with classiﬁcatory incorporation would also exhibit pragmatic incorporation. With Mithun’s concurrence, however, I would like now to suggest that it is possible for a language to develop classiﬁcatory incorporation without having ﬁrst

50

WALLACE CHAFE

developed pragmatic incorporation, and that Cherokee is just such a language. If that is correct, we can interpret the pragmatic use of incorporation in the Northern Iroquoian languages as a ﬂorescence of the more limited type illustrated by Cherokee, which may lie closer to Proto-Iroquoian in this respect.
Classiﬁcatory incorporation in Cherokee is limited to a small number of semantic classes that involve shape and substance. It can be illustrated with examples like the following from North Carolina Cherokee (Cook 1979: 186):

(1) a·kiha a·kwv·ya a·kina‘a a·kine·ha

‘I have something round or lump-like’ ‘I have something long and rigid’ ‘I have something ﬂexible’ ‘I have something liquid’

Otherwise, incorporation in Cherokee is limited to body parts (Cook 1979: 133, 134, 136):

(2) kakv‘skwo·‘a ‘I’m washing my face’ (-kvh- ‘face’, -hsk- ‘head’, -wo·- ‘wash’)
tsi·ya·kwalv·‘niha ‘I’m spanking him’ (-a·kwal- ‘buttocks’, -v·n- ‘hit’)

and certain items of clothing:

(3) te·kalá·‘suhlahska ‘I’m putting on shoes’ (ti·láhsu·lohi ‘shoes’)
ka‘lskwe·thuhska ‘I’m putting on a hat’ (a·hlskwe‘thawohi ‘hat’)

There seems to be no good evidence that pragmatic incorporation ever existed in Cherokee, so it is plausible to suppose that Cherokee (and probably ProtoIroquoian) reﬂects a language type in which incorporation is limited to classiﬁcatory nouns, body parts, and clothing.
Mithun’s stages III and IV may thus be reversible, with the Cherokee classiﬁcatory type (IV) evolving into the Northern Iroquoian pragmatic type (III). Incorporation is much more widespread in the Northern Iroquoian languages. I will draw on a particular text for examples, an autobiographical account by a Seneca man. In this account there were 240 verbs, and 75 of them, or 31%, contained incorporated nouns. I suspect that that is a typical proportion, though more genres and more speakers obviously need to be examined.
When one ﬁrst encounters this widespread use of incorporation there is a natural tendency to think that any of the nouns that occur in some particular core syntactic or semantic role — say, any patient nouns — can be incorporated with any

FLORESCENCE AS A FORCE IN GRAMMATICALIZATION

51

verb roots whose argument structure accepts that role. One quickly ﬁnds, however, that some nouns never incorporate and some (transitive) verbs never allow incorporation. But even with elements that do sometimes take part in incorporation, it is by no means an unconstrained process. It is instructive to look in some detail at examples of noun incorporation in Seneca, where pragmatic incorporation seems to have reached its zenith, as in the other Northern Iroquoian languages. I will take these examples from the autobiographical account just mentioned.
The term “pragmatic incorporation” implies that we need to consider the discourse function of this device which, to quote Mithun, is “used to background known or incidental information in discourse” (Mithun 1984: 867) If, for example, a salient referent is being introduced for the ﬁrst time, the noun root that refers to it is not incorporated. For example, this speaker told how his family would sometimes go to town to buy shoes:

(4) ahdáhgwa‘ ge˛·s

wa‘agwagwáa‘,

shoes habitually we.went.and.got

‘we went and got shoes’

wa‘- -yakwa- -kwa- -h-

-a‘

 .. get  

It would have been possible for him to incorporate the idea of the shoes within the verb:

(5) wa‘ágwahdáhgwagwáa‘

‘we went and got shoes’

wa‘- -yagwa- -ahdahgwa- -gwa- -h-

-a‘

 .. shoes

get  

but he did not. Expressing the idea of the shoes as a separate word (as well as placing it at the beginning of the clause) makes clear its function as newsworthy information, whereas its incorporation within the verb, as in (5), would have downplayed the shoes by saying that his family went to town for the more diﬀuse activity of ‘shoe-getting’.
What kinds of things are incorporated in a Northern Iroquoian language? Like Cherokee, Seneca does exhibit classiﬁcatory noun incorporation. But whereas in Cherokee such classiﬁcation is limited to a small number of shapes and substances, the possibilities in Seneca are a great deal more diverse. They include, for example, categories like ‘domestic animal’. In telling about foods that were available to his family when he was a child, the same speaker said:

52

WALLACE CHAFE

(6) o˛gwáno˛sgwa·yé˛? kho ge˛·s, gisgwísho˛‘o˛h,

we have animals and habitually pigs

‘and we always had pigs’

o˛ kwa-

-no˛ skwa-

-ye˛- -‘

.. domestic.animal have 

Not only is there greater diversity in the classiﬁcations that can be made, but the incorporated nouns can occur as separate nouns in their own right, in this case as (with the necessary preﬁx and suﬃx):

(7) gano˛·sgwa‘ ‘domestic animal’

In Cherokee the classiﬁers do not occur independently in this way. Another example of the ﬂexibility of classiﬁcatory incorporation in Seneca
can be seen in something the speaker said close to the beginning of his account, when he was placing himself in the social world:

(8) Da· ono˛dowá‘gá·‘ n’í·‘ no˛‘gyá‘do‘dé˛‘,

so Seneca

I what.kind.I.am

n-

-o˛‘- -g- -ya‘d-

-o‘de˛-

-‘

  . physical self be.a.certain.way 

ne·‘ kho né genyáhdé˛· no˛‘gé‘séó‘de˛‘.

it’s and the I’m.a.turtle what.clan.I.am

n-

-o˛‘- -ge- -‘se- -o‘de˛-

-‘

  . clan be.a.certain.way 

‘So Seneca is the tribe I belong to, and I’m of the turtle clan.’

Both of the analyzed words contain the verb root -o‘de˛- ‘be a certain way’, with which are incorporated -ya‘d- ‘physical self’ and -‘se- ‘clan’. These two noun roots express larger semantic categories: ‘being Seneca’ is an instance of one’s physical identity, and ‘belonging to the turtle clan’ is of course an instance of clan membership.
Like Cherokee, Seneca also exhibits the incorporation of body parts:

(9) o‘tgé˛·hso·we·k ‘I covered my feet’

o‘-

-t- -g- -e˛·- -hs- -owek- -0

  .  foot cover 

This word is actually the way one says ‘I put on my shoes’, showing a nice diﬀerence in the way one conceptualizes the same physical event in Seneca and English. Putting on one’s shoes is of course a familiar, even automated activity, and the way of expressing it illustrated in (9) is a highly routinized combination of noun root with verb root (as well as middle voice). It thus exempliﬁes a high

FLORESCENCE AS A FORCE IN GRAMMATICALIZATION

53

degree of lexicalization. As we look at further examples of noun incorporation we will see reasons to regard them, too, as lexicalized combinations, but combinations more diverse than those found in Cherokee. As Mithun has emphasized, pragmatic incorporation “is still a lexical process; if speakers use a new combination, they are creating a new word and are aware of that fact. The productivity of the process is governed both by lexical accident and by pragmatic considerations” (Mithun 1984: 863).
One commonly encountered type of noun incorporation is found in proper names. We already saw one example in (8), the Seneca word for ‘Seneca’, which means something like ‘pertaining to the great hill’. It has the following structure:

(10) ono˛dowá‘ga:‘ ‘Seneca’

o-

-no˛d- -owa- -‘ga·‘

. hill great .

Obviously a proper name is an established way of expressing a familiar idea, in this case the identity of the people themselves. The frozen status of this particular name may have removed any sense of its original composition, as evidenced by two alternative ways in which it is sometimes pronounced. More often than not one hears the truncated form no˛dowá‘ga·‘ without the initial pronominal preﬁx o-. I have also occasionally heard no˛dawá‘ga·‘ with a instead of o in the second syllable, where the etymology of the word — speciﬁcally the presence of the verb root meaning ‘great’ — is no longer recognizable.
At another point early in his account the same speaker said:

(11) gano˛dasé·‘, hadi·yá·s ne˛khóh, niyõgwatshísdaye˛‘.

Newtown they.call.it here where.our.ﬁre.is.laid

‘they call it Newtown, here where our home is’

ga-

-no˛d- -ase- -·‘

. town new 

ni-

-yo˛gw- -a- -tshisda- -ye˛- -‘

 .  ﬁre be.laid 

In the ﬁrst word of (11) the name of Newtown, a settlement on the Cattaraugus Reservation, is a highly lexicalized morphological formation expressing an extremely familiar idea, the place where the speaker lives. But (11) also illustrates, in the last word, a lexicalized combination of a diﬀerent kind: no longer a proper name but an idiom whose meaning has taken on a life of its own, a meaning that cannot be predicted in any systematic way from its literal meaning. The literal meaning ‘where our ﬁre is laid’ has acquired the idiomatic meaning ‘where our home is’. This idiom would appear to go back to precontact living

54

WALLACE CHAFE

where each family within a longhouse was centered around a ﬁre. An example of a similar sort is:

(12) ganyó‘ næ¡ · ní·‘ o·né˛ a·yé˛·‘ when highlight I now it.seems washé˛· ge˛·o˛dye‘, tshiwágoshíya‘go˛h, ten about when.I.had.crossed.winters ‘when I was about ten years old’ tshi- -wag- -osh- -iya‘g- -o˛h  . winter cross 

The experience of getting through winters provided a handy way of counting years in the days before European calendars.
A third type of noun incorporation that exhibits lexicalization can be illustrated with the following passage. Speaking of a doctor who made house calls, the speaker said:

(13) næ¡ · gé˛·s

ha·hó˛‘ wa·ayó˛‘, ne tganó˛hso·t,

highlight habitually he.himself he.arrived the house

‘he himself came regularly to the house’

To understand the last word in this example it is necessary to know that with certain kinds of referents involving large-scale environmental phenomena like hills, lakes, rivers, the earth, the sky, towns, and houses, Seneca requires that the noun roots expressing them must be incorporated with what may be called a positional verb root such as -de- ‘be in place’, -ye˛- ‘be laid out’, and -ot- ‘be upright’. Thus, a hill is ono˛dade‘, a town is gano˛daye˛‘, and a house is ganó˛hso·t:

(14) ono˛dade‘ ‘hill’

o-

-no˛da- -de-

-‘

. hill be.in.place 

gano˛daye˛‘ ‘town’

ga-

-no˛da- -ye˛-

-‘

. town be.laid.out 

ganó˛hso:t ‘house’

ga-

-no˛hs- -ot-

-0

. house be.upright 

The word at the end of (13) is the word for ‘house’ with the so-called cislocative preﬁx t- added, yielding a meaning more like ‘where the house was’.
(It would appear from the ﬁrst two examples that the Seneca noun roots meaning ‘hill’ and ‘house’ are identical. But that is a historical accident resulting

FLORESCENCE AS A FORCE IN GRAMMATICALIZATION

55

from the fact that in Seneca a became o˛ after n. Thus an earlier -nada- meaning ‘town’ (which appears in the name Canada) became Seneca -no˛da-, falling together with the noun root meaning ‘hill’.)
Verb roots like the -de-, -ye˛-, and -ot- illustrated in (14) occur very frequently with incorporated noun roots, and not only in expressions of environmental phenomena. In fact we saw two examples of the -ye˛- verb root earlier. In (11) it was the ﬁre that was ‘laid out’ in the word niyo˛gwatshísdaye˛‘, and in (6) the same verb was used in the word o˛gwáno˛sgwa·ye˛‘ with an animate patient pronominal preﬁx and an extended meaning that is translatable as ‘have’ (in this case a domestic animal).
These positionals are thus favorite verb roots for incorporating. Seneca has certain noun roots that are also favorite candidates for this construction. Probably the greatest favorite of all is a noun root whose earlier form was *-rihwa-, with a meaning reminiscent of Latin res, which I learned in my high school days to translate as ‘thing, aﬀair, matter’. In Chafe (1967) I glossed this Seneca root as ‘thing, matter, aﬀair, cause, subject, message, news, word, speech, conversation, story, tradition, custom, ceremony, ritual, assignment’, and in fact each of these translations (and more) is appropriate in one context or another. One example of its use in this speaker’s account is:

(15) da oné˛ khó ganó˛hsesgé kho dyotgó˛·n deyo˛gwáíwagá·ne·‘, so then too at.the.longhouse too always we’re.looking.at.the.matter ‘so then too at the Longhouse we were always paying attention to what was going on’ de- -yo˛gwa- -iwa- -ga·ne- -·‘  . thing look.at 

It seems appropriate in (15) to translate this noun root as ‘what was going on’. Another example of its use appears in:

(16) yéío‘kdá‘o˛

néh, akhíya‘dágehe˛h,

her.thing.is.at.the.end the we.are.helping.her

‘we were helping her until her things were ﬁnished,’

ye-

-i- -o‘kda-

-‘-

-o˛ h

. things be.at.the.end  

Here the same noun root refers to the mother’s household chores. This speaker discussed at some length the way his family ate when he was
a child; because of that, the incorporated noun root -khw(a)- ‘food’ occurred a number of times. In an expression parallel to (6) we ﬁnd it with the verb root -ye˛-, here again with the meaning ‘have’:

56

WALLACE CHAFE

(17) o˛gwákhwayé˛‘ næ¡ · gé˛·s

dyotgó˛·n,

we.have.food highlight habitually always

‘we always had food,’

o˛gwa- -khwa- -ye˛- -‘

1.. food have 

Another verb root that incorporates very frequently is -o˛ni- ‘make’, and it appears with the ‘food’ noun root in a combination with the idiomatic meaning ‘cook’, literally ‘make food’:

(18) akhíya‘dágehé˛ néh, akhíno‘e˛ n e˛yékho˛·ní‘,

we.are.helping.her the our.mother the she.will.cook

‘we were helping our mother cook,’

e˛-

-ye -kh -o˛ni- -‘

  food make 

When the middle voice marker -ade- is added to the construction in (18) the resulting meaning is ‘eat’. In (19) we ﬁnd that construction, but also another word in which the ‘food’ noun root is incorporated with a verb root meaning ‘be hot’:

(19) Gwás gé˛·s

okhwádáíé˛· wa‘agwadékho˛·ni‘.

very habitually hot.food we.ate

‘We really ate hot food.’

o-

-khw- -adaie˛- -·h

. food be.hot 

wa‘- -yagw- -ade- -khw- -o˛ni- -‘

 ..  food make 

The following sentence shows not only the ‘hot food’ word, but also lexicalized expressions for ‘fry-bread’ and ‘fried potatoes’, so that the example contains three examples of incorporation:

(20) gá·hgwagí·‘da·h gé˛·s

wa‘a·gwá·k né sédéhdzíáh,

fried.bread habitually we.ate the morning

‘we ate fry-bread in the morning,’

ga-

-hrahgwa- -giri‘ta- -·‘

. bread fry 

ganó˛no˛ ‘dagí·‘dá·h,

fried.potatoes

ga-

-no˛no˛‘da- -giri‘ta- -·‘

. potatoes fry 

FLORESCENCE AS A FORCE IN GRAMMATICALIZATION

57

agwás næ¡ · gé˛·s

gagwe·go˛ okhwádáíé˛·h.

very highlight habitually all

hot.food

‘(and) fried potatoes, it was all really a hot meal.’

These examples show the extent to which noun incorporation in Seneca is involved in lexicalized combinations: familiar proper names like Seneca and Newtown; familiar states like having a home and being a certain age; familiar environmental phenomena like hills, towns, and houses; familiar activities like cooking and eating; and familiar foods like fry-bread and fried potatoes. Can one, nevertheless, make up new incorporated constructions that do not have this lexicalized status, combinations that have never, perhaps, been said or heard before?
There are a few situations where such new formations do seem possible. One involves counting things. The verb root -æge- can be glossed ‘how many’, and it is used in constructions like the following:

(21) wís nó˛· ge˛·o˛dyé‘ niyóshæ¢gé· deshágwasnyé‘,

ﬁve I.guess about how.many.years we.took.care.of.him

‘I guess we took care of him for about ﬁve years,’

ni-

-y-

-osh- -æge- -h

 . year how.many 

Counting years is a familiar concept, but there seems to be no restriction on the use of incorporation for this purpose so long as the noun root is one that can be incorporated in the ﬁrst place.
The following shows the combination of the noun root meaning ‘car’ with the same verb root meaning ‘how many’, this time in the form -age-:

(22) wís nigá‘sehda·ge·h

ﬁve how.many.cars

‘ﬁve cars’

ni-

-ga-

-‘sehd- -age- -·h

 . car how.many 

When I visit the Allegany Reservation, I rent a car in Buﬀalo and the physical properties of the car can vary from visit to visit. That provides occasions to create words like:

(23) ga‘séhdage˛·n ‘white car’

ga-

-‘sehda- -ge˛·n- -0

. car be.white 

nigá‘sehdá‘a·h ‘small car’

58

WALLACE CHAFE

ni-

-ga-

-‘sehd- -a‘a- -·h

 . car be.small 

ga‘séhdi·yo·h ‘nice car’

ga-

-‘sehda- -iyo- -0

. car be.nice 

I do not know whether and to what extent these are lexicalized combinations or combinations made up on the spot. That kind of knowledge is available only to a ﬂuent native speaker of Seneca. I do know, however, that I have sometimes made up noun-verb combinations that have elicited a reaction of a sort that suggests I have created a neologism. During meals it is often appropriate to say that something tastes good, and it is possible to incorporate a noun that will specify the kind of food that tastes good:

(24) o‘wáagá?o˛h ‘the meat tastes good’

o-

-‘waa- -ga‘- -o˛h

. meat taste.good 

onó˛no˛‘dága‘o˛h ‘the potatoes taste good’

o-

-no˛no˛‘da- -ga‘- -o˛h

. potatoes taste.good 

Although the ﬁrst of these words is often used and is certainly lexicalized, the second is something I made up one time when I was eating in a restaurant. My companion reacted in a way that showed she had paid more attention to the way I had said this than to its content, remarking, “That was a cute thing to say.”
But obviously if there has been a ﬂorescence of noun incorporation and if the ideas of new cultural items like cars can be incorporated, new formations must be possible. How do they come about? I believe that incorporation is active enough in the language that speakers know how to create new instances, but that when they do so they know that they are creating something new, and their listeners know that too. In fact people often remember when they heard a particular example of incorporation for the ﬁrst time, as well as the context in which they heard it.
I found myself recently using in English the word man-madeness. I imagine that any sensitive native speaker of the English language would recognize that it was a word I made up. And so it is with noun incorporation in Seneca. The device is available for people to create neologisms, but they are recognized as such. As time goes by they may or may not become established in the language and be used in a variety of contexts. That will depend on how well they capture ideas that need to be expressed, but it may also depend on the status of their creator. I do not have the status to create new instances of noun incorporation in

FLORESCENCE AS A FORCE IN GRAMMATICALIZATION

59

Seneca, but real speakers of the language, and particularly those whose style of speaking is admired, may have more success in that regard.
Mithun (1984: 872) summarizes this issue of productivity in the following way:
To a casual observer of languages like Mohawk, [noun incorporation] may appear to be a syntactic process simply because of its tremendous productivity; the number of [noun-verb] combinations that occur seems unlimited. However, speakers are keenly aware of the lexical status of all such combinations. They know not only which constructions are possible, but also which of these actually exist — i.e. which are lexicalized. They immediately recognize those that are not. Speakers remember who uses a word not used by others, even when it is a perfectly transparent combination of two highly productive stems. A Mohawk speaker’s lexicon can be enormous, because of the high productivity of word formation processes like [noun incorporation]; but it is well-deﬁned.
Is it possible to pinpoint some feature of Northern Iroquoian culture that might be responsible for the ﬂorescence of noun incorporation? I would suggest that what lies behind the ﬂowering of this device is the high degree of prestige attached to skill in oratory. Writing in the middle of the nineteenth century, with the biases of that period, Lewis Henry Morgan, in his pioneering ethnography of the Iroquois, said the following:
The Indian has a quick and enthusiastic appreciation of eloquence. Highly impulsive in his nature, and with passions untaught of restraint, he is strongly susceptible of its inﬂuence. By the cultivation and exercise of this capacity, was opened the pathway to distinction; and the chief or warrior gifted with its magical power could elevate himself as rapidly, as he who gained renown upon the warpath. (Morgan 1851:107)
The skill involved in creating new instances of noun incorporation may be considerable, especially in a highly fusional language like Seneca, and it is no wonder that those possessed of this skill to a high degree have been accorded a special prestige. To quote Mithun again:
[Noun incorporation] can be a diﬃcult process, often requiring special linguistic virtuosity, especially in languages with complex phonological alternations. Speakers who do it well may be especially admired, while marginal speakers may not be able to do it at all. Noun incorporation can be a powerful, but fragile, linguistic resource. (Mithun 1984: 891).

60

WALLACE CHAFE

3. Toward a New Climax Stage?

Where does a language go after a climax stage has been reached? Climax forests exhibit a state of balance with their environment that may continue until it is interrupted when external forces like a change in climate may bring about signiﬁcant change. It is intriguing to think that Seneca morphology may currently be moving toward a new pattern that is being triggered by a radical change in the environment within which the language is spoken.
All Seneca speakers today are at least equally ﬂuent in English, and it is now English that all of them use most of the time in their daily lives. It is hardly surprising that when they speak Seneca they engage in a great deal of codeswitching. What is surprising, however, is that some of this code-switching takes place within words. Of particular interest here is the occurrence of Seneca verbs that have an English verb as their root. The following are a few examples, where I have underlined the English root:

(25) a. dewagaderetíredo˛h b. o‘thádestróke c. o‘dyagwadeshópda·no˛‘ d. de˛·no˛devótethak

‘I’ve retired’ ‘he had a stroke’ ‘we went shopping’ ‘they were voting’

Verbs like these exhibit new patterns in which some of the complexities governing the usual form of Seneca verbs have been modiﬁed. One modiﬁcation is the position of the accent. The English verb root is always accented, regardless of its position within the word. In Seneca only even-numbered, nonﬁnal syllables receive a morphological accent, although they do so only under complex conditions involving the presence of closed syllables. According to that pattern (25a) is well-behaved, but (25b) is not (because the ﬁnal syllable is accented), (25c) is not (because an odd-numbered syllable, the ﬁfth, is accented), and (25d) is not (because the long e˛· at the beginning of the word counts as two syllables, and thus it is also the ﬁfth syllable of this word that is accented). Seneca words may have more than one accent when the conditions are right, as they are for the second syllable in (25b), which is accented because the following, third syllable is closed. Thus (25b) has one accent assigned by the even-numbered syllable pattern and one assigned by the new pattern which says the English root must always be accented.
The shape of the pronominal preﬁxes within a Seneca verb is determined both by the initial sound of the following stem and by whatever morpheme (if any) happens to precede it. For example, the feminine singular preﬁx derived historically from the shape *ye- has that shape in yenó˛e‘s ‘she likes it’ but the

FLORESCENCE AS A FORCE IN GRAMMATICALIZATION

61

shape -e- in wa‘é·ni·no˛‘ ‘she bought it’, yo˛- in yo˛dé˛notha‘ ‘she sings’, etc. These shapes are explainable from various historical processes, but speakers probably produce and recognize them in actual speech because they have learned entire words, or at least they have learned patterns that make the manifestations of the preﬁxes within entire words already familiar.
In the newly constructed Seneca verbs with English roots the choice of a form for the pronominal preﬁx has been simpliﬁed. With respect to what follows the preﬁx, all these verbs contain a-stems, so only the pronominal preﬁx forms that precede a-stems need be produced. The conversion into a-stems is accomplished by preﬁxing to the English root the middle voice morpheme, which can be seen as having the shape -ade- in the examples in (25), although this shape is partially obscured in (25d) by the regular change of a to o˛ after n. This middle voice marker no longer has its usual function of marking middle voice within these words, but seems to be present only to simplify the options for the shape of the preceding pronominal preﬁx.
What precedes the pronominal preﬁx has been standardized in a similar way. In these verbs with English roots the pronominal preﬁx is always preceded by a morpheme that Iroquoian linguists have called the dualic. In (25a) the dualic appears as de-, in (25b) as -t-, in (25c) as -d-, and in (25d) as d- plus a lengthening of the following vowel. These forms are themselves diverse, but they follow familiar patterns and combine with the following pronominal preﬁx in familiar ways. The dualic appears in a great many words, and any ﬂuent Seneca speaker in some sense “knows” how to handle its various forms and the manner in which they combine with pronominal preﬁxes. The functions of the dualic preﬁx are varied too, but in these new verbs those functions have been lost; the dualic appears to be present only to narrow the choice of the pronominal preﬁx form to one possibility, namely the form that occurs between the dualic preﬁx and an a-stem.
These and other characteristics of these new Seneca words put them in a new morphological category, one in which accent patterns have been modiﬁed and several morphemes no longer function as they do in more traditional Seneca words. There is, then, the ﬂowering of a new morphological pattern which, if the language continued to be used, would almost certainly become more and more widespread. This new development is obviously a response to environmental pressures radically diﬀerent from those under which the Seneca language changed in the past. The overwhelming inﬂuence of English is leading to a uniquely new pattern for Seneca words. (The same development is taking place in Oneida, and probably other Northern Iroquoian languages.)
The question of productivity arises again. I have asked Seneca speakers whether it is possible to insert any English verb whatsoever into the middle of a

62

WALLACE CHAFE

new Seneca verb of this type. The answer has been no, there are just certain English words that have been adopted into the language in this way. But obviously their number is increasing. People are creating neologisms of this sort quite frequently, so that the process is in that respect analogous to the earlier process of noun incorporation. Although people recognize whether such a word is one they have heard before, new ones are being made, and they can enter the language without much trouble if people ﬁnd them useful.

4. Conclusion
It would seem that languages, at various times in their histories, fall in love with certain ways of doing things, with a resulting ﬂorescence of resources that were already present in the language to a lesser degree. This drive to extend the scope and usage of already present resources can be a major force in their further grammaticalization. The Northern Iroquoian languages signiﬁcantly increased their inventories of pronominal preﬁxes, above all by introducing gender into the third person. They also greatly increased the use of noun incorporation, maintaining its less than fully productive lexical nature but applying it in many situations where it had not been used before. It would now appear that these languages, heavily inﬂuenced by English, are in the process of exploiting still another morphological pattern, one in which English verbs are being introduced within Iroquoian verbs with a new morphological pattern that simpliﬁes the choice of pronominal preﬁx forms.
One can also make a case that these examples of ﬂorescence are responses to factors in the external environment. The strong focus on the masculine singular category that developed in the Northern Iroquoian languages can be seen as a response to the conspicuous, even ﬂamboyant role of individual males. The blossoming of noun incorporation can be seen as a response to the strong value placed on oratorical virtuosity. And obviously the introduction of English verbs into Seneca verbs has resulted from the dominance of English in almost all circumstances of language use.
It would be worth looking for cases of ﬂorescence as a force in grammaticalization in other language families, and to consider also whether such cases, if they are found, can be related to factors in the external environments of the languages concerned.

FLORESCENCE AS A FORCE IN GRAMMATICALIZATION

63

Notes
1. I am indebted to Michael Cysouw for his observation that it makes better sense to interpret Huron as representing an earlier stage of development, rather than as innovating, as in Chafe (1977).
2. According to Cysouw’s analysis, the use of ye- for feminine singular was an innovation that took place after the separation of Huron from the Five Nations. Earlier I was bothered by the fact that this same development is found in Tuscarora, which diverged from Northern Iroquoian before Huron did. Possibly the Tuscarora development was independent, but it is intriguing to supposed that it might have originated in a common Tuscarora-Cayuga branch of the family as hypothesized in Chafe and Foster (1981), later spreading to Seneca, and then to Onondaga, Oneida, and Mohawk, which retained the use of the nonhuman forms as alternative ways of expressing feminine singular.

References
Abbott, Cliﬀord. 1984. “Two feminine genders in Oneida”. Anthropological Linguistics 26:125–137.
Biggar, Henry P. 1924. The Voyages of Jacques Cartier: Published from the originals with translations, notes, and appendices. Ottawa [Publications of the Public Archives of Canada 11].
Chafe, Wallace. 1967. Seneca Morphology and Dictionary. Washington: Smithsonian Institution [Smithsonian Contributions to Anthropology 4].
Chafe, Wallace. 1976. The Caddoan, Iroquoian, and Siouan Languages. The Hague: Mouton.
Chafe, Wallace. 1977. “The evolution of third person verb agreement in the Iroquoian languages”. In Charles N. Li (ed.), Mechanisms of Syntactic Change. Austin: University of Texas Press.
Chafe, Wallace. 1990. “Uses of the defocusing pronominal preﬁxes in Caddo”. Anthropological Linguistics 32:57–68.
Chafe, Wallace and Foster, Michael K. 1981. “Prehistoric divergences and recontacts between Cayuga, Seneca, and the other northern Iroquoian languages”. International Journal of American Linguistics 47:121–142.
Cook, William H. 1979. A Grammar of North Carolina Cherokee. Yale University, Ph.D. dissertation.
Cysouw, Michael. Manuscript. A History of Iroquoian Gender Marking. Downing, Pamela. 1977. “On the creation and use of English compound nouns.” Lan-
guage 53:810–842. Lounsbury, Floyd G. 1961. “Iroquois-Cherokee linguistic relations”. In William N. Fenton
and John Gulick (eds), Symposium on Cherokee and Iroquois Culture [Bureau of American Ethnology Bulletin 180].

64

WALLACE CHAFE

Michelson, Karin. 1982. “Two feminine pronominal preﬁxes in Oneida”. Paper read before the Association for the Anthropological Study of Play, London, Ontario.
Mithun, Marianne. 1981. “Stalking the Susquehannocks”. International Journal of American Linguistics 47:1–26.
Mithun, Marianne. 1982. “The mystery of the vanished Laurentians”. In Anders Ahlqvist (ed.), Papers from the Fifth International Conference on Historical Linguistics, Galway. Amsterdam and Philadelphia: John Benjamins [Current Issues in Linguistic Theory 21].
Mithun, Marianne. 1984. “The evolution of noun incorporation”. Language 60:847–894. Mithun, Marianne. 1999. “Noun and verb in Iroquoian: Multicategorisation from multiple
criteria”. In Petra M. Vogel and Bernard Comrie (eds), An Anthology of Word Classes. Berlin: Mouton de Gruyter. Morgan, Lewis Henry. 1851. League of the Ho-de-no-sau-nee, Iroquois. Rochester: Sage and Brother. (Numerous reprintings.) Pulte, William and Feeling, Durbin. 1975. Outline of Cherokee Grammar. Tahlequah, OK: Cherokee Nation of Oklahoma. Bound with Durbin Feeling, Cherokee-English Dictionary, William Pulte (ed.), Tahlequah, OK: Cherokee Nation of Oklahoma. Scancarelli, Janine. 1987. Grammatical Relations and Verb Agreement in Cherokee. University of California, LA, Ph.D. dissertation. Scancarelli, Janine. 1988. “Variation and change in Cherokee: Evidence from the pronominal preﬁxes”. In William Shipley (ed.), In Honor of Mary Haas: From the Haas festival conference on native American linguistics. Berlin: Mouton de Gruyter. Shimony, Annemarie Anrod. 1961. Conservatism among the Iroquois at the Six Nations Reserve. Yale University Publications in Anthropology No. 65. (Reprinted by Syracuse University Press, 1994.) Thwaites, Reuben G. 1896–1901. The Jesuit Relations and Allied Documents. 73 volumes. Cleveland: The Burrows Brothers Company. Tooker, Elisabeth. 1964. An Ethnography of the Huron Indians, 1615–1649. Bureau of American Ethnology Bulletin 190. (Reprinted by Syracuse University Press, 1991) Trigger, Bruce. 1976. The Children of Aataentsic: A history of the Huron people to 1660. Kingston and Montreal: McGill-Queen’s University Press.

On the Genesis of the Verb Phrase in Cariban Languages
Diversity through Reanalysis
Spike Gildea
Rice University and Museu Paraense Emílio Goeldi
1. Introduction: word order typology and the Cariban family
The Cariban language family is well-known in the typological literature on basic word order due to Hixkaryana and a number of other languages which have been argued to have the typologically rare basic word order OVS (Derbyshire 1977; Derbyshire and Pullum 1981). Other synchronic Cariban languages have been argued to have the basic orders SOV, VSO, Absolutive-V-Ergative, and syntactically free word order. Certain subsets of clauses in certain Cariban languages have additionally been argued to be nonconﬁgurational (lacking a VP constituent). In this paper, I consider the comparative evidence for reconstructing some basic word order to Proto-Carib, and conclude that given the current lack of detailed information about the cross-Cariban grammatical patterns in question, we can do no more than reconstruct an OV verb phrase. Although this conclusion in itself is less than satisfying, the path to this conclusion leads through two points of theoretical interest: (i) When comparing word orders for the purpose of reconstruction, it turns out that “Basic Word Order” at the level of the entire language is an abstraction which does not reconstruct well (at least in Cariban, and probably in many other language families); in contrast, at the level of individual “cognate” constructions, constituency facts reconstruct quite well. (ii) Not all modern clause types are relevant for reconstructing the order properties of main clauses in the ancestor language — innovative clause types show distinct constituency properties, most of which easily reconstruct as constituency properties of their respective source constructions. These two points constitute the main theoretical contribution of this paper.

66

SPIKE GILDEA

Since most of the modern clause types do not reconstruct as main clauses in Proto-Carib, knowing their historical constituency properties does not tell us anything new about constituency in Proto-Carib main clauses. The methodology which follows from these observations is thus (i) to identify all clause types which share a common origin and reconstruct order properties of each independently, and (ii) to determine which (if any) of the clause types attested in modern languages are reﬂexes of main clauses in the proto-language, and then restrict the database to these clause types when trying to reconstruct etymological main clause order. The main contribution of this paper to the typological database is the careful reconstruction of the diﬀerent synchronic word order patterns to their Proto-Carib sources.
This paper is organized as follows: the remainder of Section 1 reviews the notion of basic word order, previous work on word order in Cariban languages, and previous historical work on pan-Cariban verbal systems. Section 2 reconstructs the verb phrases of those innovative verbal systems which present a VP: the [SV/OV] “absolutive” VP (2.1), the standard [OV] “accusative” VP (2.2), and the typologically bizarre [AV] “ergative” VP (2.3).1 Section 3 reconstructs the lack of a VP constituent in another innovative clause type. Section 4 then turns to the modern reﬂexes of Proto-Carib main clauses, so as to reconstruct a Proto-Carib [OV] “accusative” VP, but only when the transitive subject is third person (4.1–4.3). A conﬁgurational position for S/A cannot be determined (4.4). Section 5 summarizes the ﬁndings and suggests the implications of the comparative Cariban word order scenario both for future studies of synchronic word order typology and for future eﬀorts to reconstruct word order.
1.1 What is “Basic Word Order”?
In order to reconstruct something, we must ﬁrst know what it is so that we can identify it in each daughter language and thereby compare it across the family. As the deﬁnition of “basic word order” has been the subject of some dispute, I ﬁrst brieﬂy review the uses to which the term has been put.
Greenberg (1966: 74) originally deﬁned the notion of “basic Word Order” by identifying the terms “subject” and “object” semantically, then concluding that the statistically dominant order would be considered “basic”. Hawkins (1983: 12) employed the same semantic criteria to identify units; then he used three tests to identify which order amongst these units might best be called “basic” (p. 13): (i) most frequent in attested sample (i.e. of natural discourse) = basic; (ii) most frequent in grammatical contexts (e.g. occurs with more lexemes) = basic; (iii) unmarked (either grammatically or pragmatically) = basic. For a large majority

ON THE GENESIS OF THE VERB PHRASE IN CARIBAN LANGUAGES 67
of the languages in his database, these somewhat intuitive criteria revealed (at least to Hawkins) a single basic order.2 Dryer (1983) advocates reducing the criteria to nothing more than attested frequency in discourse, this being presumably the test with which he has created the largest extant word order typology database (cf. the ﬁndings reported in Dryer 1988, 1992).
An increasing number of researchers are ﬁnding that the notion of a basic grammatical order of A, S and O vis-à-vis the verb may not be the most insightful. On the one hand, in many languages, the highest discourse frequency belongs to a verb-only clause, in which any order of subject and object vis-à-vis the verb appears less basic, since subjects and objects rarely occur as explicit noun phrases (Payne 1986: 453, 459); on the other hand, when subjects and objects do occur explicitly, their order vis-à-vis the verb often cannot be predicted from their grammatical relation, but are instead better predicted from pragmatic information associated with each participant (Mithun 1987; Payne 1987; Payne (ed) 1992, inter-alia, Downing and Noonan (eds) 1995, inter-alia).
From the other direction, deﬁnitions of basic order have also come from more formal traditions, in which basic order is equated with “deep” structure, usually that from which all the surface variants can be most readily derived by movement rules (McCawley 1970; Derbyshire 1977, 1985) or theory-internal principles (Hale 1992). In this tradition, the notions of subject and object are considered derivative from constituency in the VP, object internal to the VP and subject external. Thus any assymetry between subjects and object are taken as evidence for constituency, regardless of the evidence of more traditional tests for constituency (Hale 1982, 1990, 1992; Jelinek 1984). While frequency might be expected to follow more-or-less directly from constituency facts (e.g. an [OV] verb phrase constituent might be expected to produce a high frequency of OV order), Hale (1992) argues convincingly from Papago data that discourse frequency may be completely unrelated to this notion of basic order; Payne (1994) argues the same point from Panare data.
Little attention has been paid to the possibility — so prevalent in the Cariban languages — that diﬀerent constructions in a single language may present “split conﬁgurationality”, in which diﬀerent constructions in a single language partake of diﬀerent VP structures (cf. Comrie 1989: 89 for German; Payne 1994, 1999: 153–57 for Panare; Gildea 1999 for the entire Cariban family; Bresnan 1995 [cited in Payne 1999] for a theoretical position on split conﬁgurationality). As might be expected, the determination of a single “basic word order” can be controversial in such cases, where syntactic constituency is inconsistent and frequency facts might also vary across the diﬀerent construction types.
In this paper, I examine order and constituency across the modern languages

68

SPIKE GILDEA

of the Cariban family in search of reconstructible patterns. If basic word order is deﬁned in terms of frequency, I have no principled means of using comparative evidence to reconstruct a prior most frequent order — we have no prehistorical texts on which to use our quantitative methodologies, nor can we reconstruct any. If basic order is deﬁned in terms of a single deep structure from which all surface variants are to be derived, it is somewhat diﬃcult (and excessively theory-dependent) to know ﬁrst, which deep structure to choose for each synchronic language, and second, what sort of deep structure to reconstruct, given that we do not know how deep structures evolve, and we do not yet have a detailed knowledge of the surface structures which would presumably be derived from our reconstructed deep structure. Thus, simple comparison across related languages is insuﬃcient to allow us to reconstruct either of the abstractions that go under the name “basic word order”.
However, a few voices in the literature point out the possibility of reconstructing modern order by reconstructing certain nonverbal constituents which later evolve into main clause verb phrases. Bybee (1988: 354) points out that in principle, “One grammatical order is not established on analogy with or to harmonize with another order, rather a new grammatical construction develops in a language out of the constructions that already exist and shows ordering consistent with the construction from which it developed.”3 Following this same line of reasoning, Aristar (1991) shows that a number of Greenbergian word order correlations could be traced not to synchronic “harmonic principles” (cf. Hawkins 1983), but to common origin, as a single agreeing modiﬁer construction in the Agaw (Cushitic) languages gave rise to relative clauses, genitival phrases and adjectival phrases, all of which then “harmonize”. In the example most germane to the present paper, Claudi (1994) shows that a change in “basic order” from SVO to SOV in Mande and from VSO to SVO in Egyptian Coptic both result from the reanalysis of gerunds (verbal nouns) which were possessed by their notional O arguments: in both cases, N > V and Genitive > O. The genitive-N order in Mande thus yielded an innovative OV order, whereas the NGenitive order in Coptic yielded the innovative VO order. As she summarizes (Claudi 1994: 218–19), “the fact of word order change comes from the fact that the Genitive N order encodes the O and V meanings, respectively, but that the order of O and V in main clauses is DIFFERENT from the order of genitive and noun.” [emphasis in original]
After a review of previous word order studies in the Cariban language family, I show the parallel Genitive N source for all of the innovative VPs in modern Cariban languages; I also show how one source construction that lacked a genitive phrase evolved into a nonconﬁgurational VP.

ON THE GENESIS OF THE VERB PHRASE IN CARIBAN LANGUAGES 69

1.2 Cariban languages and word order typology

Modern Cariban languages present many order variations, of which OVS and SOV appear to be the most common. Determining basic order by a variety of methods, the following proposals have been made (D&P refers to Derbyshire and Pullum 1981):

Apalaí

SOV/OVS

Bakairí Carib of Surinam De’kwana Hianacoto-Umawa Hixkaryana

OVS SOV/nonconﬁgurational SOV OVS OVS

Makushi Panare

SOV OVA/SV OVS OVS

Pemón Tiriyó Waiwai Wayana

OVS/VSO OVS SOV/OVS/nonconﬁgurational SOV “topic ﬁnal”

(Koehn and Koehn 1986, D&P) (D&P) (Hoﬀ 1978, 1995) (Hall 1988) (D&P) (Derbyshire 1961, 1977, 1985, 1986) (Carson 1982) (Abbott 1991) (D&P) (Cauty 1974, Mattéi-Muller 1981, D&P) (Payne 1994) (D&P) (Meira 1999) (Hawkins 1998) (Tavares 1999)

These studies of word order have relied on three diﬀerent types of methodology: syntactic properties (i.e., constituency) of the various orders, gross frequency counts of the various orders, and pragmatic or stylistic eﬀects associated with individual instances of the various orders. As examples of the ﬁrst methodology, Derbyshire (1977, 1985) argues from co-occurrence restrictions that a preverbal subject occupies a syntactic “topic” slot rather than having this as a basic order (a test which has not, to my knowledge, been replicated in any other Cariban language to date); Gildea (1993a) suggests that the subject in innovative Panare clause types is rigidly postauxiliary (which entails also a post-VP order), and Payne (1994) also places the Panare subject following the VP. Hoﬀ (1995) for Carib, Tavares (1999) for Wayana, and Meira (1999) for Tiriyó conclude that there is no evidence for a syntactically restricted subject position (either NP VP or VP NP) in any clause type. Several studies have concluded from morphosyntactic and prosodic phenomena that

70

SPIKE GILDEA

OV constitutes a valid VP constituent (cf. Section 4.1 below). There are numerous examples of the second methodology, including Hoﬀ (1978) for Carib, Derbyshire (1986) for Hixkaryana, Hall (1988) for De’kwana, Payne (1994) for Panare and Tavares (1999) for Wayana. Only three of these, Hoﬀ (1978) for Carib, Derbyshire (1986) for Hixkaryana, and Payne (1994) for Panare, pass eﬀectively to the third methodology, that of explaining the frequency counts by oﬀering some discussion of the stylistic eﬀects associated with individual tokens of variation from the most frequent orders.
Numerous claims have also been made about historical change in word order in the Cariban family. Derbyshire (1981, 1985, 1987) argues that the OVS order in Hixkaryana, Makushi, and Taulipang, as well as the mixed SOV/OVS order in Apalaí, are innovations from a Proto-Carib basic order of SOV, instantiated synchronically in Carib of Surinam and Waiwai. In a review of order patterns in Carib, De’kwana, Apalaí, Hixkaryana, and Panare, Payne (1994: 582–3) points out that the main order variants are SOV, OVS, and VSO, with the ﬁrst two variants common in most languages and the ﬁnal rare in all but Panare, where it is in fact the most frequent order. In a number of languages, SVO is also a common option, but in no language does it appear to be basic for this clause type. As Payne notes, the languages seem to arrange themselves in a cline, with preferred orders as follows:

SOV

Carib, De’kwana

SOV ~ OVS

Apalaí

OVS

Hixkaryana

OVS ~ VSO Panare

The simplest scenario would thus appear to begin with SOV (Carib, De’kwana), then via the reanalysis of an afterthought construction (Derbyshire 1981, 1985), SOV > OVS (in progress in Apalaí, completed in Hixkaryana); the afterthought construction would then enter a second cycle, this time acting on the O, yielding OVS > VSO (in progress in Panare, Payne 1994). These changes apparently triggered no other changes in constituent order, so the typological correlates of the innovative OVS order ended up identical to those of the prior (and typologically common) SOV order (viz. ‘they have postpositions, genitive precedes the head noun, they are dominantly suﬃxing, and auxiliary elements are suﬃxed to or follow the verb’ — Payne 1994: 582).4
In addition to the change from SOV to OVS, Derbyshire posited an earlier ergative case-marking system, retained in all clause types in Makushi, but only in the more conservative subordinate clauses in Hixkaryana and Carib. Whereas in 1981 Derbyshire was reluctant to connect these two changes, and in Derby-

ON THE GENESIS OF THE VERB PHRASE IN CARIBAN LANGUAGES 71
shire (1985: 104) he explicitly suggests that “the breakdown in the case-marking system may follow the change in word order”, in Derbyshire (1987: 316–7) he was willing to assert that “a diachronic change from SOV to some other basic order has resulted in a partial change from ergative to accusative (or neutral) case-marking and/or agreement systems”.
However, looking at a much larger database of Cariban languages, I have shown (Gildea 1998) that the opposition is not simply between ergative and nonergative case-marking, but that there are (at least) seven distinct verbal systems attested in modern Cariban languages, and that each of these seven has a distinct etymology. These systems diﬀer in terms of case-marking (two show ergative case-marking, the rest have no case-marking), verbal person marking (one has a complicated series of personal preﬁes marking both A and O, one shows absolutive proclitics and ergative encilitcs, one shows only absolutive proclitics, one shows only accusative proclitics, one shows only ergative proclitics, and two show no person-marking) and occurrence/agreement properties of auxiliaries (one shows no auxiliaries, one shows auxiliaries that do not vary for person, three show auxiliaries that agree with nominative, one shows auxiliaries that agree with absolutive, one shows auxiliaries that agree with accusative). These properties and others (Gildea 1998 [ch. 2]) combine to form constellations of morphosyntactic properties that simply cannot be reconstructed to common sources. In particular, it is clear that ergative case-marking and absolutive verbal person-marking do not reconstruct to Proto-Carib main clauses, but rather have their sources in Proto-Carib nominalized and adverbialized subordinate clauses; thus, all of the ergative verbal systems in main clauses in Cariban languages are innovative. Any connection between the putative change from Proto-Cariban SOV to Hixkaryana OVS therefore cannot be connected to the innovation of main clause ergativity, since Hixkaryana does not show this innovation.
While it was not the focus of my attention in Gildea 1998, it is nonetheless the case that at least six of these seven verbal systems have somewhat diﬀerent VP constituents,5 and that — along with the component morphology of each system — these constituents reconstruct to their nonverbal sources (cf. Bybee 1988; Aristar 1991; Claudi 1994). My goal in the remainder of this paper is to present a more global picture of the innovative conﬁgurational properties in the family (Section 2–3), then to have a look at reconstructing a conﬁgurational VP for the more recalcitrant Proto-Carib verbal system (Section 4).

72

SPIKE GILDEA

2. Reconstructing the innovative VPs

Four of the ﬁve innovative verbal systems show a strong VP constituent, although the VPs themselves are interestingly diﬀerent: two take the absolutive as their internal argument [SV/OV] (2.1), one is a standard [OV] (2.2), and the fourth is striking in that the sole internal argument is the A (2.3).

2.1 The [SV/OV] “absolutive” VPs

Two separate verbal systems show apparently identical VP structure: with transitive verbs, the O immediately precedes the verb, forming a syntactic constituent; with intransitive verbs, the S immediately precedes the verb, forming a syntactic constituent. These properties both reconstruct to the same source, a possessed nominalization (2.1.1). In previous work (Gildea 1992, 1998), I have given verbal systems with such a VP structure the arbitrary label Set II (in contrast with modern reﬂexes of the Proto-Carib verbal system, which I labeled Set I — Section 4). The diﬀerence between the two Set II systems is in their treatment of A, postverbal S, and the agreement properties of auxiliaries, all of which are easily explained as a function of the source construction within which the possessed nominalization was reanalyzed.

2.1.1 The Full Set II system The Full Set II system, found in at least ﬁve Cariban languages, is characterized by absolutive verb proclitics (1b), (1d), (2b), (2d) and ergative case-marking on explicit A (pro)nouns (1a), (2c–d). In the Pemón subgroup (Pemón, Kapón and Makushi, spoken primarily in Brazil, Guyana and Venezuela, respectively), certain tenses and aspects take a non-agreeing auxiliary (1a), (1c) and the verb frequently bears personal enclitics marking person of A, followed by the ergative case-marker (1b).6

(1) Makushi: the Full Set II system (Abbott 1991: 102, 123)

[O

V] A

Aux

a. no’santon yeurG-pGtG-Ø arimaraka-ya ko’mamG-’pG

old:woman bark-- dog- -

‘The dog kept barking at the old woman.’

[ Adv ] [

o-V-a

]

b. mGrGrG warantG u-pGika’tG-Ø-Ø-ya-’nGkon

that like 1-help--2--

‘Like that you-all help me.’

ON THE GENESIS OF THE VERB PHRASE IN CARIBAN LANGUAGES 73

[S

V ] Aux

c. to’ erepamG-’pG wanG-’pG

they arrive- be-

‘They had arrived (before).’

[ s-V ] d. u-wetun-Ø sGrGrG
1-sleep- . ‘I’m sleeping’

(2) Kuikúru: the Full Set II system (Franchetto 1990: 408)

[S

V]

a. karaihá katsun-tárG

non.indian work-/

‘The non-indian is working.’

[ s-V ] b. cué i-kacun-tárG
hard 3-work-/ ‘He is working hard.’

[O

V ]Prt

A

c. kuk-aki-sí

ta-lGi]o

léha karaihá-héke

1-word- hear-  non.indian-

‘The non-indian will hear our words.’

[ o-V ]

Prt A

d. i-ta-lGi]o

léha i-héke

3()-hear-  3-

‘He will hear it.’

The Full Set II system presents a solid VP constituent which takes the absolutive as its internal argument (most carefully argued in Franchetto 1990 for Kuikúro, but with similar evidence easily encountered in the other languages, as discussed below). There is no evidence for a rigid syntactic order of A vis-à-vis the VP, as A occurs frequently either before or after the OV unit (although the most reduced form of A occurs as a postverbal clitic). While no frequency study has been published for any Full Set II system, in the text appended to Abbott (1991), only SV and OV were attested for verbs with explicit S and O arguments, whereas of the 12 clauses with explicit A arguments, 8 preceded the VP and 4 followed.
I have reconstructed the Full Set II system before (Gildea 1997a, 1998 [Chapter 9]), but since the source of the Full Set II VP is also relevant to the Partial Set II system, I brieﬂy reiterate the source here.

74

SPIKE GILDEA

Throughout the Cariban family, a possessor noun and its possessed noun form a tight constituent: only certain particles (that modify the possessor NP) are allowed between the two; in some languages, phonological evidence indicates phrasal status (Derbyshire 1985: 181 for phrase as “phonological word” in Hixkaryana; Franchetto 1990: 409 for suprasegmental marking of the VP-internal absolutive in Kuikúru; Mattéi-Muller 1981: 64–66, Payne 1993 for segmental alternations and stress shift in NP, VP and PP in Panare; Gildea 1991, citing Hoﬀ 1968, personal communication, for Carib of Surinam); in several languages, a ‘linker’ morpheme occurs between the two, preﬁxed to the possessed; and in nearly all of the family, the possessor NP is in alternation with a possessive proclitic on the possessed noun (Gildea 1998: 105–116).
Most Cariban subordinate clauses are formed on the basis of nominalized verbs, in which the notional absolutive argument of the verb obligatorily possesses the derived noun; the notional A, if it occurs explicitly, is an oblique adjunct (Derbyshire 1994; Gildea 1994b, 1998 [Chapter 7]). Consider the illustrative examples from Makushi ((3a), Abbott 1991: 68) and Carib ((3b), Hoﬀ 1968: 121). In (3a), the intransitive verb enna’po ‘return’ is possessed by the second person possessive proclitic, which refers to the notional S, the ‘returner’; the entire possessed derived noun then serves as the O of the transitive main verb. In (3b), the transitive verb eta ‘hear’ is nominalized, then possessed by the notional O ayaura ‘your words’; this [Genitive N] phrase is then the object of the postposition ke ‘Instrumental’, with the notional A coming after the PP as an adjunct.

(3) Makushi and Carib: possessed nominalized verbs

[ possr-Possd ]NP a. aw-enna’po-’pG-kon

V-a epu’tG-’pG-i-ya

2-return-.- know--3-

‘He knew you-all returned.’

(lit. ‘He knew of you-all’s past returning.’)

[[Possr Possd]NP b. ay-aura eta-xpo

]PP Obl, ke G-’wa, eero s-ukuu-sa

2-words hear-.  1-, this 1-know-

‘Because your words have been heard by me, I know this.’

(lit. ‘With the hearing of your words by me, I know this.’)

Thus, if we can identify a construction in which such a nominalized verb might be reanalyzed as part of either Set II system, the Genitive N possessive phrase provides a ready source for the [OV/SV] absolutive VP. And in fact, I have identiﬁed six such source constructions (Gildea 1998 [chapters 9–10]), four of which have developed into the Full Set II verbal system (cf. below), and two into

ON THE GENESIS OF THE VERB PHRASE IN CARIBAN LANGUAGES 75

the Partial Set II verbal system (cf. Section 2.1.2 below). One of the four will be suﬃcient here to illustrate the general Full Set II evolutionary pattern.
Figure 1 diagrams what I call the pleonastic pivot source,7 in which the main clause is an equative construction with a pleonastic subject and the predicate is a possessed nominalization, with the possibility of adding an oblique agent phrase if the nominalized verb is transitive. After reanalysis, the pleonastic subject simply drops out of use or is reanalyzed into another function (cf. Gildea 1998: 164). If such a change were to occur in English, it would be roughly equivalent to: ‘It (is) my sleeping’ > ‘my sleeping’ = ‘I sleep / am sleeping’ and ‘It (is) my employing by the university’ > ‘my employing by the university’ = ‘The university employs me / is employing me.’
Independent Clause

Predicate NP

S-Nomi

Source:

Poss V-*-r-i]N i (A-Obl)

Result: [ O/S V-Present ] A-Erg

Ø

Figure 1. The Pleonastic Pivot > an Action Nominalization in an Equative Clause

Examples of the source are not so easily encountered in the literature. The clearest pre-reanalysis examples come from Apalaí ((4) Koehn and Koehn 1986: 109), the post-reanalysis examples from Makushi being exactly parallel, but with a new epistemic or emotive value now attached to the optional sentenceﬁnal pronouns ((5) Abbott 1991: 106):

(4) Apalaí: the pre-reanalysis pleonastic pivot, intransitive verbs

a. y-Gto-rG moro

b. a-Gto-rG moro

1-go- that

3-go- that

‘I was going.’

‘He was going’

(lit. ‘That is my going’)

(lit. ‘That is his going.’)

76

SPIKE GILDEA

(5) Makushi: the post-reanalysis imperfective, intransitive verbs a. a-tG-Ø mGrGrG 3-go- . ‘He is going / will go / goes (of interest to you)’ b. uu-tG-Ø sGrGrG 1-go- . ‘I am going / will go / go (of interest to me).’
The order of the oblique A in Proto-Carib is not clear, as it does not appear to have a ﬁxed pre-reanalysis order in any language described to date. Derbyshire (1981, 1985) takes the preposed order as primary in Hixkaryana, and uses this as the basis for reconstructing SOV order to Proto-Carib. However, in recent personal communication he suggests that it is simply an adjunct postpositional phrase, and that, while like any adjunct it can be placed preceding the derived nominal, more recent work with co-translators has convinced him that the other possibility, post-nominal placement, is in fact more frequent. To my knowledge, statistical studies of the placement of this oblique agent phrase have not been carried out in any Cariban language, and as such, we have no basis for claiming any order as synchronically basic, nor for reconstructing any order as basic in Proto-Carib. My personal suspicion is that the order in Proto-Carib was syntactically free, and thus pragmatically conditioned, as it appears to be today in those Cariban languages which have not reanalyzed it.
In the absence of a syntactically rigid postverbal placement of the ergative A, the ergative enclitic in the Pemón Group Full Set II system requires explanation. I propose that the postverbal position of the postpositional agent phrase correlates with a given, topical information status (cf. Payne 1992: 6–11 for discussion of how typologically common such placement appears to be when the order of S/A is not conﬁgurationally restricted). Thus, the anaphoric and speech act participant pronouns would normally occur postverbally, and as such would be readily available for encliticization, while leaving full NP agent phrases free for placement either pre- or postverbally.
2.1.2 The Partial Set II system The Partial Set II System is characterized by absolutive verb proclitics (6a), (6d), postverbal auxiliaries that agree with the nominative for animacy (6a–b), (6d), and no case-marking on any (pro)nominal arguments. Conﬁgurationally, the absolutive proclitics are in alternation with a preverbal free absolutive argument

ON THE GENESIS OF THE VERB PHRASE IN CARIBAN LANGUAGES 77

(6a–b), (6c–d); the explicit nominative argument shows a fairly rigid postauxiliary position (Gildea 1993). To date, the Partial Set II system is clearly described only in Panare (but cf. Gildea 1998 [ch. 10] for other possible attestations).

(6) Panare: the Partial Set II system (Gildea 1998: 21; Payne 1994: 590)

[ o-V

] Aux A O

a. yG-petyú’ma-ñe këh kën arakon

3-hit- 3 s/he black.monkey

‘S/he is gonna hit the monkey.’

[O

V

]Aux A

b. arakon

pétyu’ma-ñe këh kën

black.monkey hit- 3 s/he

‘S/he is gonna hit the monkey.’

[S

V]

c. ake wë-të-n

snake -go-

‘The venomous snake goes’

[ s-V ]

(Aux) S

d. y-u-të-n

(këh) e’ñapa

3--go- 3 Panare

‘The Panare goes’

Although a preverbal S can alternate with the absolutive proclitic (as in 6c–d), in texts the S is almost exclusively encountered postverbally, and in elicitation it is frequently disallowed preverbally (Gildea 1993).8 The single argument of the intransitive verb appears to have two conﬁgurational slots, one as the preverbal argument which is internal to the verb phrase (as in (6c), the same slot occupied by the O nominal or proclitic in transitive examples (6a–b)) and the other as the postverbal nominative subject which controls auxiliary agreement (as in (6d), the same slot occupied by the A nominal in transitive examples (6a–b)). As both appear to entail constituency relations, both the preverbal and postverbal position of S require reconstruction; also in need of explanation are the strong synchronic preference for a proclitic in the preverbal S slot and a (pro)noun in the postverbal S slot.
Etymologically, the Partial Set II system clearly has the same VP nucleus as the Full Set II system: a possessed nominalized verb. However, A and S are treated diﬀerently — not only is there no ergative agent phrase in the Partial Set II System, but the copular auxiliary agrees with A and S, forming a nominative

78

SPIKE GILDEA

pattern. Thus, our source construction must be diﬀerent from the pleonastic pivot described in Figure 1. In order to assure auxiliary agreement with S/A, we must reconstruct a nominative pivot. To arrive at the appropriate pivot in the source construction, the predicate must either be an equative with a predicate NP coreferential with S/A (Figures 2 and 3) or an adverbial/locative phrase, which can either attribute some property to A/S (Figure 4) or locate A/S in some action (Figure 5, Section 2.2).
In Figure 2, the subject of the superordinate clause is identiﬁed as coreferential with the possessed agent nominalization in the predicate, cf. English ‘Shei is a makeri of beer / shei is (the) beer’s makeri.’ After reanalysis, the possessor is O, the possessed nominalization is the ‘Present’ inﬂected verb,9 and the subject and copula of the superordinate predicate are, respectively, the subject and auxiliary of the new clause.
Independent Clause

Predicate

S-Nomi

NP

(Copula)i

Source:

Poss

V-A.Nmlzri i

Result:

[ O(Abs)

V-Pres ]VP Auxiliary:a A(Nom)

Figure 2. A Pivot > Nominative/Absolutive: the A Nominalizer in an Equative Clause

The resultant clause is morphologically indistinguishable from an agent nominalization in a predicate nominal clause: the linear string of words in (7a–b), with their hierarchical structure, could as easily be given a nominal as a verbal translation.10 The structure is also exactly what one would expect of main clauses: the A is clearly identiﬁable as a subject, with the O in a well-behaved [OV] verb phrase.

[O

V ] (Aux:a) A

(7) a. arakon

pétyuma-ñe këh kën

black.monkey hit-

3 s/he

‘S/he is gonna hit the monkey.’ ~ ‘S/he is a hitter of the monkey

/ monkeys.’

ON THE GENESIS OF THE VERB PHRASE IN CARIBAN LANGUAGES 79

[O V

]A

b. amën pétyuma-ñe yu

you hit- I

‘I’m gonna hit you.’ ~ ‘I am your hitter / a hitter of you.’

As the Proto-Carib agent nominalization only occurs on transitive verbs, this exact source is not available to intransitive clauses. In Panare, the intransitive half of this inﬂection comes from a distinct source, the cognate to the action nominalization seen in Figure 1 as the source of the Full Set II system. However, as seen in Figure 3, the source construction in Panare utilizes the S — rather than a pleonastic subject — as the pivot. The action nominalization is possessed by the notional S, forming a constituent that can be reanalyzed as a VP; the superordinate S of the copula is coreferential with the S of the nominalized verb in the predicate, creating a second syntactic slot for the same semantic participant. The result, after reanalysis, is that the S is represented both as an absolutive preﬁx and as a postverbal noun that controls agreement with the copular auxiliary. An English parallel would be something like ‘Hei is hisi singingi’ = ‘he sings / is singing / will sing.’

Independent Clause

Predicate

S-Nomi

NP

(Copula)i

Source:

Possi

V-Act.Nmlzri i

Result:

[S(Abs)

V-Pres]VP Auxiliary:s S(Nom)

Figure 3. S Pivot > Nominative/Absolutive: the action nominalizer in an Equative Clause

Example (8a) (repetition of (6d) above) illustrates both etymological S slots, neither of which has been reanalyzed away, in a simple nonspeciﬁc aspect intransitive clause, again morphologically indistinguishable from a possessed action nominalization in a predicate nominal clause. Example (8b) (from (6c) above) shows the parallel [SV] clause (which looks identical to the Full Set II SV clause).

80

SPIKE GILDEA

s-V

Aux:s S

(8) a. y-u-të-n (këj) e’ñapa

3--go- 3.be Panare

‘The Panare goes’

[S

V]

b. ake wë-të-n

snake -go-

‘The venomous snake goes’

A second means of obtaining an S/A pivot is to place a nominalization into an attributive predicate, cf. Figure 4. The nominalized verb is possessed by its notional absolutive, then this NP is the object of the attributivizing postposition *pe, and the resulting derived attributive phrase is the predicate of the copular clause. The copula agrees with its subject, which is the notional A/S of the nominalized verb. English approximations might be ‘Hei is like [a (potential) maker of beer]i’ = ‘he will make beer’ and ‘hei is like [hisi (potential) singing]i’ = ‘he will sing’.

Independent Clause

Predicate

S-(Nom)i

PP

(Copula)i

NP

*pe ‘Attr’

Possi

V-Nmlzri i

[S/O(Abs)

V-T/A

T/A ]VP Auxiliary:a/s S/A(Nom)

Figure 4. S/A pivot > Nominative/Absolutive: the predicate attributive construction

After reanalysis, the nominalizer bonds with the postposition to form a single complex future tense marker and the S/O forms a VP with the following V; similarly, the S/A pattern together in controlling auxiliary agreement and in being assigned a rigid syntactic slot after the auxiliary. For illustration, consider the Panare future, -séhpa.11 In (9a–b) the verbal proclitics indicate person of S and O,

ON THE GENESIS OF THE VERB PHRASE IN CARIBAN LANGUAGES 81

respectively, while the postverbal ﬁrst person pronoun indicates the identity of S and A, respectively. The nominal analysis is no longer available for this form in Panare, as no simple nominalizing reﬂex remains of the source nominalizer, *-cetG.

(9) Panare -séhpa ‘Future’ < *-cetG ‘Potential.Action.Nmlzr’ + pe ‘Attributive’

s-V

S[

Obl

]

a. Ø-w-atarama-séhpa-nkë yu tyakó-pe arakon pëh kuure

1--hunt--again 1 other- monkey for many

‘I will hunt again for more monkeys.’

o-V

AO

b. y-amenkë-séjpa pG yu kapere

3-write-  1 paper

‘I’m not going to write anything’

(lit. ‘I won’t write the paper.’)

This scenario explains not only why the Partial Set II A behaves diﬀerently from the Full Set II A, but also why the S partakes in both the absolutive and the nominative behaviors. It is not unexpected that, given a choice of two etymological syntactic slots, the free form would prefer the slot associated with the main clause predication (as subject of the copula) and the obligatory expression of the S inside the VP would be simply the proclitic, now functioning primarily as a verbal agreement preﬁx.

2.2 The [OV] “accusative” VP

The standard [OV] verb phrase is found only in the innovative Progressive verbal system, found in some ﬁve or six modern languages and characterized by accusative verbal proclitics, postverbal auxiliaries that agree with the nominative, and no case marking on any free (pro)nominal arguments. Conﬁgurationally, the accusative proclitics are in alternation with free accusative (pro)nouns; the explicit nominative argument is usually postverbal, post-auxiliary as well in Panare and Apalaí but pre-auxiliary in the Pemón subgroup. In Apalaí and the Pemón subgroup, free O nouns can only precede the verb, whereas in Panare O more frequently comes to the right of A, yielding the order o-V(Aux)AO.

(10) Panare: the Progressive verbal system

V

(Aux) S

a. a-të-nëpëh

këh kën

-go-. 3.is s/he

‘S/he is going.’

82

SPIKE GILDEA

o-V

(Aux) A O

b. y-anG-mpëh

këh kën aire’

3-eat.meat-. 3.is s/he ﬂesh

‘S/he is eating meat.’

[O

V]

(Aux) A

c. aire’ v-anG-mpëh

këh kën

ﬂesh -eat.meat-. 3.is s/he

‘S/he is eating meat.’

(11) Makushi: the Progressive verbal system

V

Aux

a. entamo’ka-npG’ wai

eat-. 1.be ‘I’m eating (now)’ (Abbott 1991: 114)12

[O

V]

A

Aux

b. t-ewG’

koneka-pG’ it-akon ko’mamG-’pG

3-house make-. 3-brother remain-

‘Hisi brotherj continued making hisj house.’ (Abbott 1991: 122)

A [o-V]-aux

c. amírG-nGkó] i-eká-pG-má]

2- 3-bite-- ‘You are/were biting it.’ (Carson 1982: 146)13

The transitive forms are easily reconstructed as the same action nominalizers seen above (Section 2.1), followed by the postposition *poko ‘on, occupied with’. Thus, the accusative VP in the progressive is formed exactly like the transitive half of the Absolutive VP in the Partial Set II attributive source: the nominalized transitive verb is possessed by its notional O, then becomes the object of a locational postposition *poko, and the postpositional phrase is the predicate of a copular clause. The possessor becomes the O, the possessed nominalized verb becomes the new main verb, the nominalizer and postposition collapse into a single progressive inﬂection, and the copula and its subject become the auxiliary and nominative, respectively (also precisely parallel to the source of the English progressive). Examples (12a–b) illustrate the expected patterns in Panare and Pemón (Álvarez 1996), respectively.14

ON THE GENESIS OF THE VERB PHRASE IN CARIBAN LANGUAGES 83

(12) The transitive progressive in (a) Panare (*-n pëh) and (b) Pemón (*-Ø pë’)

o-V

(Aux) A

a. y-anG-mpëh

këh kën

3-eat.meat-. 3.be 3

‘S/he is eating it (meat).’

O

V

b. mGre nGmGkG-pë’

Ø-ichi-’pë

child expect-. 1-be-

‘I was expecting the child.’

What is curious is the absence of the parallel intransitive [SV] verb phrase. Here, the allomorphy of the progressive suﬃx helps to guide us. In all but one of the languages where the reanalysis is attested, the progressive inﬂection shows suppletive allomorphy depending on the transitivity of the verb: transitive verbs clearly take some modern reﬂex of the action nominalization followed by the postposition, *-rG poko; intransitive verbs show a diﬀerent pattern, which reconstructs to *-no poko. In many languages of the Cariban family there exists a nominalizing suﬃx, reconstructed to Proto-Carib as *-no ‘inﬁnitive’, which derives a noun that cannot be possessed at all (Gildea 1998: 134). I illustrate with examples from Carib (Hoﬀ 1968: 201–2), where -no occurs on both transitives and intransitives, giving the semantic reading ‘the fact of being V-ing on a certain occasion’. The notional S is unspeciﬁed in (13a), the notional O in (13b).

(13) a. [waaretaa-no] s-eeta-i tuuna ta

sing-

1-hear- river in

‘I have really heard singing on the river (i.e. singing of un-

known origin).’

b. [auwano-po-no] poko

mando«]

laugh-- occupied.with they.are

‘They are making (people) laugh’

(lit. ‘they are occupied with causing laughing’)

When the inﬁnitive is reanalyzed into a main clause verb, it does not bring with it any constituent structure to be reanalyzed as a VP, hence giving us a source for the lack of the [SV] verb phrase with intransitive verbs in the Progressive verbal system. As seen in Figure 5, the inﬁnitive derives a nominal form that cannot be possessed, thus it stands alone as the object of the locative postposition, with the sole reference to its notional S participant coming via the copula and its (external) subject, which become, respectively, auxiliary and

84

Source:

NP V-Inf

SPIKE GILDEA

Independent Clause

Predicate

S-(Nom)i

PP

(Copula)i

Locative *-poko ‘on’

Result: [V-Progressive1

Progressive2]V Auxiliary:s S(Nom)

Figure 5. S/S Pivot > Nominative: Source for the Progressive.Intransitive

nominative subject of the resultant intransitive progressive clause (14a)–(c).

(14) The intransitive Progressive in (a) Panare and (b)–(c) Pemón (Álvarez 1996)

[V

] (Aux) S

a. a-të-nëpëh këh kën

-go-.I 3.be 3

‘S/he is going.’

S

[V ]

Aux

b. u-paruchi-ton ye’-nëpë’

man

1-brother- come-. 3.be

‘My brothers are coming.’

[V ]

Aux

c. ekë-ta-npë’

man

rotten--. 3.be

‘It is rotting’

The diﬃculty with the Progressive system is explaining why, when both source constructions existed side-by-side with transitive and intransitive options, the transitive was selected from the action nominalization source and the intransitive from the inﬁnitive source (cf. Gildea 1998: 201–2 for more on this conundrum). However, the syntactic source of the typologically well-behaved [OV] verb phrase is no longer a mystery. Note that the frequent occurrence of postverbal O in Panare is a later innovation, by analogy to a change which had already taken

ON THE GENESIS OF THE VERB PHRASE IN CARIBAN LANGUAGES 85

place in the Set I past-perfective clauses (cf. Gildea 1989a–b, 1998: 158–9 for extensive discussion; cf. also Section 6 below).

2.3 The [AV] “ergative” VP

One verbal system, which Franchetto (1990) calls “DeErgative” in Kuikúru, is characterized by a VP which takes as its only internal argument the subject of the transitive verb. This verbal system has only been documented in Kuikúru and Panare, and while the AV verb phrase is the same for both languages, other properties of the system are not.
Most main clauses in Kuikúru belong to the ergative Full Set II system, but within the set of three “interactive moods”, the Intentional, the Hortative and the imperative, there is a person-based split. When A is ﬁrst or second person and O third person, the verb must occur in what Franchetto has called the DeErgative conjugation.15 The DeErgative is characterized by a verbal proclitic that indicates person of A, the verbal preﬁx ñ-/]- ‘DErg’, the absence of case-marking on free nouns and the absence of auxiliaries. Due to the nature of the personal hierarchy that conditions use of the De-Ergative in Kuikuro, the De-Ergative system never occurs with a third person A; as a result, we have no examples of the construction with a free (pro)nominal A, but only with the ﬁrst or second person proclitic on the verb. The O argument can occur freely either before or after the VP.

(15) The Kuikúru De-Ergative construction (Franchetto 1990: 413)

a-V

O

a. ku-ñ-api-rái

G]éle

1+2--hit- he

‘We shall hit him.’

O a-V

b. akiñá e-]-iha-tái

u-iña

story 2--show- 1-

‘You shall tell the story to me.’

In Panare the cognate construction is used only when the speaker wishes to place the A/S of a clause in focus, either questioning the identity of A/S in an information question, answering such a question, or in placing emphasis on the identity of A/S (all functions for which subjects are fronted in English). Any person of A or S can occur in this construction. Grammatically, the A proclitic is in alternation with a preverbal A (pro)noun; A can occur in no position in the clause other than immediately preverbally. The verb bears the agent focus preﬁx n- (cognate to Kuikúru ñ-/]-). The O (pro)noun clearly does not form a phrase

86

SPIKE GILDEA

with the verb, occurring rigidly in the post-auxiliary position. The optional auxiliary agrees with O. Unlike in Kuikúru, the agent focus preﬁx n- also occurs with intransitive verbs (at least in elicitation), however the preverbal S (pro)noun appears to be required, as speakers are uncomfortable about reducing S to the proclitic form.

(16) The Panare De-Ergative subject-focus construction (Gildea 1998: 194–5)

[A V ]

O

a. “nëh nëtuhpë

mën anë” kañe

“nëh nG-utu-hpë

mën anë ka-ñe

who .-give- it mother say-

‘“Who gave (you) that, Mother?” they say.’

A

V

O

b. “e’ñapa nëtuhpë

mën Pekoro pe tiche”

“e’ñapa nG-utu-hpë

mën Pekoro pe t-iche

Panare .-give- it Pedro  3-name

‘“A Panare named Pedro gave it,”’

[

A

]

V

O

c. inoh

pG na’kamapGtGhG

mën,

yu-noh

pG nG-a’kama-pGtG-hpë

mën

1-grandmother dead .-tell-- it

‘My (late) grandmother told it over and over,’

(17) The Panare De-Ergative subject focus construction with intransitive verbs

S

V

a. nëh nataramai?

nëh n-atarama-i

who .-dance-/

‘Who danced?’

SV b. yu nataramai
yu n-atarama-i I .-dance-/ ‘I danced’

This construction cannot be analyzed as simply a stylistic order variant of some other clause type — the grammar is fundamentally diﬀerent from that of all the other clause types in both Panare and Kuikuro. This is the only construction in

ON THE GENESIS OF THE VERB PHRASE IN CARIBAN LANGUAGES 87

which the transitive subject is indexed with the set of verbal proclitics usually reserved for the absolutive, and in Panare the auxiliary agreement normally reserved for the nominative is claimed by the direct object. In Panare the constituency tests, which in other verbal systems show that the absolutive or the accusative forms a constituent with the following verb, can be applied to this construction to show that A and S form a constituent with the following verb. The conﬁguration of this clause type is thus exactly reversed from that of the other main clause types. Beyond the simple order variation, these conﬁguration facts require explanation.
Like the other innovative verb phrases, this VP comes from a possessed nominalization. As is often the case typologically, the Proto-Carib object nominalization presents a diﬀerent structure from the action and subject nominalizations. It is formed by adding the preﬁx *nG- to a subset of the action nominalizations; the possessor then is obligatorily the notional A and the notional O does not occur (cf. English ‘my employee’, where the A possesses the nominalization). The object nominalization did not occur with intransitive verbs (and arguably still does not in any modern Cariban language). Again I illustrate with Makushi examples (Abbott 1991: 72). In (18a), the notional A, t-inyo ‘her (own) husband’ precedes and possesses the nominalized verb, which in turn serves as the O of the main verb yanumG ‘pick up’; note that the noun saaro ‘meat’ precedes the possessed nominalization, apparently in a modifying apposition relationship. This same relationship exists between a lexical noun and a modifying derived noun in (18b), but with the linear order reversed: the object nominalization is possessed by the ﬁrst person possessive proclitic, but it is the noun in apposition to the noun it modiﬁes, pemonkon ‘person’, the O of the main verb.

(18) Makushi: the Object Nominalization

[[ Possr a. sararu t-inyo

Possd ]NP n-arima-’pG

V-a ] yanumG-’pG-i-ya

meat 3-husband .-send- pick.up--3-

‘She picked up the meat that her husband had sent.’

(lit. ‘The meat, her husband’s sent thing, she picked up.’)

[possr-Possd]

O

V-a

b. u-n-era’ma-’pG

pemonkon ekaremekG-Ø-u-ya

1-.-see- person tell-/-1-

sGrGrG

a-pG’

. 2-to

‘I will tell you (about) the one I saw.’

(lit. ‘I will describe the person, my seen one, to you.’)

88

SPIKE GILDEA

Obviously, this possessed noun phrase provides an ideal source for the DeErgative VP, right down to the nasal preﬁx on the verb, as shown in Figure 6. The Proto-Carib object nominalizing preﬁx *n- occurs on a verb already bearing one of a small subset of the action nominalizing suﬃxes, and the resultant noun is possessed by the notional A. This possessed noun is then the predicate of a simple equative clause, which takes as its subject the notional O. After reanalysis, A is internal to the VP, O is external (with all the expected syntactic freedom of any etymological S), and the copular auxiliary (when it occurs) agrees with O. An English parallel would be ‘Ii am his employeei’ > ‘He employs me’.
Independent Clause

Source:

Poss

(A)

Predicate

Si

NP

Copulai

n-V-Nmlzri (V)

Result:

A

A.Foc-V-T/A (Auxiliary)

O

DErg-V-T/A

Figure 6. S/O pivot > [AV]: the Object Nominalization Source

After reanalysis, A forms a constituent with the V, leaving the O to follow in the slot assigned to it by the auxiliary. In Kuikúru, the construction remains restricted to transitive verbs, and becomes the non-ergative part of the person-based split ergative system (cf. the ‘DErg’ gloss in Figure 6). In Panare, this postreanalysis construction becomes the only way to formulate sentences which question the identity of A and answers to such questions; it also occurs in certain additional contexts where the identity of A is in focus (cf. the ‘A-Foc’ gloss in Figure 6). The same preﬁx (with its preceding possessor cum ergative) then extends to intransitive verbs in Panare, creating a true conﬂation of A and S.16

ON THE GENESIS OF THE VERB PHRASE IN CARIBAN LANGUAGES 89

3. Reconstructing the nonconﬁgurational verbal system

This section presents and then reconstructs the *t-V-ce system, which has no apparent VP constituent. The *t-V-ce verbal system occurs in at least ﬁve Cariban languages (Gildea 1997b) and potentially in several more (Gildea 1998 [ch. 13]); it is characterized by the verb bearing some modern reﬂex of the preﬁx *t- and the suﬃx *-ce, functioning in the modern system as an ambiﬁx, usually indicating past tense and/or completive/perfective aspect. There is no verbal person marking, but if an auxiliary occurs, it agrees with the absolutive; the absolutive nominals are unmarked and the A bears an ergative suﬃx. There is no evidence for any constituency relationship between any nominal arguments and the verb, although in Carib of Surinam, the verb must precede the auxiliary. While all orders of nominal arguments and verb can be elicited, and all are attested in text, the most frequent orders are OVA and VS (Tavares 1999 for Wayana, Meira 1999 for Tiriyó). The following examples from Wayana texts (Tavares p.c.) are illustrative:17

S

V

(19) a. yorok t-ët-apua-y

spirit /--open-/

‘The spirit opened’

V

S

b. t-ët-apua-y

yorok

/--open-/ spirit

‘The spirit opened’

O

V

A

c. yorok t-ëmëyipa-y e-ya-he

spirit /-call-/ 3--

‘they called the spirit’

A

V[

O]

d. ariko-ya rëken tu-wë-y pëkënatpë pakira

ariko- only /-kill-/ one

pig

‘Ariko only killed one pig.’

Hoﬀ (1995: 358) reports: “The participle [t-V-se – SG] must precede the auxiliary verb. Otherwise, constituent order is free…”. In illustrative examples
taken from texts (20)–(21), we see two cases of intransitive V with no S, plus transitive verbs with the very unusual orders (for Carib) VOA and OAV:18

90

SPIKE GILDEA

V

[

(20) inooro-mbo tG-tuuwaróngex-ka-Ø

moxkaaro

then

/-be.inattentive--/ they

O

]

AV

[ Loc ]

t-aroo-naa-mon

i-’wa, tu-w-oomá-Ø

tuuna xtaaka

3-convey-- 3-by /--throw-/ water into

[ Loc ] Aux mooro-mbo po man there- at 3 ‘And then, his guards (were) caused to be inattentive by him, and at that unlikely place he threw himself into the river.’

V

Aux, [ O ] A V

Aux

(21) paxporo tii-to-Ø man, paxporo tuuna i-’wa t-oone-Ø man

all

/-go-/ 3 all

water 3-by /-see-/ 3.be

‘He went everywhere, he saw all rivers.’

Koehn and Koehn (1986) do not speciﬁcally address word order for the cognate construction in Apalaí, but their examples show A, S and O in both preverbal and postverbal position. Meira (1999: 536, 552–3) reports similar word order freedom in the Tiriyó cognate construction, and in my elicitation ﬁeld notes I have recorded parallel freedom for Kaxuyana and Akuriyó. This freedom diﬀers markedly from the patterns seen until now, and thus must reconstruct to a distinct source.19
In every Cariban language described to date, a stative/passive participle (very like a verbal adjective) can be derived from a verb by means of an ambiﬁx which is a modern reﬂex of Proto-Carib *t-V-ce (Gildea 1998: 140–51). The semantics of this participle vary between potential (22) and past (23); the morphosyntactic properties are perfectly consistent in that it is never possessed, and thus never forms a tight syntactic bond with a noun, either as an attributive nominal modiﬁer or as the complement of a copula. In some languages the participle has no means of expressing the notional A of the verb (e.g. Hixkaryana, Derbyshire 1985: 95), but in others, an oblique agent phrase can co-occur (e.g. Tiriyó, Meira 1999: 334).

(22) Hixkaryana: the participle with potential reading

(Derbyshire 1985: 95)

[tonoso ]

naha kyokyo

t-ono-so

naha kyokyo

Ad-eat.meat- 3. parrot

‘Parrot can be eaten.’

ON THE GENESIS OF THE VERB PHRASE IN CARIBAN LANGUAGES 91

(23) Tiriyó: the participle with past reading (Meira 1999: 334)

a. wëri nG-tën-Ø tG-pakoro ta t-ëëka-e

ëkëi ya

woman 3-- 3-house to -bite- snake 

‘The woman went home bitten by a snake / snake-bitten’

b. ap6i n-ai t-ee-pahka-e

chair 3- -:-break-

‘His/her seat is broken.’

When this participial form is reanalyzed into a main clause verb, it cannot bring with it any constituent structure to be reanalyzed as a VP. The t-V-ce verbal system is transparently derived etymologically from a source construction in which the t-V-ce participial form was the complement of a copular clause; this then entered into the well-known evolutionary path of participle to passive to ergative (Figure 7). The most detailed look at the entire evolutionary scenario is presented in Gildea (1997b), with additional Cariban languages added to the database in Gildea (1998 [Chapter 13]).

Independent Clause

Predicate

Si

Prtcpl

Copulai

(NP Dat)

Source: t-V-cei i

Result 1: Vtr-Passive VIntr-Perfect

Auxiliaryi Auxiliaryi

Si (Patient)
Si

(Obl) (Agent)

Result 2: V-Past

(Auxiliaryi)

S/Oi

A-Erg

Figure 7. Stages of Evolution from participle to main clause verbal system

The intransitive participle simply follows the path of the French Passé Composé, going directly to a completive/perfective reading without being subjected to the interplay of voice like the transitive participle.
The lack of conﬁgurational relationships in the t-V-ce verbal system follows directly from the lack of such relationships in the source: the A phrase arrives on

92

SPIKE GILDEA

the scene as an oblique adjunct, formulated by analogy to the agent phrase adjuncts found in other nonﬁnite forms and thereby sharing in their lack of constituency with the nonﬁnite verb form. In all the languages where this reanalysis has become prominent, the lack of a syntactically restricted order of S and Copula means the O/S of the new ergative clause type similarly has no syntactically restricted order vis-à-vis the verb or auxiliary.20 Thus, the word order preferences indicated in Carib (Hoﬀ 1995), Wayana (Tavares 1999) and Tiriyó (Meira 1999) are nothing more than preferences, presumably intended to indicate something about the pragmatic status of the various parts of the sentence.

4. Reconstructing the Proto-Carib VP
Now that we have explained away the VP structure in all the innovative verbal systems, this section addresses the complex conﬁgurational properties of the Set I verbal system, the only one which reconstructs to Proto-Carib as a verbal system. While it is diﬃcult to deduce much about the evolution of the VP in a system so old, at least some of the complexity yields to a combination of comparative and internal reconstruction, until we are left with a residue which cannot be further reconstructed in the absence of new comparative data.
The Set I system is characterized primarily by a complex set of personal preﬁxes, analyzed by various linguists as reﬂecting an ergative, an absolutive, a tripartite, an inverse, a hierarchical, or an active-stative system (for a survey, cf. Gildea 1998: 16–18, 79–96). However one chooses to characterize them, the forms of the preﬁxes are cognate across the 19 languages which retain the system. The system is additionally identiﬁable by unique Tense-Aspect-Modality suﬃxes, which interact in idiosyncratic ways with number suﬃxes (Derbyshire to appear, Gildea 1998: 96–103). There is no case-marking on nouns, nor do auxiliaries ever occur.
In the modern Set I systems, conﬁgurational properties of O appear to depend on the person of A and O: for clauses with third person A and third person O, O normally must precede the V, forming a tight VP bond with it (4.1). For clauses with third person A and non-third-person (Speech Act Participant — SAP) O, the VP in most modern Set I systems does not contain the free O pronoun, but the verb bears a preﬁx indicating person of O; I argue that a VP can be reconstructed to Proto-Carib, with the O preﬁx the remnant of a VP-internal O pronoun (4.2). When A is non-third person (SAP A), O may precede or follow the V, and in no order is there any evidence for a VP constituent (4.3). Intransitive clauses appear to have no syntactically rigid order of S and V, nor do

ON THE GENESIS OF THE VERB PHRASE IN CARIBAN LANGUAGES 93

transitive clauses ever appear to have a syntactically rigid order of A and V (4.4).

4.1 The clear [OV] Verb Phrase in 3A3O sentences

The evidence for an OV constituent in modern Cariban languages is as follows:

– alternation between a free O nominal and a verbal proclitic *n- (illustrated for 14 languages in Gildea 1998: 60–74).
– prosodic evidence for a phrase, usually involving shift in accent in one or both of the words (Mattéi-Muller 1981: 64–66; Payne 1993).
– phrase-internal segmental alterations in the verbal preﬁx for Panare (MattéiMuller 1981: 64–66; Payne 1993)
– placement of second-position clitics/particles, in which the [OV] VP is treated as a single unit, and cannot be separated by a clitic/particle (Hoﬀ 1995; Meira 1999).

For the ﬁrst and last properties, consider these illustrative examples from Carib of Surinam (Hoﬀ 1995: 353): (24a–d) illustrate the alternation between the proclitic n- and the preverbal O, but not A; (25a–b) illustrate that the second position particle hkuru ‘certainly’ can follow the entire VP (25a), but it cannot come between O and V (25b).

o-V (24) a. n-ukuutG-i
33-know-/ ‘He has known him.’

A o-V b. a-yuumG n-ukuutG-i
2-father 33-know-/ ‘Your father has known him.’

[O

V]

c. [a-yuumG ukuutG-i]

2-father know-/

‘He has known your father.’

A

[O

V]

d. piipi

[a-yuumG Ø-ukuutG-i]

grandmother 2-father 3-know-/

‘He has known your father.’

94

SPIKE GILDEA

[O

V ] PRT

(25) a. [a-yuumG Ø-ukuutG-i] hkuru

2-father 3-know- certainly

‘He certainly has known your father.’

O PRT

V

b. *a-yuumG hkuru Ø-ukuutG-i

While such studies of the interaction between particles and constituency have been published only for Carib (Hoﬀ 1995) and Tiriyó (Meira 1999), until counterexamples begin to appear, I hypothesize that cognate Set I VPs will show the same behavior. In the meantime, relying only on the alternation between preverbal O and proclitic, I have found that a clear synchronic VP exists for 14 of 19 languages, and for two others such a VP is at least available as a stylistic option (Gildea 1998: 78). The four languages where the alternation does not exist are easily identiﬁed as innovative (Gildea 1998: 74–78), leaving a clear preponderance of evidence in favor of reconstructing the 3A3O VP to Proto-Carib. This VP is exactly the source of most claims that Cariban languages have a basic OV order.

4.2 Reconstructing an [OV] VP for 3A acting on SAP O

In most modern Cariban languages, when 3A acts on SAP O, the conﬁgurational information is simply marked on the verb in the form of a personal preﬁx, and a free O pronoun either cannot occur (cf. Hixkaryana, Derbyshire 1985: 8 interpreted in Gildea 1998: 70, note 5) or occurs in addition to the verb plus its preﬁx, arguably not forming a VP constituent with the verb (cf. Tiriyó, Meira 1999: 532–535; Carib, Hoﬀ 1978, 1995). However, in Panare sentences with 3A acting on SAP O, a preverbal O pronoun is in complementary distribution with the O preﬁx (26a–b). Similarly, Hoﬀ (1978: 25, note 5) indicates that parallel sentences are also possible in Carib (27a–b), provided by Hoﬀ in personal communication).

o-V

A

(26) a. a-petyú’ma-yah kën

2-hit- s/he

‘S/he hit you.’

[O

V

]A

b. amën pétyu’ma-yah kën

2 hit- s/he

‘S/he hit you’

[O V ] (27) a. aawu ukuutï-i ~
1 know-/ ‘He has known me.’

O [ o-V ] aawu y-uukuutï-i ~ 1 1-know-/ ‘He has known me.’

o-V y-uukuutï-i 1-know-/ ‘He has known ‘me.’

ON THE GENESIS OF THE VERB PHRASE IN CARIBAN LANGUAGES 95

[O

V]

b. amooro eene -i ~

2 see-/

‘He has seen you.’

O [ o-V ] amooro ay-eene -i ~ 2 2-see-/ ‘He has seen you.’

o-V ay-eene-i 2-see-/ ‘He has seen ‘you.’

Based on these alternations, and on both phonological and morphosyntactic parallelism between the SAP O preﬁxes and possessive preﬁxes (which retain a much more robust pattern of alternation with free forms), I reconstruct the entire set of Carib inverse preﬁxes (i.e. preﬁxes which indicate 3A acting on a SAP object) to a Pre-Proto-Carib set of free object pronouns internal to the VP (Gildea 1994: 200–1, 1998: 83–4).21 Thus, I claim that in Proto-Carib, whenever A is third person, it is plausible to reconstruct a VP constituent with OV order.

4.3 On the lack of a VP with SAP A

In all modern reﬂexes of the Set I system, when A is ﬁrst, second, or ﬁrst person inclusive, the verbal personal preﬁx is obligatory regardless of the order of O and V (Gildea 1998: 78); in this clause type, there is no evidence for a VP constituent, with wide variation in possible orders of explicit O arguments (although the actual number of order possibilities and the statistical frequency of each allowed order apparently varies widely across the family). Derbyshire (1985: 76) points out that in Hixkaryana, postverbal O is allowed with ﬁrst or second person A; he adds (in personal communication) that in recent translation work by native speakers, he is ﬁnding that the postverbal order of O is apparently preferred with ﬁrst or second person A. Following Jelinek’s (1984) theoretical lead, Payne (1994) argues that in Panare, the verbal preﬁx is the true O argument of any verb that bears one, thus giving any external (pro)nominal refence to O the syntactic status of merely a coreferential adjunct (although a high-frequency adjunct). Only when a preverbal O NP replaces the personal preﬁx can we argue that this O is syntactically internal to the verb phrase. As a preverbal O NP never supplants the preﬁx when A is non-third-person (SAP), the implication is that Panare never presents an [OV] VP with SAP A.
Hoﬀ (1995) reinforces the point for Carib of Surinam by use of the second position particle test: not only does the free O (pro)nominal behave like an adjunct in terms of syntactic freedom, but it can be followed by the second position particle hkuru ‘certainly’ (28a), whereas the OV sequence cannot be (28b). Recall that in the 3A3O clause, the [OV] sequence showed precisely the opposite pattern (25a–b), conclusively demonstrating the diﬀerence between the

96

SPIKE GILDEA

two types of clause. Similar data for Tiriyó can be seen in (29a–b) (Meira 1999: 533–4).

[ O ] PRT

V

(28) a. a-yuumG hkuru s-ukuutG-i

2-father certainly 13-know-

‘I certainly have known your father’

*[ O

V ]PRT

b. *a-yuumG s-ukuutG-i hkuru

[ O ] PRT

V

(29)

a. yi-pG mo

w-amoht6-i

1–wife  1-call-

‘I would call my wife.’

*[ O

V ] PRT

b. *yi-pG w-amoht´-i mo

4.4 The Unresolved Problem of the Order of the Nominative Subject

Like O in clauses with SAP A, the order of the Set I nominative subject is not conveniently linked to reconstructible morphology. For this paper, the important fact about all the order studies in the family (reviewed in Section 1) is that they document a great deal of synchronic variation in the order of the subject: in every single language, pre-VP and post-VP orders are both allowed and zero subjects are common. This indicates that we are dealing with a syntactically free argument. Unlike the case of the syntactically free SAP O pronouns with 3A (Section 4.2) , we have no morphological clues to a previous constituency status for the subject argument and as such, we are forced to reconstruct a syntactically free subject at least as far back as Proto-Carib.
This brings up a slightly diﬀerent issue in reconstruction of syntax: to the extent that basic word order is taken to be constituent structure, we can go no farther. But if we accept the notion that some syntactic notion of basic word order can be determined by either pragmatic markedness interpretation, or by discourse frequency of given orders, we might still be able to determine a basic (i.e. most frequent) order for the subject vis-à-vis the OV unit, and in that case the question might arise as to whether we could reconstruct such a “basic” order to Proto-Carib. My answer is no, that a basic order which is derived from frequency counts cannot be reconstructed for any proto-language because there will never be either a speaker of the proto-language to give pragmatic markedness judgements nor texts in the proto-language that allow one to count order frequency.

ON THE GENESIS OF THE VERB PHRASE IN CARIBAN LANGUAGES 97
Derbyshire (1985) suggests that order in subordinate clauses preserves facts about order in older main clauses. However, as I have noted before (Gildea 1992: 56–8; 1998: 47–49), while dependent clauses are more conservative than main clauses, what they conserve in Proto-Carib is clearly not main clause morphosyntax, but dependent clause morphosyntax — that is, reconstructions show convincingly that main clause morphosyntax in Proto-Carib is almost completely unrelated to subordinate clause morphosyntax (cf. also sections 2–3). In any event, preposed versus postposed order of the oblique A vis-à-vis the AbsV unit in nominalized subordinate clauses is every bit as open to question as order of the A in main clauses (cf. discussion above in Section 2.1.1).
The one remote possibility I can see for reconstructing a statistically predominant basic order to Proto-Carib would be to start at the bottom, with a solid classiﬁcation of the Cariban family and text counts in every single relevant Cariban language. We might then discover that all members of given branches of the family share similar order frequencies, which might allow us to reconstruct statistically predominant orders to the proto-branch levels, and so on back to Proto-Carib itself. The problem with testing this idea is that we still have no reliable internal classiﬁcation of the family (cf. Gildea 1998: 3–11), and even if we did, we have reliable frequency studies of only Carib, De’kwana, Hixkaryana, Panare, and Wayana. Nonetheless, we may soon be able to do such studies in at least two small branches, the Taranoan group (consisting of Akurió, Karihona, and Tiriyó, cf. Meira 1998) and the Parukotoan group (consisting of Hixkaryana, Kaxuyana, and Waiwai, cf. Gildea 1998: 92–94), and as other clear branches are identiﬁed, the possibilities will expand.
5. Conclusion
The primary contribution of this article is to point out that syntax can, indeed, be reconstructed. That is, when one reconstructs the morphology of a given construction, one is often able to reconstruct some of the associated syntactic constituency relationships as well. Interestingly, the synchronic variations in constituency are always (at least in these data) associated with splits in casemarking and/or verb agreement; the reconstruction of the latter two can lead naturally to the reconstruction of the former. Thus, even in the relatively poorlydocumented Cariban family, it is possible to reconstruct a good deal of the synchronic order variation of modern languages to the constituency properties of a restricted subset of Proto-Carib source constructions.
A second point, which falls out from the ﬁrst, is that reanalyzed construc-

98

SPIKE GILDEA

tions — which contain both morphological and syntactic clues to their origins — can be reconstructed more reliably than analogical shifts in word order that may not be associated with any morphological implications. As a corrolary to this, etymologically more recent arrivals into main clause morphosyntactic constructions are far easier to reconstruct than older systems: the newer systems show less variation, and knowledge of their source makes it easier to identify which variations have been created subsequent to their arrival in main clauses. Older systems have had more time to vary in unpredictable ways, and without information as to the source constructions from which the older systems emerged into main clauses, we have no reliable way to conﬁrm internal reconstructions of changes. Hence, it is relatively easy to reconstruct the sources for order splits in the innovative clause types in the Cariban family, but diﬃcult to reconstruct word order beyond a certain point for the Proto-Carib verbal system.
Finally, this study opens a potentially interesting new avenue for word order typology. By taking a closer look at the synchronic constituency facts in Cariban languages, we can now see that most prior word order studies, and perhaps the entire enterprise of Basic Word Order typology, have either missed or ignored some of the most interesting patterns. It may prove instructive to re-evaluate the typological importance of the rare basic order OVS, given that most of the clear examplars, the Cariban Set I systems, only show a clear synchronic OV verb phrase in clauses with third person A, third person O, and an explicit 3O argument. All other conﬁgurations of person, and all other verbal systems which might co-exist synchronically with the Set I system, lack this “basic” conﬁgurational order. In future research, perhaps typologists could reconsider whether word order is a property of entire languages; from the Cariban perspective, it appears more appropriately considered (like ergativity) to be a property of speciﬁc clause types.

Acknowledgments
Earlier versions of this paper were presented at the University of Oregon and Rice University colloquia, where it beneﬁtted from comments by various people. Thanks are more speciﬁcally due to Desmond Derbyshire, Berend Hoﬀ, Marie-Claude Mattéi-Muller, Doris Payne and Therese Thonus, who oﬀered written comments on previous drafts. They bear no responsibility for the remaining mistakes. The research for this paper was carried out with ﬁnancial support from the National Science Foundation, grants no. BNS-8609304 and DBS-9210130, the Wenner Gren Foundation for Anthropological Research, the National Philosophical Society, and the Rice University Dean of Humanities. Thank you to Dr. Denny Moore and Dra. Priscila Faulhaber for their logistical and administrative assistance at the Museu Paraense Emílio Goeldi.

ON THE GENESIS OF THE VERB PHRASE IN CARIBAN LANGUAGES 99

Notes

1. In word order studies, the symbols S, O and V represent “subject”, “object”, and “verb”, respectively. In cases where order of intransitive and transitive subjects is not identical, this system breaks down. Since this is frequently the case in the Cariban languages, from this point on I follow Dixon’s (1979) use of S only for intransitive subject, with A indicating transitive subject. When I use the term “subject” in subsequent prose, it should be understood as referring to a category composed of both A and S (the nominative).
2. Although cf. Payne 1987, followed by Hale 1992, Payne 1992b for a case-study of O’odham (Papago), a language where Hawkin’s methods apparently yielded an unsatisfactory result.
3. This claim appears a bit too categorical. As I show in Gildea 1989a: 49–52, reiterated in Gildea 1998: 158–9, the innovative postverbal order for O in the Partial Set II system in Panare is best understood as allowed by analogy to the postverbal order of O in the Set I system.
4. This would also be consistent with Dryer’s (1992) ﬁnding, that order of A/S relative to the verb does not really correlate signiﬁcantly with orders of other constituents, whereas order of O relative to the verb shows many such correlations.
5. The seventh, which I call the *t-V-ce-mG system, is not suﬃciently well understood to be usable in this study. The etymology is clear and the constituency facts of the source construction are not diﬃcult to identify (Gildea 1998 [Chapter 14]), however the modern constituency properties have yet to be thoroughly investigated, placing this system outside the scope of the current study.
6. For the ease of the reader, I convert language-speciﬁc orthographic conventions to a general schema in all examples. On the left are the symbols I use in this paper, to the right, the equivalent symbols used for each language are arranged in columns.

Apalaí Carib HixkaryaG Kuikúru Makushi Panare Pemón Tiriyó Wayana

Gy

ïG

â

î, G

G, ï

ü, ï ï, ü ï

6 --

-- --

--

--

6, ë ö, ë ë, ö ë

yj

yy

y

y

y

y

j

j

ñ --

-- ny

ñ

--

ñ

--

--

--

] –-

] --

g

--

--

--

--

--

]« –-

~] --

--

--

--

--

--

--

ts –-

-- –-

c

--

--

--

--

--

v –-

–- tx

--

ch

ch

ch

--

--

h –-

hh

h

--

j

h

h

h

’h

‘ --

’

’, ‘

’

’

–-

--

With regard to grammatical abbreviations, since the nuances of meaning or function are not at issue in this paper, I take the liberty of simplifying complex glosses like Panare ‘Past Perfective 1’ to simply ‘Past’, while both Panare ‘Nonspeciﬁc Aspect’ and Makishi ‘Universal Tense’ become simply ‘Pres’. In place of the various glosses given to the diﬀerent components of the t-V-ce ambiﬁx by various authors, I simply put ‘T/A’ (for ‘Tense-Aspect’) under each. Other terms are all spelled out and/or explained at their ﬁrst mention. My convention for order symbols above examples is: capital A, S, O and V refer to free words representing, respectively, transitive subject, intransitive subject, direct object and verb; lower-case a-, s-, and o- represent bound forms referring to the same argument; brackets indicate salient syntactic phrase boundaries.

7. I use the term ‘pivot’ following Dixon 1994, in which it designates coreference relationships

100

SPIKE GILDEA

between pairs of clauses, either conjoined or main-dependent. Dixon focused on the nominative properties of S/A pivots (in which S of one clause is obligatorily coreferential with A of the other) and the ergative properties of S/O pivots (in which S of one clause is obligatorily coreferential with O of the other). I use the term ‘pleonastic pivot’ to indicate a coreference relation in which S of the superordinate clause is coreferential with the entire subordinate clause, cf. English Iti seems [that John is happy today]i.
8. Payne (1994: 591) reports that the order SV is less common than VS in texts, but not overwhelmingly so. However, her counts are not reliable in this regard, as she conﬂated main clause verbs and nonﬁnite verbs (= derived nouns) into the same category, due to their morphological similarity. Given the rigid possessor-possessed order for derived nouns, all nonﬁnite verbs would show up in her counts with the order SV, skewing the results away from the expected VS order for the innovative main clause verbs. Mattéi-Muller (personal communication) suggests that all cases of SV order, including the example in 6c, are better analyzed as synchronic nominalizations.
9. Payne, Payne and Gildea (1992) label this inﬂection ‘Nonspeciﬁc Aspect’. It covers a wide semantic range, almost precisely that covered in other Cariban languages by the Set I ‘nonpast’ or the Full Set II ‘Universal’ or ‘Present’: present habitual, present progressive, immediate future, and very recent (and still currently relevant) past. Here, I gloss it simply as ‘Pres’.
10. One might be excused for asking why we need to have two analyses for the sentences in 7a-b. For a full discussion of the evidence in favor of reanalysis, cf. Gildea 1998: 153–160, 203–209, which summarizes, and evaluates responses to, the points made in Gildea 1989a-b, 1992, 1993.
11. Mattéi-Muller (p.c.) analyzes the ﬁnal vowel of -séhpa as the synchronic trace of an etymological nominalizer, *-no, which conditions the ﬁnal e of adverbial forms to become a (cf. Tiriyó kure ‘pretty, good’, kura-no ‘pretty one, good one’. By this analysis, the entire reconstructed form would be *-cetG-pe-no and the source construction a true predicate nominal, rather than a predicate attributive. I ﬁnd this hypothesis quite promising, and once the data in support of it are published (Mattéi-Muller to appear), I may also adopt it here. By either hypothesis, the ultimate source of the absolutive and nominative conﬁgurational patterns is the same, a possessed nominalization.
12. The Makushi glosses are mine — although we agree that Abbott’s glosses are inadequate, Álvarez (1996) and Gildea (1998: 206–7) disagree as to the appropriateness of the glosses I give here.
13. These glosses are Carson’s, except for those on the morphemes that indicate the progressive. As Carson failed to note the crucial glottal stops that distinguish between the postposition cum progressive marker -pG’ and the nominalizer cum perfective suﬃx -’pG, she has to work through a somewhat tortuous argumentation to explain how they can be the “same” thing and yet have such diﬀerent meanings and morphosyntactic behaviors. As a result, her glosses are somewhat confusing and I have substituted my own.
14. These are my glosses, which diﬀer from those given by Álvarez; cf. Gildea 1998: 208–9 for summary and discussion of our disagreement over whether the Pemón progressive has been reanalyzed.
15. The story is more complicated, especially for plurals — cf. Franchetto 1990 for details.
16. Mattéi-Muller (personal communication) expresses surprise and doubt at the Panare examples I collected in elicitation showing the extension of the n- subject focus preﬁx to intransitive verbs, and also its co-occurrence with etymologically ﬁnite verbal inﬂections (cf. Gildea 1998: 194). She is checking the reliability of these examples in current ﬁeld work, and if she is

ON THE GENESIS OF THE VERB PHRASE IN CARIBAN LANGUAGES 101
unable to conﬁrm my examples, the Panare system will be more parallel to Kuikúro in being restricted to transitive verbs. 17. I simply gloss each half of the t-V-ce ambiﬁx as ‘T/A’ (for Tense/Aspect) in both Wayana and Carib, but it should be noted that the semantics of the constructions varies signiﬁcantly (Hoﬀ 1995; Tavares 1998; Gildea 1998 [ch. 13]). A note on allomorphy: in Wayana *-ce > -y/ V+___. 18. Hoﬀ (1995) calls the construction a passive, but his translations of these examples do not always reﬂect that analysis; (Gildea 1994a) shows that the discourse pragmatic properties of this construction are more consistent with the inverse voice (which, unlike passive, is pragmatically a transitive voice), and then (Gildea 1997b) shows that the inverse in Carib appears to be a transitional stage en route to the ergativity seen in the other languages. In this context, Hoﬀ’s active translations for some of these clauses make more sense. A note on allomorphy: in Carib, *-ce > -Ø following a, o, and e. 19. In personal correspondence, Franchetto reports that the cognate construction in Kuikúru does not show similar word order freedom, but instead follows the dominant pattern of the language, SV/OVA. I hypothesize that this restriction is a later innovation, by analogy to the dominant conﬁgurational order in the Kuikúru Full Set II system. 20. Only in Panare does the subject of a copular clause have a restricted, conﬁguration-like position vis-à-vis the copula; the order properties of the t-V-ce clause type in Panare have not been independently studied. 21. In Gildea (1994: 200–3), I extend the same analysis to the 3A3O proclitic *n-.
References
Abbott, Miriam. 1991. “Macushi”. In Desmond. C. Derbyshire and Geoﬀrey. K. Pullum (eds). 23–160.
Álvarez, José. 1996. “Construcciones progresivas en pemón e panare: ¿Nominalización o reanalisis?” Presented at IX Jornadas de Lingüística ALFAL-AsoVAC, Barquisimetro, November 17–23.
Aristar, Anthony R. 1991. “On diachronic sources and synchronic pattern: An investigation into the origin of linguistic universals”. Language 67:1–33.
Bresnan, Joan. 1995. “Lexical functional syntax (Barcelona version)”. Stanford University. ms. [Reproduced at the European Summer School in Logic, Language and Information, University of Barcelona, August 13–25, 1995.]
Bybee, Joan L. 1988. “The diachronic dimension in explanation”. In John Hawkins (ed.), 350–379.
Bybee, Joan, Haiman, John and Thompson, Sandra A. (eds). 1997. Essays on Language Function and Language Type. Amsterdam and Philadelphia: John Benjamins.
Carlson, Robert (ed.). 1989. Proceedings of the Fourth Paciﬁc Linguistics Conference. Eugene, OR: University of Oregon, Department of Linguistics.
Carson, Neusa. 1982. Phonology and Morphosyntax of Macuxi (Carib). University of Kansas, Ph.D. dissertation.

102

SPIKE GILDEA

Cauty, A. 1974. “Reﬂexiones sobre ‘las formas ﬂexionales’ del idioma Panare”. Antropológica 37:41–50.
Claudi, Ulrike. 1994. “Word order change as category change”. In William Pagliuca (ed.). 191–231.
Comrie, Bernard. 1989. Language Universals and Linguistic Typology. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Darnell, Michael, Moravcsik, Edith, Newmeyer, Frederick, Noonan, Michael and Wheatley, Kathleen (eds). 1999. Functionalism and Formalism in Linguistics. Volume I: General papers. Amsterdam and Philadelphia: John Benjamins.
Derbyshire, Desmond C. 1961. “Hixkaryana (Carib) syntax structure”. International Journal of American Linguistics 27:125–142, 226–236.
Derbyshire, Desmond C. 1977. “Word order universals and the existence of OVS languages”. Linguistic Inquiry 8:590–99.
Derbyshire, Desmond C. 1979. Hixkaryana. Amsterdam: North Holland. Derbyshire, Desmond C. 1981. “A diachronic explanation for the origin of OVS in some
Carib languages”. Journal of Linguistics 17:209–20. Derbyshire, Desmond C. 1985. Hixkaryana and Linguistic Typology. Arlington: Summer
Institute of Linguistics and the University of Texas at Arlington. Derbyshire, Desmond C. 1986. “Topic continuity and OVS order in Hixkaryana”. In
Sherzer and Urban (eds). 237–306. Derbyshire, Desmond C. 1987. “Morphosyntactic areal characteristics of Amazonian
languages”. International Journal of American Linguistics 53:311–26. Derbyshire, Desmond C. 1994. “Clause subordination and nominalization in Tupi-Guar-
anian and Cariban languages”. Lingüística Tupí-Guaraní/Caribe. Revista Latinoamericana de Estudios Etnolingüísticos 8:179–198. Derbyshire, Desmond C. To appear. “The Cariban language family”. In R. M. W. Dixon (ed.) Languages of South America. Cambridge: CUP. Derbyshire, Desmond C. and Pullum, Geoﬀrey K. 1981. “Object initial languages”. International Journal of American Linguistics 47:192–214. Derbyshire, Desmond C. and Pullum, Geoﬀrey K. (ed.). 1986. Handbook of Amazonian Languages, vol. 1. Berlin: Mouton de Gruyter. Derbyshire, Desmond C. and Pullum, Geoﬀrey K. (ed.). 1991. Handbook of Amazonian Languages, vol. 3. Berlin: Mouton de Gruyter. Derbyshire, Desmond C. and Pullum, Geoﬀrey K. (ed.). 1998. Handbook of Amazonian Languages, vol. 4. Berlin: Mouton de Gruyter. Dixon, R.M.W. 1979. “Ergativity”. Language 55:59–138. Dixon, R.M.W. 1994. Ergativity. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. Downing, Pamela and Noonan, Michael (eds). 1995. Word Order in Discourse. Amsterdam and Philadelphia: John Benjamins [Typological Studies in Language 30]. Dryer, Matthew. 1983. “Coos word order”. Paper presented at the Western Conference on Linguistics, University of Oregon, Eugene.

ON THE GENESIS OF THE VERB PHRASE IN CARIBAN LANGUAGES 103
Dryer, Matthew. 1988. “Object-verb order and adjective-noun order: Dispelling a myth”. Lingua 74:77–109.
Dryer, Matthew. 1992. “The Greenbergian word order correlations”. Language 68:81–138. Franchetto, Bruna. 1990. “Ergativity and nominativity in Kuikúro and other Carib
languages”. In Doris L. Payne (ed.). 407–28. Gildea, Spike. 1989a. Simple and Relative Clauses in Panare. University of Oregon, MA
thesis. Gildea, Spike. 1989b. “Structural correlates to functional change: A Panare nominalizer
‘surfaces’ as main clause aspect”. In R. Carlson (ed.). 165–89. Gildea, Spike. 1992. Comparative Cariban Morphosyntax: On the genesis of ergativity in
independent clauses. University of Oregon, Ph.D. dissertation. Gildea, Spike. 1993. “SOV to VS in Panare: A historical explanation”. International
Journal of American Linguistics 59:44–63. Gildea, Spike. 1994a. “Semantic and pragmatic inverse: ‘Inverse alignment’ and ‘inverse
voice’ in Carib of Surinam”. In T. Givón (ed.). 187–230. Gildea, Spike. 1994b. “The Cariban and Tupí-Guaraní object nominalizing preﬁx”.
Lingüística Tupí-Guaraní/Caribe. Revista Latinoamericana de Estudios Etnolingüísticos, 8:163–77. Lima, Peru. Gildea, Spike. 1995. “The active-stative system in Kaxuyana (Cariban)”. Presented at the Summer Meeting of SSILA, Albuquerque, NM. Gildea, Spike. 1997a. “Introducing ergative word order via reanalysis: Word order change in the Cariban language family”. In Joan Bybee et al. (eds). 145–61. Gildea, Spike. 1997b. “Evolution of grammatical relations: How functional motivation precedes functional change”. In T. Givón (ed.). 155–198. Gildea, Spike. 1998. On Reconstructing Grammar: Comparative Cariban morphosyntax. Oxford: OUP. Gildea, Spike. 1999. “A case for split-conﬁgurationality: The Cariban languages”. Manuscript. Givón, T. 1984. Syntax: A functional typological introduction, vol. 1. Amsterdam and Philadelphia: John Benjamins. Givón, T. (ed.). 1994. Voice and Inversion. Amsterdam and Philadelphia: John Benjamins [Typological Studies in Language 28]. Givón, T. (ed.). 1997. Grammatical Relations: A functionalist perspective. Amsterdam and Philadelphia: John Benjamins [Typological Studies in Language 35]. Greenberg, Joseph. 1966. “Some universals of grammar with particular reference to the order of meaningful elements.” In Joseph Greenberg (ed.). 73–113. Greenberg, Joseph (ed.). 1966. Universals of Language. Cambridge: MIT Press. Guentcheva, Zlatka and Landaburu, Jon (eds). To appear. L’énonciation médiatisée, v. II. Bibliothèque de l’Information Grammaticale. Louvain: Peeters. Hale, Kenneth. 1992. “Basic word order in two ‘free word order’ languages”. In Doris L. Payne (ed.). 63–82.

104

SPIKE GILDEA

Hall, Katherine. 1988. The Morphosyntax of Discourse in De’kwana Carib. Washington University in St. Louis Ph. D. dissertation.
Hawkins, John. 1983. Word Order Universals. New York: Academic Press. Hawkins, John (ed.). 1988. Explaining Language Universals. Oxford: Basil Blackwell Ltd. Hawkins, Robert. 1998. “Wai wai”. In Desmond C. Derbyshire and Geoﬀrey K. Pullum
(eds). 25–224. Heine, Bernd. 1994. “Grammaticalization as an explanatory parameter”. In William
Pagliuca (ed.). 255–87. Hoﬀ, Berend J. 1968. The Carib Language. The Hague: Martinus Nijhoﬀ. Hoﬀ, Berend J. 1978. “The relative order of the Carib ﬁnite verb and its nominal
dependents”. In Frank Jansen (ed.). 11–27. Hoﬀ, Berend. 1995. “Conﬁgurationality and non-conﬁgurationality in the Carib language
of Surinam”. International Journal of American Linguistics 61:347–77. Jansen, Frank (ed.). 1978. Studies in Fronting. Dordrecht: Foris. Jelinek, Eloise. 1984. “Empty categories, case, and non-conﬁgurationality”. Natural
Language and Linguistic Theory 2:39–76. Koehn, Edward and Sharp Koehn, Sally. 1986. “Apalaí”. In Desmond C. Derbyshire and
Geoﬀrey K. Pullum (eds). 33–127. Lehmann, Winfred P. 1973. “A structural principle of language and its implications”.
Language 49:47–66. Mallinson, Graham and Blake, Barry J. 1981. Language Typology. Amsterdam: North-
Holland. Mattéi-Muller, Marie-Claude. 1981. “La reducción silábica en Panare”. Amerindia 6:59–84. Mattéi-Muller, Marie-Claude. To appear. “Le médiatif en Panaré, langue caribe du
Vénézuela”. In Zlatka Guentcheva and Jon Landaburu (eds). McCawley, James. 1970. “English as a VSO language”. Language 46:286–299. Meira, Sérgio. 1998. Proto-Taranoan Phonology and Inﬂectional Morphology. Rice
University, MA thesis. Meira, Sérgio. 1999. A Grammar of Tiriyó. Rice University, Ph.D dissertation. Mithun, Marianne. 1987. “Is basic word order universal?” In Russell Tomlin (ed.).
281–328. Pagliuca, William (ed.). 1994. Perspectives on Grammaticalization. Amsterdam and
Philadelphia: John Benjamins Payne, Doris L. 1986. “Basic constituent order in Yagua clauses: Implications for word
order universals”. In Desmond C. Derbyshire and Geoﬀrey K. Pullum (eds). 407–439. Payne, Doris L. 1987. “Information structuring in Papgo narrative discourse”. Language 63:783–804. Payne, Doris L. (ed.). 1990. Amazonian Linguistics: Studies in Lowland South American Languages. Austin: University of Texas Press. Payne, Doris L. (ed.). 1992. Pragmatics of Word Order Flexibility. Amsterdam and Philadelphia: John Benjamins.

ON THE GENESIS OF THE VERB PHRASE IN CARIBAN LANGUAGES 105
Payne, Doris L. 1992a. “Introduction”. In Doris L. Payne (ed.). 1–13. Payne, Doris L. 1992b. “Nonidentiﬁable information and pragmatic order rules in
‘O’odham”. In Doris L. Payne (ed.). 137–166. Payne, Doris L. 1993. “Nonconﬁgurationality and discontinuous expressions in Panare”.
Proceedings of the Berkeley Linguistics Society 19:121–138. Payne, Doris L. 1994. “OVSu versus VSuO in Panare (Cariban): Do syntax and discourse
match?”. Text 14:581–610. Payne, Doris L. 1999. “What counts as explanation? A functionalist approach to word
order”. In Michael Darnell, et al. (eds). 137–165. Payne, Thomas E., Payne, Doris L. and Gildea, Spike. 1992. “Panare reference grammar:
Final report to the National Science Foundation”. Manuscript. Sherzer, Joel and Urban, Greg (eds). 1986. Native South American Discourse. Berlin:
Mouton de Gruyter. Tavares, Petronila. 1994. “O sistema ativo-estativo na língua Wayâna”. Presented at the
Ninth meeting of ANPOLL, Caxambu, Brazil, June. Tavares, Petronila. 1999. “On some aspects of Wayana word order (Cariban)”. Manuscript. Tomlin, Russell (ed.). 1987. Coherence and Grounding in Discourse. Amsterdam and
Philadelphia: John Benjamins.

Internal reconstruction: As method, as theory
T. Givón
University of Oregon
1. Historical reconstruction
In a text that was still touted as the best source on historical linguistics when I went to grad school in the 1960’s, Bloomﬁeld’s Language (1933), the chapter on historical reconstruction is 24 pp long (297–320). Neither internal reconstruction, nor grammaticalization, nor morpho-syntactic change are mentioned; nor can they be found in the book’s index. When at the end of his discussion Bloomﬁeld criticizes the inadequacy of the comparative method, he oﬀers neither alternatives nor complements:
“…The comparative method, then, — our only method for the reconstruction of prehistorical language, — would work accurately for absolutely uniform speech-communities and sudden, sharp cleavages. Since these presuppositions are never fully realized, the comparative method cannot claim to picture the historical process…” (1933: 318) Almost thirty years later, in Hoenigswald’s Language Change and Linguistic Reconstruction (1960), the chapter on the comparative method (henceforth CM) is 25 pp long (119–123). A 4 pp chapter is given to the reconstruction of grammar. Only within the latter does one ﬁnd a little over a page (68–69) dealing, ostensibly, with internal reconstruction (henceforth IR), with the term appearing only in the section’s title. The motivation for the comparativist to stray into IR is the standard one, following the 19th Century Grand Tradition:
“…Some fairly obvious conclusions are possible from morpheme alternants [allomorphy]. Morphophonemically related morpheme alternants normally go back to sound change…; hence their further utility in the reconstruction of sound change…” (1960: 68)

108

T. GIVÓN

The actual textbook used in my ﬁrst Historical Linguistics class, Lehmann’s Historical Linguistics (1962), paints a picture that appears, at ﬁrst glance, considerably more even-handed: a 17 pp chapter on CM (75–91), as against 12 pp on IR (93–104). Lehmann is, further, rather generous in recognizing the value, at least in principle, of reconstructing older forms on the basis of evidence from a single language:
“…As the comparative method is being used to determine earlier syntactic patterns on the basis of evidence from related languages, so the method of internal reconstruction permits us to propose earlier syntactic patterns on the basis of one language alone. In this way the method of internal reconstruction will lead to syntactic reconstruction of languages attested only today…” (1962: 102).
While more generous to IR, Lehmann nonetheless identiﬁes correctly the old bias of the 19th Century comparativist Grand Tradition, which resorted to IR only when CM had failed; that is, recruiting IR as an auxiliary tool where paradigmatic irregularities and variation made it impossible to posit clean, invariant correspondence sets:
“…In explaining the second group of exceptions to Grimm’s law, Grassmann made use of the comparative method. His decisive evidence, however, was furnished by observation of patterns within [only] Sanskrit and Greek. Application of the comparative method to Germanic, Sanskrit and Greek data, however, would not indicate which language better reﬂects the situation in the parent language. Irregularities within Sanskrit and Greek [alone], clearly show that in some environments these languages had made a departure from the Indo-European distinction between aspirates and stops…” (1962: 92)
In a more recent edition of his book, Lehmann (1992) is a bit more generous to IR (13 pp, 162–174), but the goals of the reconstructive enterprise remain the same as those of the 19th Century comparativists:
“…By examining the irregularities in contrast with the regular patterns, we reconstruct earlier forms…” (1992: 162)
The bias toward the Grand Tradition’s goal of reconstructing proto forms persists in the most recent, most extensive, and to my mind the most thoughtful, treatment of IR, Fox’s Linguistic Reconstruction (1995). Two whole chapters are given to IR, 72 pp in all (145–216), with a fairly extensive and surprisingly current discussion of, in particular, grammaticalization. Buried somewhere in a section titled “’Laws’ of language development” is the recognition of the most salient feature of IR: its utter dependence on a universal theory of linguistic change.
In spite of its quantum leap in sophistication, Fox’s book still winds up

INTERNAL RECONSTRUCTION

109

glossing over the profound teleological, methodological and theoretical cleavage between the two reconstruction methods.
This is so because the all-consuming agenda remains the — largely phonological — reconstruction of older forms, rather than reconstruction of the intricate and profoundly gradual natural pathways via which older forms change into newer forms. In his summary of CM vs. IR, Fox thus notes:
“…It is evident, therefore, that the two methods diﬀer in their capacity to reconstruct splits and mergers. Internal Reconstruction favors the former. The Comparative Method the latter…” (1995: 213)
The main event remains, so it seems, the same phoneme-reconstruction agenda of the 19th Century Indo-Europeanists.
Fox acknowledges, though again implicitly, the more theoretical orientation of IR as against the more empiricist, inductivist bias of CM:
“…The Comparative Method can be carried out at a fairly superﬁcial level of language structure — sounds and phonemes — while Internal Reconstruction requires a slightly ‘deeper’ analysis — morphophonemes. Hence the former tends to be seen as more concrete, and the latter as more abstract. The comparative method often relies on lexical correspondences for its data, while Internal Reconstruction may be more grammatical…” (1995: 213–214)
The conclusions, however, reveal the old 19th Century agenda, whereby IR is subservient to the reconstructive goals of CM — with the profound methodological and theoretical diﬀerences between the two largely submerged:
“…In spite of these diﬀerences, the methods are, as we have seen, in many ways parallel: both involve the recognition of correspondence sets in order to establish contrasting units; both provide abstract forms to which we may give a historical interpretation. Last but not least, in both cases the methods have weaknesses which call for due discretion in interpreting the results historically…” (1995: 214).

2. Re-orienting the agenda
The theoretical goals of those of us who have been studying grammatical change in the context of trying to understand language universals are radically diﬀerent from those of the 19th Century comparativists. While we never lament coming up with — as by products — reconstructed pre-, pre-pre or even proto- forms, the goals of our enterprise, ever since Bopp and Meillet, have been diﬀerent. We are interested ﬁrst and foremost in the process of diachronic change itself. Even

110

T. GIVÓN

more speciﬁcally, we have been trying ever since the early 1970s to elucidate and understand the general principles — universals — that govern morphosyntactic change.
The underlying motivation for this new agenda is thus not inherently diachronic. Rather, it springs from an attempt to understand synchronic grammatical structure and its typological diversity. What we have been observing is that each grammatical — functional — domain seems to be grammaticalized via a relatively small number of diachronic pathways. The typological range of structures that can code, synchronically, any particular grammatical functional domain is thus highly constrained. And the constraints seem to apply diachronically. That is, what is constrained is the number and type of diachronic pathways via which each domain can be grammaticalized.
This is, of course, not altogether surprising in the context of Darwinian evolutionary thinking. In biology too, the distribution of current (‘synchronic’) types of organisms is totally constrained — and explained — by the available evolutionary (‘diachronic’) pathways that led to the extant types.
Quite legitimately, then, one may wish to study diachrony not for its own sake, but rather to gain better understanding of seemingly-synchronic universals that govern the range of possible grammatical typological diversity.
This agenda, it is easy to see, diverges rather sharply from the 19th Century’s magniﬁcent obsession with proto-form reconstruction. In addition, it also departs from the 19th Century comparativists’ profoundly empiricist, inductivist methodological bias against non-inductive methods, as well as against any sort of theorizing, especially that which may require a ‘deep’ conceptual apparatus.
The strong inductivist bias of the Grand Tradition was shared by Bloomﬁeld and his structuralist acolytes. This is evident in Bloomﬁeld’s (1922) attack on Sapir’s mentalism:
“…We must study people’s habits of language — the way they talk — without bothering about mental processes that we conceive to underlie or accompany habits. We must dodge this issue by a fundamental assumption, leaving it to a separate investigation in which our results will ﬁgure as data along with the results of other social sciences…” (Bloomﬁeld 1922: 142)
The bias was also extended toward typological diversity, a subject to which at least some exponents of the Grand Tradition (Bopp, Schleicher, von Humboldt) tried to apply universalist thinking. Thus:
“…The only useful generalizations about language are inductive generalizations…The fact that some features are, at any rate, widespread, is worthy of notice and calls for an explanation; when we have adequate data about many

INTERNAL RECONSTRUCTION

111

languages, we shall have to return to the problem of general grammar [universals] and to explain those similarities and divergences, but this study, when it comes, will be not speculative but inductive…” (Bloomﬁeld 1933: 20)
As one can see, Bloomﬁeld’s main beef with theory was indeed methodological. From his perspective, induction reigns and speculation is to be shunned. But the theoretical counterpart of this methodological purism is neigh inevitable. Thus, in pronouncing on linguistic diversity, Bloomﬁeld (1933) again reveals his ingrained anti-universalist bias:
“…north of Mexico alone there are dozens of totally unrelated groups of languages, presenting the most varied types of structure. In the stress of recording utterly strange forms of speech one soon learned that philosophical presuppositions [a theory of universals] were only a hindrance…” (1933: 19)
Bloomﬁeld’s structuralist minions fairly wallowed in unconstrained diversity. In extolling the intellectual legacy of Bloomﬁeld and other early American structuralists, M. Joos (1958) writes:
“…Their leading principle was that every language has to be explained from the inside out, the explanation being formulated under the logic of that language…” (1958: v)
Once one’s agenda shifts from reconstructing proto forms to universals of language change and thus of language, the balance between the Comparative Method and Internal Reconstruction shifts, inevitably, often radically. It is thus hardly an accident that the renascent interest in grammaticalization, beginning in the early 1970s but catalyzed by Greenberg’s seminal typological approach to universals (in particular Greenberg 1966), brought to the fore unabashed universalists. Combining a functional (‘mentalist’) and typological (‘universalist’) orientation, the new generation of synchronic-cum-diachronic linguists gravitated rather naturally toward Internal Reconstruction — suspect, speculative, noninductive — as their signature method.

3. Internal Reconstruction as method
3.1 Deduction, induction and abduction in science
Reductionist philosophy of science has split traditionally between extreme inductivists (Carnap 1963; Russell 1956) and extreme deductivists (Popper 1934/ 1959). An important group of pragmatists (Peirce 1934; Hanson 1968; Lakatos 1978) recognized, however, that in addition to induction and deduction, a third

112

T. GIVÓN

mode of inference, abduction (Aristotle’s apagoge), plays a crucial role in the process of empirical science.
Induction is reasoning from individual cases to the general rule, as in e.g.:
(1) • every Greek person I encounter appears to be bald
• therefore all Greeks must surely be bald
Deduction is reasoning from the general rule to individual cases, as in e.g.:
(2) • all Greeks are bald • Socrates is a Greek
• therefore Socrates is unquestionably bald
As one can see, the level of certainty assigned to inductive and deductive reasoning is rather diﬀerent. Inductive reasoning is probabilistic, resting on an act of faith — that past experience will be faithfully upheld by future experience. Or, put another way, that a limited sample faithfully represents the entire population. Indeed, as Peirce (1934) has noted, there is an element of abduction buried inside induction.
Deduction, on the other hand, is logically unassailable. But it carries one major drawback: As Wittgenstein (1918) has pointed out, it produces no new knowledge.
Abduction is reasoning by hypothesis, analogy, and explanation. It is, in a profound way, reasoning toward coherence. Within the scientiﬁc process, abduction is the crucial step at many distinct points, but perhaps most saliently in the formation of new hypotheses.
The general form of abductive-hypothetical reasoning may be given as (following Peirce 1934; Hanson 1968):
(3) • Given the current theoretical knowledge, facts X seem strange, bizarre, unexplainable. They do not cohere with current knowledge, as expressed in prevailing Theory Y.
• However, if one hypothesized that instead of Theory Y another one, Theory Z, is the case,
• then — voila — within Theory Z facts X ﬁnd a rather natural explanation; they cohere with Theory Z.
• Therefore Theory Z must be the case.
In science, once a new theory has been hypothesized, one moves on to testing its validity. As Popper (1934/1959) points out, testing must involve a distinct phase of deductive reasoning, through which one generates logical consequences (predictions) of the hypothesized theory. Those consequences, further, must be

INTERNAL RECONSTRUCTION

113

testable. The logic of the testing process is that of falsiﬁcation. That is:
(4) • Putative facts A,B,C,D are logical consequences of Theory Z. • Therefore, if facts A,B,C,D are now shown to be false,
• then Theory Z also is false.
That is, by modus tolens:
(5) A ⊃ B -B -A
Induction typically comes into play as a distinct component of hypothesis testing. Most conspicuously, in sampling the actual facts to see whether the predicted facts (logical consequences) of the new hypothesis are real.
As Popper (1934/1959) points out, one cannot verify a theory in science, but at best only fail to falsify it. Since any non-trivial theory has multiple logical consequences, the process of failing to falsify, again and again and again, has no principled logical closure. One ﬁrst tests major predictions, but even a lifetime would not suﬃce to test all. So at a certain point one simply ‘has enough’ and quits, perhaps leaving further attempts at falsiﬁcation to younger minds, richer purses, or to future generations who may yet come up with brand new facts that may incontrovertibly falsify major tenets of the theory.
In the next section I would like to illustrate how the logical status of Internal Reconstruction is very much like that of abductive/analogical reasoning in hypothesis formation. I will do so by citing a run-of-the-mill cycle of Internal Reconstruction in Swahili grammar.
3.2 Synchronic irregularities and restored coherence
Much like abductive reasoning in hypothesis formation, IR always begins with facts that make no sense, facts that do not cohere, most commonly irregularities in an otherwise regular paradigm. The underlying aﬃnity of IR with abductive reasoning is revealed right there: Both strive to re-establish coherence in the face of temporary incoherence.
Both abduction and IR presuppose that coherence must be or must have been there. In the case of a non-evolutionary science (chemistry), the presupposed coherence is of the synchronic system. In the case of evolutionary or diachronic sciences (biology, linguistics), one presupposes that coherence must have been there at some earlier evolutionary or diachronic stage.

114

T. GIVÓN

The underlying assumptions that inspire IR are, much like hypothesis formation in science, profoundly universalist and unabashedly theoretical: that language as a communicative tool is in the main regular, or iconic. The notion of paradigmatic irregularity rests on the presupposition that paradigms tend, on the whole, to be — or at least start — regular. Much like the abductive reasoning practiced by the evolutionary biologist, the IR practitioner in linguistics takes it for granted that synchronic irregularities are merely the foot-prints of diachronic change from earlier regularities (Givón 1979, ch. 6).
3.3 Internal Reconstruction in Swahili verb paradigms1
Most regular verb stems in Swahili are bi- or poly-syllabic. In ﬁnite verb paradigms, the verb stem must be preceded by a tense-aspect marker, which is in turn preceded by a subject-agreement marker:
(6) a. a-li-sóma ‘He read’ b. a-me-sóma ‘He has read c. a-na-sóma ‘He is reading’ d. a-ta-sóma ‘He will read’ e. a-[Ø]-sóma ‘He reads’
This system looks rather neat, until one begins to notice some ‘distortions’. First, a small group of verbs are monosyllabic, and the paradigm for these verbs contains an added element, the stressed morpheme -kú-, tucked between the tense-aspect marker and the verb stem:
(7) a. a-li-kú-la ‘He ate’ b. a-me-kú-la ‘He has eaten’ c. a-na-kú-la ‘He is eating’ d. a-ta-kú-la ‘He will eat’ e. á-[Ø]-la ‘He eats’
And second, -ku- does not appear in the habitual (zero) tense (7e). The ﬁrst distortion factors out into two sub-questions:
(8) a. What is the reason for having -ku- in monosyllabic verbs but not it in bi- or poly-syllabic ones?
b. Why -ku- rather than any other phonological sequence?
The answer to (8a) turns to be relatively transparent, once one notes that the Swahili word-stress is overwhelmingly penultimate; that one lexical stress must fall on the verb stem; and that mono-syllabic verb stems cannot carry this stress without violating the penultimate stress rule. One thus makes the interim

INTERNAL RECONSTRUCTION

115

explanatory hypothesis (9), through which the hitherto disparate facts of -ku- and the Swahili stress are linked in a single coherent pattern:
(9) The function of -ku- must be to augment the monosyllabic verb stem so that it may carry the prescribed penultimate stress.
But why -ku-? In historical linguistics, given what we know about the process of grammaticalization, via which lexical stems give rise to grammatical morphology, this question is better recast as:
(10) What is the source of -ku-?
One now casts around for other contexts where -ku- is found; not any old context, but one whose syntactic and functional distribution may tag them as plausible source of the -ku- in short-verb paradigms. And one might as well note that judgements of plausibility here are heavily theory-driven, depending on what one knows about universals of grammaticalization.
The ﬁrst relevant observation is that ku- as a verb preﬁx also marks the inﬁnitive of verbs, and further has the same stress distribution with short verbs:
(11) ku-sóma ‘to read’ kú-la ‘to eat’
The next relevant observation is that -ku-marked inﬁnitives appear in complements of modality verbs, again with the same stress distribution in long vs. short verbs:
(12) a. a-na-taka ku-sóma he--want -read ‘He wants to read’
b. a-li-kwisha kú-la he--ﬁnish -eat ‘He ﬁnished eating’
At this point, the abduction-bent linguist has just about enough facts, both puzzling and regular, to attempt an abductive leap to an explanatory hypothesis. Before outlining the hypothesis, however, let us consider some additional puzzling facts, this time involving verbs in relative clauses.
In their -clause form, verbs in three of the tenses — excepting the perfect and habitual (‘zero’) — may take an inﬁx -pronoun between the tense marker and the verb stem. For long-stem verbs, the pattern is as follows:
(13) a. mtoto a-li-ye-sóma child he---read ‘The child who read’

116

T. GIVÓN

b. mtoto a-na-ye-sóma child he---read ‘The child who’s reading’
c. mtoto a-taka-ye-sóma child he---read ‘The child who’ll read’
In (13c) we now spot one additional puzzle: The future marker -ta- has somehow acquires an additional syllable in the -clause pattern, appearing now as -taka-. As we shall see below, this puzzling fact eventually falls into place, and in fact contributes an important clue for resolving the initial puzzle.
The salutary role of an erstwhile puzzle may be re-cast as a well-known general principle of empirical science:
(14) An inexplicable puzzle (‘irregularity’) within the old theoretical context often turns out to both lead to and be explained by the new, expanded, more coherent (‘regular’) context.
More puzzling yet, the perfect marker -me-, which earlier (7) followed the pattern of the other three tense-aspects in (13), now joins the habitual (zero) in displaying an irregular -clause pattern:
(15) a. mtoto amba-ye a-me-sóma child say- he--read ‘The child who has read’
b. mtoto a-[Ø]-somá-ye child he--read- ‘A/the child who reads’
As diﬀerent as the relativization patterns (15a,b) are, they nonetheless supply us with an added clue, one that turns out to be crucial for abducting a comprehensive hypothesis: In both aspects, the -pronoun is a verb suﬃx. In (15a) it is suﬃxed to the verb-stem -amba ‘say’ that is now used as the -subordinator. In (15b) the -pronoun is attached to the relativized verb itself.
Another piece of evidence is the fact that the four tense-aspects in (13a–c) and (15b) may also adopt, optionally, the -subordinator pattern with ‘say’ that is obligatory for the perfect (15a).
At this point the hypothesis fairly leaps out of the page at you,2 especially if you know something about the most common diachronic source of tense-aspect markers: They tend to arise, overwhelmingly, from a small group of complement taking modality verbs (as in (12) above), via the process of grammaticalization. The verbs that most commonly contribute to this process are ‘have’, ‘be’ (or

INTERNAL RECONSTRUCTION

117

‘be’-like verbs),3 ‘want’, ‘go’, ‘come’, and ‘ﬁnish’. Further, each of these verbs gives rise, most commonly, to a highly speciﬁc
tense-aspect:
(16) a. ‘be’ > ‘progressive’ b. ‘want’, ‘go’ > ‘future’ c. ‘have’, ‘ﬁnish’, ‘come’ > ‘perfect’
The facts surveyed thus far now fall into an unmistakably coherent pattern. This pattern leaves a number of loose facts still puzzling and not yet integrated into the overall coherence. Nonetheless, the pattern is there, as hypothesis:
(17) a. The four tense-aspects that involve some phonological material (unlike the zero-marked habitual) must have all arisen from erstwhile verbs.
b. Their grammaticalization into tense-aspect markers must have proceeded from the modal-verb constructions as in (12). In such constructions, the current main verb must have been the complement of the modality verb.
Hypothesis (17) immediately explains two major pieces of our puzzle; ﬁrst the shape and verb-preﬁx position of -ku- when it appears in front of short-stem verbs; and second, the position of the relative pronoun — following the tenseaspect marker — in the ‘inﬁx’ constructions (13). That is:
(17) c. The shape and position of -ku- must both be frozen relics, reﬂecting the syntax at the pre-grammaticalized phase of the construction, as complementizer.
d. The ‘inﬁx’ -pronoun must be also a frozen relic reﬂecting the syntactic stage of the time when the tense-aspect was the main verb and thus carried the -pronoun as suﬃx.
Hypothesis (17a–d) must still be further augmented, however, with:
(17) e. The verb-suﬃx position of the -pronoun, as in (15), must have been the older, original pattern of Swahili relativization. It is the process of grammaticalization from modality verb to tense-aspect that created the ‘inﬁx’ -pattern in (13).
As satisfying as hypothesis (17a–e) is, it still leaves the exceptional behavior of both the habitual and perfect outside the newly cohered system. The habitual poses no problem, since it displays neither verb-related characteristics (inﬁnitive on the following verb, inﬁx -pronoun) nor any phonological material. It may

118

T. GIVÓN

be thus dispatched summarily by elaborating hypothesis (17) as follows:

(17) f. The zero-marked habitual did not arise from a verb; it simply is the morphologically least marked form. The relativization of verb-stems in the habitual thus reveals the older — verb suﬃx — pattern (17e).

The perfect marker -me- is a bit more problematic, since it shows one verbrelated feature (-ku- before short stems) but not the other (‘inﬁx’ -pronoun). As it turned out, however, the answer to the next important question indirectly also resolves the problem of the perfect.
As hypothesis (17a–f) stands now, it predicts one absolutely vital set of hypothesized facts whose falsiﬁcation would falsify the entire hypothesis:

(18) Each one of the four supposedly verb-derived tense-aspect markers in Swahili — li, na, ta, and me — must have had speciﬁc verbal origins.

From Popper’s (1934/1959) perspective, thus, if (18) were not the case, hypothesis (17) must be rejected, by modus tolens.
Of the four aspectual markers of Swahili, the ﬁrst three — with leastirregular pattern — readily yield verbal etymologies, traceable to ‘be’, ‘have’ and ‘want’, respectively:

(19) a. a-li mu-ngaanda he-be in-house ‘He is in the house’
b. a-na chakula he-have food ‘He has food’
c. a-na-taka ku-la he--want -eat ‘He wants to eat’

(Bemba) (Swahili) (Swahili)

The perfect marker -me- turns out to be related to Swahili -mal-iz- ‘ﬁnish’ (Bemba -mal- ‘ﬁnish’). Its current shape in Swahili is derived historically from the so-called “modiﬁed base” form (Bemba -meele) by predictable phonological reduction.
We have then plausible etymological sources; but these sources are not free of problems. To wit:

(20) a. Normally ‘be’ tends to grammaticalize into the progressive aspect (as in English); but the Bantu -li- became past in Swahili.

INTERNAL RECONSTRUCTION

119

b. Normally ‘have’ tends to grammaticalize into the perfect aspect (as in English); but Swahili -na- became the present-progressive.
The answer to these two puzzles, it turns out, has to do with more idiosyncratic historical developments in Swahili, where -na- indeed became ﬁrst the perfect, then later changed into the present, which was in turn re-interpreted as ‘presentprogressive’. And -li- was indeed ﬁrst a past-progressive tense-aspect, and only later was re-interpreted as simple (preterit) past.4
Lastly, we still have the functional-explanatory hypothesis (9) concerning the appearance of -ku- only before short verb-stems. Given the added facts we have unearthed since ﬁrst abducting (9), and the current shape of hypothesis (17a–f), we must now modify (9) slightly, in order that it ﬁt into the coherence pattern of (17). That is, it must be now expressed in coherent historical terms:
(17) g. The reason why -ku- was retained before short verb stems even after the grammaticalization of the preceding verb into tenseaspect, must have been because it carried the verb’s lexical stress and thus behaved like part of the verbal stem.
Our sub-hypothesis (17g) of course takes advantage of other pieces of theoretical knowledge, concerning the phonological reduction (‘erosion’) that occurs during grammaticalization and how it impacts de-stressed syllables.
At the end of a protracted process that involved many diverse steps, we wind up with a more general theory of the phenomenon — Swahili tense-aspect morphology — than we had at the beginning. Within this expanded theory, the distortions that gave impetus to our cycle of investigation ﬁnd their natural resolution, coherence, or theoretical context.
Our investigation cycle in Swahili involved the gathering of additional relevant facts, the successive ﬁtting of those facts into a single overall pattern, and the gradual reﬁnement — via additional abductions — of a complex explanatory hypothesis. The cycle also involved at least one crucial falsiﬁcatory test.
The theory we hypothesized and gradually constructed explains the original puzzle, but also others that came along the way. It explains them all within a single — albeit complex — theoretical framework. And it explains them in conformity with a number of well-known general principles observed in grammaticalization elsewhere. Whether our hypothesis will survive further falsiﬁcatory testing only time will tell.

120

T. GIVÓN

4. The burden of proof in a theory-driven method
4.1 Preamble
In this section I will outline the theoretical underpinning of Internal Reconstruction, ﬁrst showing how it is motivated initially by puzzling exceptions to wellestablished typological universals, and then how it is driven by a host of theoretical assumptions. I will then illustrate this with data from the complex verbal system of Tolowa, an Oregon Coast Athabaskan language. I hope, in particular, to illustrate the heavy burden of proof that IR imposes on its user. As analogical-abductive reasoning elsewhere, Internal Reconstruction is a high-stake, high-yield gamble (Anttila 1970).
4.2 Principles of grammaticalization
A number of general principles of grammaticalization are relevant to historical reconstruction. They may be all found, under one guise or another, in various contributions to the now burgeoning literature on grammaticalization.5
Since multiple principles may lead to gradation and conﬂicting criteria, one general requirement on a proposed reconstruction is that it is compatible with the vast majority of the proposed criteria. General principles in typology have always had a range of exceptions, a natural state of aﬀairs in any complex, multi-variant domain. Some exceptions to any single criterion are thus only natural. But a preponderance of exceptions ought to damn a reconstruction. This is one of the methodological rationales for using a basket of criteria.
4.3 Typological plausibility
The proposed diachronic changes must conform to what is known about universals of diachronic change. In particular, they must demonstrate three kinds of naturalness or plausibility: • semantic plausibility of the proposed lexical sources of morphemes (natural
semantic change, semantic bleaching). • phonological plausibility of the proposed lexical sources of morphemes
(natural phonological change, phonetic bleaching). • typological plausibility of proposed syntactic developments via which
particular morphemes were placed in particular morphotactic positions.

INTERNAL RECONSTRUCTION

121

4.4 Principles of cliticization
All morphemes begin their life as lexical words or stems. Their cliticization to other stems is governed by the following general principles:
• Functional relevance: Morphemes tend to cliticize to stems to which they were functionally relevant at the time of grammaticalization.
• Serial position: Morphemes tend to cliticize at the syntactic position they occupied — as words — at the time of grammaticalization.6
• Syntactic conﬁguration: Lexical morphemes do not merely ﬁnd themselves in a particular linear position at the time of grammaticalization. Rather, they most often are in a particular syntactic conﬁguration — construction — with the words they cliticize on.
• Clausal context: Grammatical and morphological innovation tends to occur in the most common, neutral clause type (main, declarative, aﬃrmative, active).7 Conversely, non-neutral clause types often preserve frozen relics of older grammatical stages, in both morphology and word-order.8
• Supra-segmental eﬀects: Morphemes cliticize to large lexical stems because they are de-stressed and thus cannot stand alone as phonological words.
• Bleaching: Once a morpheme is de-stressed and cliticized, its phonetic erosion is accelerated.
• Attachment: Once a morpheme cliticizes to a word, it tends to retain its morphotactic position. So that morphemes who cliticize later seldom displace it.
4.5 Internal reconstruction of relative chronology
Given the general principles outlined above, the following predictions can be made about the relative age of morphemes:
• Phonetic size: The smaller a morpheme is, the older it is. • Semantic size: The more generic, grammaticalized, or semantically opaque
a morpheme is, the older it is. • Distance from stem: All other things being equal, the closer a morpheme
is to the stem/root of the word, the older it is.9 • Morpho-phonemic irregularity: The more morpho-phonemically irregular
or variable a morpheme is, the older it is. • Frozen relic morphology: The morpho-syntax of nominalized clauses, when
diﬀerent from that of free ﬁnite clauses, represents older stages of the grammar.
As elsewhere in a complex, multi-variable system, no single one of these

122

T. GIVÓN

principles is absolute. Taken together, however, they deﬁne a prototype, whereby a preponderance — or convergence — of evidence rather than an absolute proof is what is expected (Givón 1989, ch. 2).

5. The puzzle of the Athabaskan verbal word

5.1 Tolowa Athabaskan

Tolowa is the last remnant of the Oregon Coast Athabaskan cluster that spread along the coast between Bandon, Oregon and Crescent City, California. Nowextinct members of this cluster included Chetko, Tututni, Galice and Applegate. The depth of separation of the Oregon cluster and another Athabaskan cluster in California (represented by one extant language, Hupa) from the main body of Athabaskan is estimated at 2,000 years. The split of the Oregon from the California cluster is estimated at 1,000 years.
I owe all my information on Tolowa to Loren Bommelyn of Crescent City, CA, one of the last ﬂuent speakers of the language (and an MA in linguistics, University of Oregon, 1997; see also Bommelyn 1997; Bommelyn & Givón 1996, 1998).

5.2 Overview of Tolowa verb morphology

Like most Athabaskan languages, Tolowa verbal words have at least 15 distinct morphemic positions (‘slots’) preﬁxed to the verb stem, in addition to at least one suﬃxal position. In terms of their functions, the slots are at ﬁrst glance a wild mix of lexical-semantic, grammatical and functionally-opaque morphology, summarized in (21) below.

(21) Morphemic slots on the Tolowa verbal word:

morphemic position function

(historical)

−1  = 0 root = 1= 2= 3  = 4 1/2 = 5  = 6=

tense-aspect-modality gramm

verb stem

sem

ł-classiﬁer opaque (*causative)

d-classiﬁer gram (*de-transitive)

1/2 subject pronoun gramm

plural 1/2 person gramm

perfective

gramm

desiderative/conative sem/opaque

INTERNAL RECONSTRUCTION

123

7  = 8  = 9 3 = 10  = 11  = 12 3 = 13  = 14  = 15 3 =

‘thematic preﬁx’ transitivity gramm plural 3 person reversive adverbial/locative (alternative slot) (extra slot) object pronoun (alternative slot)

opaque (*possibly ) (* pronoun) gramm sem/opaque sem gramm sem gramm gramm

The various morphological slots on the Tolowa Athabaskan verb are illustrated in the next two section. They are divided into two ranges: inner (‘conjunct’) and outer (‘disjunct’).

5.3 Inner (‘conjunct’) range of verbal morphology

5.3.1 Overall sequence Examples (22) below, taken together, illustrate the internal cluster of slots (1–8), sometime referred to in Athabaskan linguistics as the ‘conjunct’ preﬁxes.
(22) a. ’=u-sh-tł-t=uł -1--kick ‘I am kicking it’
b. s-ii-ł-tał -1--kick/ ‘I kicked it’
c. ’-i’-tł-t=uł -1--kick ‘we-2 are kicking it’
d. ’aa-gh-i’-tł-t=uł -1–1--kick ‘we-all are kicking it’
e. y=u-ł-t=uł --kick ‘s/he is kicking it’
f. xee-y=u-ł-t=uł 3---kick ‘they are kicking it’

124

T. GIVÓN

g. sh=u-ł-t=uł 1/--kick ‘s/he is kicking me’
h. t=u-d-ł-t=uł ---kick ‘s/he is kicking out/kicking her/his feet’
The reversive (slot 10) and one adverbial/locative (slot 13) can be seen in the contrast:
(23) a. ya-sh-tł-yał -1--jump ‘I jump through’
b. ya¸-[n]-sh-d-ł-yał --1---jump ‘I hop back and forth’
Examples (24) below illustrates two adverbial-locative slots (slots 11, 13), the reversive (slot 10) and the desiderative (‘optative’) (slot 6), as well as the suﬃxal modality position (slot -1), in this case with the future suﬃx:
(24) daa-na-n-n-u-sh-tesh-te -----1-lie- ‘I still want to lie back in there’
5.3.2 The so-called L-‘classiﬁer’ Comparative Athabaskan evidence suggests that the so-called L-classiﬁed (slot 1) was a causative, transitivizing preﬁx (Kibrik 1993). In Tolowa, this preﬁx is largely lexicalized, as can be seen from its occurrence on many stative adjectival verbs, as in:
(25) a. ne-ł-sh=un --black ‘it is black’
b. ne-ł-gii --white ‘it is white’
c. ne-ł-srik --red ‘it is red’

INTERNAL RECONSTRUCTION

125

The L-‘classiﬁer’ is also lexicalized in some intransitive verbs that have been detransitivized, via the antipassive (‘unspeciﬁed object preﬁx’) or the passive (‘Dclassiﬁer’) or both, as in:
(26) a. na-ł-yi --get ‘s/he plays’
b. na-y-ł-gh=un ---??? ‘s/he warms up’
c. t=u-ł-t=uk --puﬀ ‘s/he puﬀs on a pipe’
d. t=u-d-ł-xwas ---cough ‘s/he coughs’
e. t=u-d-ł-x=ut ---swallow ‘s/he gulps’
A few minimal pairs still survive in the language that preserve the original causative function of this preﬁx, as in:
(27) a. tr’¸int’ dead ‘s/he is dead’
b. y=u-s-tł-tr’¸int’ TR--L-dead ‘s/he killed him/her’
(28) a. naa-’aa-m=us --roll/ ‘s/he is rolling’
b. naa-y=u-ł-m=us -TR-L-roll/ ‘s/he is rolling it’
(29) a. s-t¸i -be// ‘s/he is lying there’
b. nu-y-ł-t¸i ‘s/he is putting him/her (on)’ -TR-L-be// ‘s/he is giving birth to him/her’

126

T. GIVÓN

5.3.3 The so-called D-‘classiﬁer’ A large cluster of de-transitivizing functions are associated with the so-called D‘classiﬁer’ across Athabaskan (Thompson 1989). Of those, several are still attested, productively or in trace forms, in Tolowa.
Relatively few trace forms of the use of the D-classiﬁer as a passive marker survive in the language, as in:
(30) a. ’=u-sh-tł-nish -1--taste ‘I taste it’
b. y=u-ł-nish --taste ‘s/he tastes it’
c. sh=u-ł-nish 1/--taste ‘s/he tastes me’
d. ’=u-d-ł-nish ---taste ‘it is tasted by someone’ ‘it tastes (good)’ ‘someone tastes it’
e. sh=u-d-ł-nish 1/---taste ‘someone tastes me’ ‘I taste (good)’
The D-marked passive is clearly a non-promotional passive, as can be seen from the retention of object status by the object of the transitive verb in (30e). However, it may well be that the D-marked passive was earlier a promotional passive, since this preﬁx is never used to de-transitivize an intransitive verb.
A now-defunct use of the D-classiﬁer by itself to mark antipassive function is suggested by few surviving forms, as in:
(31) a. y=u-ł-t=uł --kick/ ‘s/he is kicking it’
b. sh=u-ł-t=uł 1/--kick ‘s/he is kicking me’

INTERNAL RECONSTRUCTION

127

c. t=u-d-ł-t=uł -D--kick ‘s/he is kicking out’ (her/his feet)
d. *sh-t=u-d-ł-t=uł 1/----kick
For whatever historical reason, the D-classiﬁer must be used with the reversive/ iterative preﬁx, as in:
(32) a. te-s-ch’a --leave ‘s/he is leaving’
b. nn-te-s-d-ch’a ----leave ‘s/he is returning’
c. ya-ł-yał --jump ‘s/he jumps through it’
d. ya¸-[n]-d-ł-yał ----jump ‘s/he hops around, back and forth’

5.3.4 The old object pronoun slot () For many Tolowa verbs, in particular those with short preﬁx sequences (the inner or ‘conjunct’ range), slot (8) is still the object pronoun slot, as in:

(33) a. m=u’n’ s-ii-ł-sr¸i

house -1--make/

‘I made the house’

b. ch’=usne m=un-’ y=u-s-tł-sr¸i

man house- ---make/

‘The man made the house’

c. K’wan’leesh=um sh=u-s-tł-sr¸i

God

1/---make/

‘God created me’

d. K’wan’leesh=um n=u-s-tł-sr¸i

God

2/---make/

‘God created you’

Various diachronic changes have conspired, however, to re-deﬁne this slot. First, the contrast between the obviate and proximate 3rd person object pronouns (y-

128

T. GIVÓN

vs. m- in Tolowa; see Thompson 1989) has disappeared from this slot. Morphologically transitive verbs with 3rd person subject and 3rd person object are marked by the y=u- preﬁx, as in (33b) above.
Second, many morphologically-detransitivized verbs are syntactically transitive, and can thus take an object pronoun. But that pronoun does not necessarily occupy the old slot (8). Thus consider:

(34) a. (tr’a¸a¸xe) ne-sh-tł-ch’=ut

(woman) -1--fear

‘I am afraid of her (the woman)’

b. tr’a¸a¸xe (det’-naa-gh-i)

ne-ł-ch’=u t

woman (night--walk-) --fear

‘The woman fears it (the Indian Devil)’

c. *yee-ne-ł-ch’=ut

---fear

d. (tr’a¸a¸xe) shii ne-ł-ch=ut

(woman) 1/ --fear

‘she (the woman) fears me.’

e. *she-ne-ł-ch’=ut

1/---fear

Further, with many morphologically transitive verbs that take the y=u- preﬁx but also display more external (‘disjunct’) adverbial-locative preﬁxes, the y=u- preﬁx retains slot (8) but object pronouns are ejected to the more external slot (14). Thus, with the verb ‘put’:

(35) a. nu-sh-’=ush -1-// ‘I am putting it (on something)’
b. nu-y-’=ush --// ‘s/he is putting it (on something)’
c. nu-y-ł-t¸i ---/ ‘s/he is putting him/her (on something)’
d. sh-nu-y-ł-t¸i 1/----// ‘s/he is putting me (on something)’ ‘she is giving birth to me’

INTERNAL RECONSTRUCTION

129

e. nn-nu-y-ł-t¸i 2/----// ‘s/he is putting you (on something)’ ‘she is giving birth to you’
In (35d,e), the y=u- preﬁx in the old object pronoun position (slot 8) now coexists with the real object pronoun in slot (14), and thus could not be considered an object pronoun any more. Although some might want to suggest that it can be considered an obviate subject pronoun, as in Koyukon (Thompson 1989).
With some verbs, one can ﬁnd the restructuring of the object pronoun position within the very same paradigm, as in:
(36) a. na-y-tał --like ‘s/he likes her/him’
b. naa-shee-tał -1/-like ‘s/he likes me’
c. naa-nee-tał -2/-like ‘s/he likes you’
d. nn-na-sh-tał 2/--1/-like ‘I like you’
e. *na¸-[n]-sh-tał -2/-1/-like
f. sh-na¸-[n]-tał 1/--2/-like ‘You like me’
g. *naa-sh¸i-[n]-tał -1/-2/-like

5.3.5 De-transitivizing morphemes in the  slot (8) Several de-transitivizing morphemes can occupy the old object pronoun slot and supplant the y- preﬁx. I will survey them in order. Two of those — the reﬂexive and the antipassive (‘unspeciﬁed object’) — ﬁt rather naturally into the old object pronoun slot, since they yield an objectless de-transitive clause. A third, the reciprocal, would have ﬁt well in the slot, since much like the reﬂexive it yields an objectless de-transitive clause. However, when used in its added

130

T. GIVÓN

capacity of marking joint action, it does not de-transitivize the clause, and may thus coexist with an object pronoun.
The fourth de-transitivizing preﬁx, the new impersonal passive (‘unspeciﬁed subject pronoun’, ‘4th person’), is incompatible with an object pronoun slot. So that its introduction into that slot probably contributed to the displacement of Tolowa object pronoun from its traditional slot.
5.3.5.1 The reﬂexive preﬁx. The reﬂexive morpheme d=u- is historically probably the 3rd person deictic pronoun (see Bommelyn 1997). When the reﬂexive is used, the D-classiﬁer must also be used, as in:
(37) a. ’=u-sh-k’=usr -1-shave ‘I shave him/her’
b. yaa-k’=usr -shave ‘s/he shaves her/him’
c. d=u-d-k’=usr --shave ‘s/he shaves herself/himself’
d. d=u-sh-d-k’=usr -1--shave ‘I shave myself’
5.3.5.2 The reciprocal preﬁx. Like the reﬂexive, the reciprocal preﬁx also requires the use of the D-classiﬁer with it, as in:
(38) a. ’=u-sh-tł-t=uł -1--kick ‘I am kicking him/her/it’
b. y=u-ł-t=uł --kick ‘s/he is kicking him/her/it’
c. sh=u-ł-t=uł 1/--kick ‘s/he is kicking me’
d. łe-d-ł-t=uł ---kick ‘they (2) are kicking each other’ (reciprocal) ‘they (2) are kicking (something) in unison’ (joint)

INTERNAL RECONSTRUCTION

131

e. sh-tłe-d-ł-t=uł 1/----kick *‘They-2 are kicking me each other’ (reciprocal) ‘They-2 together are kicking me’ (joint)
f. nn-tłe-d-ł-t=uł 2/----kick ‘*The-2 are kicking you each other’ (*reciprocal) ‘They-2 are together kicking you’(joint)
As one can see, in its capacity of marking joint action, this preﬁx does not ﬁt as well in an object pronoun slot, since — used with a transitive verb — it has to coexist with such an object. In (38e,f) above it has eﬀectively displaced the object pronoun from slot (8). With other verbs, however, the joint-action preﬁx can itself be displaced to the left-most slot of the verb, the very slot toward which object pronouns seem to gravitate. Thus compare:
(39) a. naa-d-i’-d-ł-n=ush --1--work ‘we-2 are working’
b. łee-naa-d-i’-d-ł-n=ush ---1---work ‘we-2 are working together’

5.3.5.3 Remnants of the antipassive (‘unspeciﬁed object’). The old Athabaskan unspeciﬁed-object preﬁx is unproductive in Tolowa, having all but lexicalized. However, traces of its older function can still be discerned, as in the development of the verb ‘write’ from ‘tattoo’:

(40) a. ’=u-sh-d-t’e’sr

-1-D-tattoo

‘I am tattooing him/her’

b. y=u-d-ł-t’e’sr

TR---tattoo

‘s/he is tattooing it’

c. ch’ee-d-t’e’sr

AP--tattoo

‘s/he is writing’

d. ch’=u-d-t’e’sr ch’ee-d-t’e’sr

book

AP--tattoo

‘s/he is writing the book’

132

T. GIVÓN

e. *yee-D-t’e’sr TR--tattoo
Similarly, in the development of the intransitive ‘drink alcohol’ from the transitive ‘sip’:
(41) a. ’=u-sh-sh=ush -1-sip ‘I am sipping it’
b. yee-sh=ush TR-sip ‘s/he is sipping it’
c. ch’ee-sh=ush AP-sip ‘s/he is sipping’ ‘s/he is drinking alcohol’
And likewise in the change from the transitive to the intransitive ‘eat’, which can then be re-transitivized:
(42) a. ch’ee-sh-a¸ AP-1-eat ‘I am eating (it)’
b. y-a¸ TR-eat ‘s/he is eating it’
c. *sh-a¸ 1 / -eat
d. ch’-a¸ AP-eat ‘s/he is eating’
e. shii ch’-a¸ 1 / -eat ‘s/he is eating me’
5.3.5.4 The impersonal passive (‘unspeciﬁed subject’). With the exception of a few verbs where passivization via the D-classiﬁer still survives, the productive impersonal passive in Tolowa is marked with the preﬁx tr’=u/’sr in the old object pronoun () slot. Since the object of the transitive remains the syntactic object of this non-promotional passive clause, the tr’=u- preﬁx can coexist with an object pronoun and displace it from slot (8). Thus consider:

INTERNAL RECONSTRUCTION

133

(43) a. y=u-ł-t=uł TR--kick ‘s/he is kicking it’
b. sh=u-ł-t=uł 1 / --kick ‘s/he is kicking me’
c. tr’=u-ł-t=uł PASS--kick ‘someone is kicking it’
d. sh-tr’=u-ł-t=uł 1 / - --kick ‘someone is kicking me’ ‘I am being kicked’
When the verb includes a locative-adverbial preﬁx, the growing tendency is to displace the object pronoun all the way to the external slot (14), as in:
(44) a. nu-y-ł-t¸i -TR--/ ‘s/he is putting him/her (on something)’
b. sh-nu-y-ł-t¸i 1 / --TR--// ‘s/he is putting me (on something)’
c. sh-nu-’sr=u-ł-t¸i 1 / --PASS--// ‘someone is putting me (on something)’ ‘I am being put (on something)’ ‘someone gave birth to me’/’I was born’
Since the impersonal passive construction is non-promotional, it is only to be expected that it can also be used with intransitive verbs (Givón 1990, ch. 14), as in:
(45) a. dee-y=un -sing/ ‘s/he is singing’
b. sr-dee-y=un PASS-THM-sing/ ‘someone is singing’
The Athabaskan object pronoun slot (8) has, as can be seen, undergone considerable re-structuring in Tolowa. The erstwhile obviate object pronoun y=u-, to all intent and purpose, now marks most transitive verbs when both the subject and

134

T. GIVÓN

the object are 3rd persons. But it also marks many complex transitive verbs — those with so-called ‘disjunct’ preﬁxes — when the object is 1st and 2nd person. Slot (8) may thus be occupied by a transitive marker (y=u-) and three de-transitivizers (reﬂexive, reciprocal, passive). It is thus better characterized, in Tolowa, as the transitivity slot ().
5.4 The external (‘disjunct’) range: Locative-adverbial preﬁxes
The most common occupier of slot (11) is the “movement” preﬁx na-. When a second adverbial/locative preﬁx occurs, it invariably takes the more external slot (13). By itself, na- may be seen in (46a) below. The more external locativeadverbial preﬁxes, typically in slot (13), carry clear semantic contents. In this way they are comparable to lexical derivation. But their semantic predictability is only partial, because of many verb-speciﬁc lexicalizations. As a rare productive example, consider:
(46) a. na-ł-da --run ‘s/he runs’
b. waa-na-ł-da ‘s/e runs that-a-way (dispersing)’
c. yaa-ł-da ‘s/he runs through (it)’ (-ya ‘go’)
d. daa-na-ł-da ‘s/he runs into (it)’ (-da ‘sit/live’)
e. k’wee-na-ł-da ‘s/he is running behind (it)’
f. tr’ee-na-ł-da ‘s/he runs down’
g. see-na-ł-da ‘s/he runs up’
h. tee-na-ł-da ‘s/he runs under water’
i. yee-na-ł-da ‘s/he runs under (it)’
j. ch’aa-ł-m=us ‘s/he runs oﬀ (road)’ (-ch’a ‘leave’)
k. łee-na-y’-ł-da ‘we-2 run together’ (ł- /)

INTERNAL RECONSTRUCTION

135

l. ł-ch’aa-na-ł-da ‘s/he runs apart’
m. taa-na-ł-da ‘s/he runs outward’
n. ’ee-na-ł-da ‘s/he runs in a circle’
o. k’w=ut-na-ł-da ‘s/he runs upon (it)’
p. ts’ee-na-ł-da ‘she runs out there’
q. gee-na-ł-da ‘s/he runs away’
r. xaa-na-ł-da ‘s/he begins to run’ (-xa ‘lift up’)

5.5 The suﬃxal slot

5.5.1 Survival of the old TAM suﬃxal position Three perfective preﬁxes are productive in Tolowa, s=u-, gh=u- and n=u-, occupying slot (5). The choice between the three is fully lexicalized, however. In addition, many verbs exhibit a suﬃxal alternation between imperfective and perfective stem forms. The list of these verbs is given in (47) below.

(47)   

-’a

-’a¸

‘speak’

-sri

-srí¸

‘do/make’

-na

-na’

‘drink’

-yu

-yu’

‘wear beads’

-’=u sh

-’=u¸

V-cl (compact sg. obj)

-’a

-’a¸

‘have’ (V-cl compact sg. obj)

-tí¸sh

-ta¸

V-cl (rigid/long obj)

-sr=u sr

-sr=u ’sr

V-cl (loose matter)

-lesh/l=ush -la

V-cl (composites)

-łe

-łek

V-cl (liquid)

-tesh

-tí¸sh

V-cl (animate prone)

-t=u sh

-t¸i

‘take to’ (V-cl anim. obj.)

-t=u n

-ta¸

‘stir’ (V-cl long obj)

-ł-tí¸

-ł-tí¸’

‘ﬁnd’ (V-cl, anim. obj)

-shi

-shí¸

‘call/name’

136

T. GIVÓN

-le ‘become’ -lí¸

-s=u ł

-seł

-li

-li’

-y=u n

-y=u n’

-t=u ł

-tał

-ne ‘say’ -n=un

-da

-t’a

-yu

-yu’

-lesh

-ya

-’í¸

-’í¸’

-ni

-ni’

-na

-na’

-mish

-m¸ish

-k’w=u sr

-k’w=u ’sr

-yił

-ya¸

‘be’ ‘throw’ ‘tie knot’ ‘sing’ ‘travel hard’, ‘kick’ ‘tell’ ‘sit’ ‘wear beads’ ‘build ﬁre’ ‘see’ ‘advise’, ‘help’ ‘be well’, ‘undulate’, ‘ﬂop’ ‘hang’ ‘hang’(tr.) ‘grow’ (intr.)

The pattern of the alternation justiﬁes reconstruction of an older purely-suﬃxal aspect marking pattern with, synchronically, two suﬃxes each:10

: -n, -’ : -sh, -ł

Added support for the existence of an earlier suﬃxal TAM slot comes from the fact that all recently-innovated TAM suﬃxes still occupy a suﬃxal slot (-1). A representative but not yet exhaustive list of TAM suﬃxes is given in (48) below. TAM suﬃxes can only be aﬃxed to imperfective verb forms.

(48) a. naa-ch’-í¸¸i-’a ‘You talk’

--2-talk

  

b. naa-ch’-í¸¸i-’aa-de’

??

‘If he talks’ ()

c. naa-ch’í¸¸i-’aa-d=un

-d=un ‘act’

‘While you talk…’ ()

d. naa-’-’aa-le’

-le ‘become/’

‘Let him talk’ ()

e. naa-ch’-í¸¸i-’aa-n=um

-n=um ‘already’, ‘*ﬁnish’?,

‘You used to talk’ ()

f. naa-ch’-í¸¸i-’aa-srí¸

-srí¸ ‘do/’

‘You talk a lot’ ()

g. naa-ch’-í¸¸i-’aa-te

-te ‘want’

‘You will talk’ ()

INTERNAL RECONSTRUCTION

137

h. naa-ch’-í¸¸i-’aa-la

-la ‘be/’

‘You used to talk’ (-)

i. naa-ch’-í¸¸i-’aa-he’-na

-he’ ??, -na ‘move’

‘You must talk’ (MOD)

j. naa-ch’-í¸¸i-’aa-tée-w=un

-te ‘want/’, -w=un ‘for’

‘You would talk’ (MOD)

k. naa-ch’-í¸¸i-’aa-wáa-te

-wa ‘that way’, -te ‘want/’

‘You will deﬁnitely ‘talk’ (MOD)

l. na-ch’-í¸¸i-’aa-daa-wa

-da ‘sit’, -waa ‘that way’

‘You might talk’ (MOD)

5.6 Summary of the Tolowa synchronic situation

The facts of the main Tolowa verb–morphology slots, can be now summarized as follows, beginning with the innermost position (closest to the stem).
A. Internal (‘conjunct’) preﬁxal range • L-‘classiﬁer’: This innermost (closest to the stem) morpheme has lost its
older causative function (Kibrik 1993); functionally opaque and thus largely co-lexicalized; phonologically bleached to a single consonant. • D-‘classiﬁer’: This next-to-innermost preﬁx retains some remnants of its older passive use, but the passive function is largely supplanted by the more external tr’/’sr; the D preﬁx still retains other de-transitivizing functions (reﬂexive, reciprocal), but only in combination with more external morphemes. • subject pronouns: 1/2 person subject pronouns phonetically bleached to either a single consonant (sh), a nasalizing ‘ghost’ consonant (n) or a vowel plus glottal stop (i’, u’). • plural 1/2: adjacent to the relevant pronouns, a CV preﬁx with the underlying form gh=u; the vowel most commonly elided. • perfectives: The three perfective preﬁxes are synchronically functional; all are CV morphemes with the bleached neutral vowel /=u/. • U-desiderative (‘optative’, ‘conative’): often opaque synchronic function; restricted function as desiderative; otherwise to all intent and purpose colexicalized; single vowel /u-/. • thematic preﬁxes: totally opaque synchronic function, though in many cases ex-perfectives; all CV morphemes with the bleached neutral vowel /=u/. • TR position: The y=u- obviate preﬁx, survivor of the direct/inverse alternation (Thompson 1989), has largely re-grammaticalized as transitivity marker.

138

T. GIVÓN

The reﬂexive, reciprocal, and impersonal passive (‘unspeciﬁed subject’) preﬁxes occupy the  slot and are synchronically productive. All three are CV morphemes with the bleached neutral vowel (=u); the erstwhile antipassive preﬁx ch’=u (‘unspeciﬁed object’), also with the neutral vowel, is now functionally opaque except in old nominalizations.
B. External (‘disjunct’) preﬁxal range • reversive (RE): Synchronic function of this preﬁx is largelyopaque, thus co-
lexicalized; older connection with de-transitivization can be seen in the obligatory use of the D ‘classiﬁer’. Phonetically mostly a non-segmental ‘ghost’ [n], nazalising the preceding vowel; • plural 3: variable positions (at least 3); variable forms (xee, ghaa/yaa and xwii), the last one a recent grammaticalization from the quantiﬁer ‘all’. • adverbial-locative: at least two positions; most commonly a CV morpheme with unbleached vowels and clear if not always fully regular lexicalsemantic (derivational) function. • object pronouns: slot (14) still alternates with the older slot (8); the displaced (ﬁrst and second singular) pronouns retain their bleached form from slot (8), either a single consonants or CV with the neutral vowel.

6. Internal reconstruction of the Tolowa Athabaskan verb
6.1 Typological puzzles
From the point of view of what a universalist-typologist would normally expect to ﬁnd in the distribution of verbal morphology, the following aspects of the Tolowa (and Athabaskan) verbal morphology represent baﬄing typological puzzles: • The placement of some TAM morphology as suﬃxal (position −1), the rest
as preﬁxal (position 5). • The well-known Athabaskan puzzle of deﬁning the lexical verb sense
distributionally along the verbal word, through the coincidence of several positional morphemes, some semantically alive, some semantically opaque, one grammatical — and many of them occupying non-contiguous slots:
root (0) semantically alive  (1) semantically opaque  (5) grammatically alive  (6) semantically opaque  (7) semantically opaque

INTERNAL RECONSTRUCTION

139

 (10) semantically opaque  (11) semantically alive  (13) semantically alive • The choice between three perfect morpheme (position 5) is semantically arbitrary, and thus must be lexically speciﬁed. • The fact that the three perfect preﬁxes are used with some verbs as opaque (‘dummy’) thematic preﬁxes (position 7). • The extensive interspersion of lexical-semantic, lexical-opaque and grammatical morphemes. • The distance of the 3rd person plural markers (slots (9), (12), (15)) from the subject pronoun position, as well as the dispersal of that position in three slots. • The dispersal of transitivity-related morphemes into two non-adjacent slots (2), (8), including cases when the function is identical (passive). • The placement of object pronouns in two possible slots (8), (14) • Reconciling all these puzzles within the framework of an SOV language.
To a linguist acquainted with typology and universals and trained in diachronic syntax and grammaticalization, the Athabaskan verb represents the supreme challenge, the Mount Everest of Internal Reconstruction. The challenge is to show that this extremely bizarre synchronic verbal morphology nevertheless arose via perfectly sane and universally attested avenues of diachronic change and grammaticalization.
6.2 Tolowa morpho-syntactic typology
The reconstruction I propose below on largely internal grounds must be compatible with what is known about Tolowa grammar typologically. That is: • The clausal order is predominantly (S)OV. • Nominal case-marking of indirect objects is post-positional. • Subordinate clauses display the same ﬁnite structure found in main clauses
(Bommelyn and Givón, 1996) • Consequently, clause-union is accomplished via verb serialization (rather
than embedding).
6.3 The hypothesis: Diachronic evolution of the Tolowa Athabaskan verbal word
The following is, in broad outline, my hypothesis about the gradual diachronic evolution of the Tolowa Athabaskan verbal word.

140

T. GIVÓN

Stage 1: The earliest stage of Tolowa verbal morphology can be reconstructed as:
--STEM--
 = de-transitivizer  = causative (transitivizer) : imperfective = -sh, -ł  = -n, -’ : subject pronouns = 1 = -i (2 = -n ?) (3 = Ø)
Stage 2: Renovating the subject pronominal system The next development probably involved the renovation of the phonologicallyeroded subject suﬃxes as a new set of 1/2 singular (sh-, n-) and dual (i’-, u’-) pronominal preﬁxes. The pre-verbal position suggests either a syntactic position at the time of cliticization of stressed independent pronouns, or alternatively, a suﬃxation to new aspectual preﬁxes (see below). The pluralizer gh=u- of 1/2 subject pronouns arises from roughly the same period:
P1/2-SU---stem-
Stage 3: Renovating the tense-aspect system The next development must have involved the renovation of the phonologically eroded, erstwhile suﬃxal aspectual system. A group of semantically-amenable verbs must have contributed the perfective/perfect preﬁxes n=u, gh=u-, s=u (slot 5). Universally, the achievement verbs ‘have’, ‘ﬁnish’ and ‘come’ are the most common sources of grammaticalized perfective or perfect markers (Givón 1972, 1973, 1979; Heine 1993).
Some peculiarities of the TAM system of the verb ‘be’ (-le/-lí¸/-la), as well as some morpho-phonemic alternations, suggest that the s=u- preﬁx may have marked a perfect aspect (rather than perfective). The use of all three perfective in stative-adjectival verbs is compatible with a perfect initial function, in that the perfect of a stative verb yields a resultative present state meaning.
The ‘thematic’ preﬁxes ’=u- t=u- x=u- (slot 7) may have originally been imperfective markers, presumably derived from semantically-amenable verbs. The ‘thematic’ preﬁx d=u- may have arisen as a later re-analysis of the homophonous reﬂexive preﬁx.
The desiderative (‘optative’) and ‘conative’ u-, with a broad irrealis modal range (Axelrod 1997), most likely should be traceable to some inherently-irrealis

INTERNAL RECONSTRUCTION

141

verb (‘go’, ‘want’) from roughly the same period. The syntactic conﬁguration via which the new de-verbal preﬁxes entered the
grammar must have been a serial verb conﬁguration, given that Tolowa has only ﬁnite (unembedded) complements. Renovation via an embedded complements conﬁguration in an SOV languages would have yielded TAM suﬃxes (Givón 1995, chs 5,6):
IMPERF/THM-PERF-DES-1/2----stem-
Stage 4: Creating an object pronoun slot Slot (8) must have been originally the object pronoun slot, a fact supported by the location of the reﬂexive, reciprocal and antipassive preﬁxes/pronouns there. The status of the reﬂexive, reciprocal and antipassive as object-displacing morphemes certainly suggests this (see below):
OB-/---1/2----stem-
Stage 5: Renovating the de-transitivity slot The next development must have involved the collapse — or gradual lexicalization — of the transitivity morphemes L and D (‘classiﬁers’), and the reestablishment of de-transitivizing morphology in the erstwhile object pronoun slot (8). The D-‘classiﬁer’ had probably expanded its functional range already to cover a broad range of de-transitivizing operations (Thompson 1997).
The renovated system involved an obviate-proximate pronominal alternation (y=u- vs. m=u- respectively in Tolowa; see Bommelyn 1997), with the pronouns coming most likely out of the deictic pronoun system. The obligatory overlap of the new reﬂexive (d=u-) and reciprocal (ł=u-) preﬁxes with the old D passive suggests that D must have already assumed those added functions (Thompson 1997). The reﬂexive preﬁx may have arisen from the homophonous (3rd person) deictic pronoun d=u-.
The antipassive (‘unspeciﬁed object’) preﬁx ch’=u- and impersonal passive (‘unspeciﬁed subject’) tr’=u-/’sr=u- belong, roughly, to the same generation of morphology. The slight synchronic overlap between -D- and the antipassive suggests that -D- may have already taken on an antipassive function (Thompson 1997). The residual overlap between the new impersonal passive in slot (8) and D- again suggests a gradual functional shift.
The new impersonal passive (‘unspeciﬁed subject’) pronoun (tr’=u-/’sr-) in slot (8) competes directly with the object pronouns, since they can co-occur. The extension of the reciprocal to joint-action function precipitates a similar head-on competition for slot (8). Such competition may have been part of the motivation for the — still ongoing — left-ward displacement of both the object pronouns

142

T. GIVÓN

and the reciprocal preﬁx:
TR-/---1/2----stem-
Stage 6: Lexicalizing verbs as ADV/LOC pre-verbs The next development must have involved the rise of the / preﬁxes, including the reversive-distributive preﬁx. Their origin is most likely verbal. They have been inserted in front of the verbal word most likely as serial-verbs clauses, later cliticizing either directly onto the verbal word or ﬁrst as postpositions with a pronominal object. The cliticization of the latter into a pre-verbal slot is still an on-going process in Tolowa (see further below).
Typologically, the insertion of (O)V clauses before the main verb is consonant with verb serialization in an OV language, see Weir (1986, for Nadeb, Maku-Puinave), Craig and Hale (1987, for Chibchan), Carlson (1991, for Sup’ire, Niger-Congo). Massive pre-verbal incorporation of adpositions is also well known in Indo-European. The rise of the  preﬁxes may have thus occurred in three distinct stages:
a. Verb serialization (clause union):11 OBJ V, V ⇒ OBJ V V
b. Grammaticalization: OBJ V V ⇒ OBJ POST V
c. Cliticization: OBJ POST V ⇒ OBJ POST-V ⇒ OBJ ADV-V
ADV-----⁄----stem-
Stage 7: Innovating a slot for 3rd person plural markers The multiple locations and variable forms of the pluralizer for 3rd person subjects strongly suggest a late addition, and from multiple origins (gha-/ya-, xe-, xwi-). The ﬁrst two most likely go back to gh=u-. The last one is still synchronically the quantiﬁer ‘all’:
P3--(P3)-----1/2----stem-
Stage 8: The last restructuring of the Tolowa verbal word is still ongoing, the consolidation of the object pronoun into the left-most slot (15). This change is no doubt closely associated the demise of the old y/m (obviate/proximate) pronominal contrast in the old object pronoun slot (8), and the conversion of that slot to detransitivity operators:
OBJ-3--(3)-----1/2----stem-

INTERNAL RECONSTRUCTION

143

7. Supporting evidence

7.1 Possible verbal origin of older  preﬁxes

Several of the older adverbial-locative preﬁxes, those that currently cannot be used as post-positions, have plausible etymological connections to extant verb stems.
Consider ﬁrst the preﬁx xa- (‘inceptive’, ‘upward’, ‘out’), as in:

(49) a. d=u-sh-y=un

-1-sing

‘I sing’

b. xa-sh-y=un

INCEP-1-sing

‘I start to sing’

c. taa-gha-’sr-na ya-y-łe

water

THROUGH--draw.water

‘He is drawing (some) water’

d. taa-gha-’sr-na xa-y-łe

water

UPWARD--draw.water

‘He is pumping water up’

e. yee-k’=ush

-pull

‘s/he pulls (on) it’

f. xa-y-k’=ush

OUT--pull

‘s/he pulls it out’

Tolowa still has a lexical stem of that form, with the meaning ‘raise/carry raised’, as in:

(50) na-y-xa --raise ‘He carries it (raised)’

The verb stem -xash ‘straighten’, may also be plausibly related to the sense ‘raise’ of -xa, with a frozen old imperfective suﬃx -sh, as in:

(51) na-y-xash -1-raise/IMPERF ‘s/he straightens it’

144

T. GIVÓN

Consider next the  preﬁx ch’a- ‘away from’, as in:
(52) a. na-ł-da --run ‘s/he runs’
b. ch’aa-ł-da AWAY--run ‘s/he runs oﬀ (road)’
This preﬁx is transparently related to the verb stem ‘leave (to return)’, as in:
(53) a. n-tee-s=u-s-ch’a ---1-leave ‘I am leaving (to go back)’
b. na¸-[n]-n=u-sh-ch’a ---1-leave ‘I left (to go back)’
Consider next the  preﬁx -me’ ‘inside’, as in:
(54) a. yuu-ye’sh-na-y-t=un that-air---stir ‘s/he whistles’ (lit.: ‘stirs up air’)
b. me’-na-y-t=un in---stir ‘s/he is stirring it (in a container)’
This preﬁx is most likely related to the transitive verb stem -me’ ‘bathe’, ‘immerse in water’, as in:
(55) a. naa-y=u-ł-me’ ---bathe ‘S/he bathes him/her ( = dead)’
b. naa-y=u-s-tł-me’ ----bathe ‘S/he bathed him/her ( = dead)’
Consider next the most common, and probably oldest, locative- preﬁx na‘be at motion’, as in (54) and (55) above. Two related motion verbs with the stem -na — perfect stem -na’ — are still attested:
(56) a. x=u-sh-na -1-move ‘I am ﬂopping around’

INTERNAL RECONSTRUCTION

145

b. xee-s-ii-na’ --1-move/PERF ‘I was ﬂopping around’
c. t=u-sh-na -1-move ‘I am undulating’
d. tee-s=u-s-na’ --1-move/PERF ‘I was undulating’
In many cases, the same -na/-na’ aspectual alternation found in verb stems is still observed in the  preﬁx, as in:
(57) a. naa-d=u-sh-d-t’u MOV--1--swim ‘I bathe’
b. na’-d=u-gh-ii-d-t’u MOV/PERF---1--swim ‘I bathed’
c. naa-xw=u-sh-d-ł-ye MOV--1---play ‘I play’
d. na’-xwee-s=u-s-d-ł-ye MOV/PERF---1---play ‘I played’
Consider next the  preﬁx da- ‘into’, as in:
(58) a. na-ł-da --run ‘s/he runs’
b. daa-na-ł-da INTO---run ‘s/he runs into (it)’
This preﬁx is most likely related to the verb stem -da/-da’ ‘be in/at’, ‘live in/at’, ‘sit in/at’, as in:
(59) a. daa-s=u-s-da -/-1-sit ‘I sit’ (‘I have settled in’)

146

T. GIVÓN

b. daa-gh-ii-da’ --1-sit/PERF ‘I sat’
Consider next the  preﬁx ta- ‘outward’, ‘away’, as in:
(60) a. na-ł-da --run ‘s/he runs’
b. taa-na-ł-da OUTWARD---run ‘s/he runs outward’
This preﬁx is most likely related to the verb stem -ta ‘push away’, as in:
(61) ch’=u-sh-ta -1-push ‘I push it/him/her (away)’
Consider next the  preﬁx ya- ‘through’, as in:
(62) a. na-ł-da --run ‘s/he runs’
b. yaa-ł-da THROUGH--run ‘s/he runs through (it)’
This preﬁx is most likely related to the motion verb stem -ya/-gha ‘go’, ‘come’, ‘walk’, ‘meet’, as in:
(63) a. naa-gha -go ‘s/he is walking’
b. gha¸a¸-ya-ł /-come- ‘s/he is coming’
c. tee-s-ya --go ‘s/he is going’
The  preﬁx waa-/ghaa- ‘away’, ‘that way’, ‘that manner’ may also be related to ‘go’/’come’/’walk’ (63). Thus consider:

INTERNAL RECONSTRUCTION

147

(64) a. na-ł-da --run ‘s/he runs’
b. waa-na-ł-da AWAY---run ‘s/e runs that-a-way (dispersing)’
c. wa-y-’=ush AWAY--/ ‘she gives it to him/her
d. sh-gha-y-’=ush 1/-AWAY--/ ‘s/he gives it to me’
The desiderative/optative/conative preﬁx u-, with a broad range of irrealis senses (‘want’, ‘can’, ‘try’) ﬁts the semantic proﬁle of a grammaticalized modal verb. This preﬁx is obligatory — i.e. lexicalized — with the verb ‘want’ -te, occupying slot (6) as in:
(65) a. y-u-ł-te -DES--want ‘s/he wants it’
b. d=u-sh-y=un ’-u-sh-tł-te -1-sing -DES--want ‘I want to sing’
However, in restricted contexts, only for the 1st person sg., the preﬁx by itself, again in slot (6), can be used with the sense of ‘want’:
(66) a. d=u-sh-y=un -1-sing ‘I sing’
b. d-u-sh-y=un -DES-1-sing ‘I want to sing’
With other verbs, however, this preﬁx is fully lexicalized, but in a slot that sometime precedes the ‘thematic preﬁx’ (slot 7), as in:
(67) a. ’-uu-d-¸in-tł-x=ut -CON--2--ask ‘you ask him/her’

148

T. GIVÓN

c. ’aa-w-i-ł-ts’it -CON/PERF-1--know ‘I knew it/him/her’
d. yaa-w-¸i¸i-sh¸i -CON/PERF-3-call ‘I called/named him/her’
e. y-uu-xay -CON-buy ‘s/he buys it’
Finally, the potential separation of the lexicalized ‘conative’ slot from the more productive ‘desiderative’ in slot (6) can be illustrated with the verb ‘ask’ (67a):
(68) ’-uu-d-uu-sh-tł-x=ut -CON--DES-1--ask ‘I want to ask him’
7.2 The perfect preﬁxes as erstwhile verbs
The next piece of supporting evidence involves the diachronic origin of the three perfective preﬁxes n=u, s=u, and gh=u. Like other TAM markers, perfect, perfective or past markers usually grammaticalize from erstwhile verbs, as is evident in the current set of younger TAM suﬃxes (slot -1). Is there any evidence for that in Tolowa? Given that the vowel in the three perfective preﬁxes is the neutral, most bleached vowel in Tolowa (/=u/, schwa), the task of relating the three preﬁxes to extant verb stems is diﬃcult. But at least one of them, gh=u, may have come from -gha ‘come’, ‘arrive’ (see earlier above).
There is, however, one strong piece of evidence to suggest that all three may have come from verbs. This has to do with their special form for ﬁrst — but particularly third — person subject. As noted above, we have good reason for reconstructing a perfective nasal suﬃx for an earlier stage of Tolowa. Now, two of the perfective preﬁxes — gh=u and n=u — display a nasalization of their vowel in the 3rd person singular. And all three display an aberrant 1st person subject pronoun -i- (rather than the more regular -sh-). Thus compare:
(69) Perfective gh=u-: a. ’a-sh-d=un -1-act ‘I act’

INTERNAL RECONSTRUCTION

149

b. ’aa-gh-ii-d=un --1SG-act ‘I acted’
c. ’aa-gh-¸i¸i-d=un --3SG-act ‘s/he acted’
(70) Perfective n=u-: a. tr’e-sh-n=uł -1-/pile ‘I dump it’ b. tr’ee-n-ii-n=uł --1SG-/pile ‘I dumped it’ c. tr’-ii-n-¸í¸i-n=uł ---3SG- ‘s/he dumped it’
(71) Perfective s=u: a. ’=u-sh-k’=ush -1-pull ‘I pull it’ b. s-ii-k’=ush -1SG-pull ‘I pulled it’ c. y=u-s-k’=ush --pull ‘he pulled it’
The most reasonable explanation of a nasal suﬃx on the perfective morphemes is that it represents the last vestige of the old perfective verb suﬃx. But this must mean that the current perfective preﬁxes gh=u- and n=u- — and most likely also s=u— must have been originally verbs. It is their perfective form that became the perfective marker, and they simply pulled the perfective nasal suﬃx with them.
7.3 Semantic bleaching (‘thematization’) of erstwhile TAM preﬁxes
There are many instances in which the three perfective preﬁxes have lost their perfective function and have become ‘thematized’ or lexicalized. That is, they have joined the set of arbitrary morphemes that jointly deﬁne the verbal sense in the imperfective. In their fully-bleached capacity, these preﬁxes now occupy the

150

T. GIVÓN

‘thematic preﬁx’ slot (7) in both the imperfective and the perfective, as do other preﬁxes in this slot.
In verbs with such ‘thematized’ perfects, quite often the verb stem carries evidence of having been a perfective stem, suﬃxed with either with a nasal or glottal stop. Often, the resulting verb remains stative, and often it cannot be reperfectivized. As representative examples, consider:

(72)  

a. gh=u-sh-’í¸

ghee-s-ii-’í¸-’

PERF-1-see/ -PERF-1-see/-

‘I see’

‘I saw’

b. n=u-sh-sh=um (no  form)

PERF-1-good/

‘I am good’

c. m=u¸ =u¸ -[n]-gh=u-d-ł-n=ush mii-n=u¸=u¸-[n]-gh=u-d-ł-n=ush

--PERF---remember -PERF--PERF---remember

‘He remembers it’

‘He remembered it’

d. m=u¸ =u¸ -[n]-gh=u-d-ł-n=uk’ (no  form)

--PERF---forget/

‘He forgets/forgot it’

e. s=u-s-da gh-ii-da’

PERF-1-sit PERF-1-sit/

‘I live’ ‘I lived’

f. ’=u-sh-le

-1-be

‘I become’

g. n=u-sh-lí¸

s-ii-lí¸

PERF-1-be/ PERF-1-be/

‘I am’ ‘I have become’

h. gh=u-sh-le-ł

gh=u-sh-lí¸

PERF-1-be- PERF-1-be/

‘I am becoming’ ‘I was’

While it is impossible to reconstruct the original grammatical function — let alone verbal meaning — of the semantically-bleached imperfective ‘thematic preﬁxes’ in Tolowa, by analogy with the bleaching of perfective preﬁxes (72) one may suggest, I think not unreasonably, that they were initially grammaticalized de-verbal TAM markers.

INTERNAL RECONSTRUCTION

151

7.4 The verbal origin of post-positions
The incorporation of post-positions into the most external (‘disjunct’) preﬁxal slots of the verbal word is still an on-going process in Tolowa (Bommelyn 1997; Underriner 1997). Thus, in terms of their morphosyntactic distribution, Tolowa post-positions span the diachronic continuum between serial verb, post-nominal clitic and verbal preﬁx:
Stage I: Strictly nominal (non-incorporating) post-positions Stage II: Post-positions that can incorporate as verb preﬁxes Stage III: Strict verbal preﬁxes
We have already noted (Section 7.1.) stage III, as well as evidence for the deverbal origin of many of its exemplars. In the following sections we discuss stages II and III.
7.4.1 Stage I: Non-incorporating post-positions In general, post-positions in Tolowa do not appear directly on the object noun, but — even when the noun is present — tend to incorporate an anaphoric pronoun (or its morphophonemic trace) as preﬁx. If they were indeed serial verbs, as I suggest, they thus presumably carried their object pronominal preﬁx.
Consider ﬁrst the benefactive -a with its wide range of pronominal preﬁxes:
(73) sh-aa ‘for me’ n-aa ‘for you’ m-aa ‘for him/her’ () y-aa ‘for him/her’ () d-aa ‘for him/her’ ()
(74) n-aa sh-k’wi-y-s=uł 2SG-BEN 1---throw ‘s/he is throwing me for you’
Quite often, the post-position (and its anaphoric pronoun) are detached from the object noun, as in:
(75) Ch’aani Meeli m=un’ xaa-m-aa s-i-ł-sr¸i Johnny Mary house 3PL-3SG-BEN -1--make/ ‘I made a house for Johnny and Mary’ (lit.: ‘Johnny and Mary, a house for them I made’)
Example (75) also illustrates the fossilization of the proximate 3rd-singular pronoun m=u- with the post-position, a common feature in Tolowa.

152

T. GIVÓN

Consider next the associative post-position -la ‘with’, again with a wide range of pronominal preﬁxes, as in:

(76) shee-la ‘with me’ nee-la ‘with you’ mee-la ‘with him/her’ yee-la ‘with that thing’ dee-la ‘with that’

(77) Ch’aani daach’=ustłna mee-la naa-s-ee-ya

Johnny store

3SG-ASSOC --2-go

‘I went to the store with Johnny’

(lit.: ‘Johnny, (to) the store with him I went’)

The post-position -la may have been derived from a perfective stem of ‘be’ (-le, -la, -l¸i), as in:

(78) a. waa-’=u-sh-le --1-be ‘I am like that’
b. n-ii-la -1-be/PERF ‘I was like that’

7.4.2 Stage II: Incorporating post-positions The post-position -k’w=ut/-k’=ut ‘on’, as in:
(79) shii sh-k’=ut ‘on me’ n=un n-k’=ut ‘on you’ hii k’w=ut ‘on it/him/her’
(80) see nee kw’=ut nu-y-n-ii-’a¸ rock ground 3SG.on ---3-/round ‘s/he put the rock on the ground’ (lit.: ‘the rock, the ground, on it s/he put it’)
The labialization of the initial k’ in the 3rd person is the morphophonemic trace of the 3rd person proximate preﬁx m=u-.
The post-position k’w=ut can incorporate into the verb as a locative-adverbial preﬁx at the outermost slot (except for the object pronoun), as in:
(81) k’w=ut-ya-y-łe ON---/liquid ‘s/he skims it’

INTERNAL RECONSTRUCTION

153

This post-position may be related to a verbal stem meaning ‘put’, as in:

(82) yaa-n-ii-ł-k’w=ut --1--put ‘s/he stuck it through (there/it)’

Consider next the instrumental post-position -ł, displaying several pronominal variants, as in:

(83) m=u-ł ‘with it’ () y=u-ł ‘with it’ () x=u-ł ‘with it’ (??)
(84) baashu’k na’łmi m=u-ł s-ii-t’as bread knife 3SG-INSTR -1-cut ‘I cut the bread with a knife’ (lit.: ‘the bread, a knife, with it I cut (it)’)

Incorporated instances of this post-position, with the frozen proximate pronoun m=u-, can be seen in:

(85) a. m=uł-shee-ghał

INSTR-1/-come

‘I am sleepy’

(lit.: ‘It came to me with it’)

b. m=uł-naa-’=u-sh-tł-k’w=ut

INSTR---1--put

‘I am selling it’

(lit.: ‘I am putting (it) with it’??)

c. lat

m=udłgheene’ m=uł-ta-’-’a

sea-weed fat

INSTR---/round

‘s/he is dipping sea-weed in oil’

(lit.: ‘sea-weed, oil, s/he is dipping it into it with’)

A richer array of instrumental incorporation can be found in instrument nominalizations, as in:

(86) a. m=uł-’=u-d-ł-ghał INSTR----beat ‘drum stick’ (lit.:’one beats it (drum) with it’)

154

T. GIVÓN

b. m=ul-ch’ee-tr’-a¸ INSTR---eat ‘fork’ (‘lit.: ‘one eats things with it’)
c. m=uł-daa-ch’=u-s-d-ł-k’et’ INSTR------peck ‘rake’ (lit.: ‘one rakes things in with it’)
d. m=uł-ch’e-’d-ts’ił INSTR---paint ‘paint brush’ (lit.: ‘one paints things with it’)

Finally, consider the purpose post-position, with a range of pronominal variant:

(87) m=u-n ‘for it’ () y=u-n ‘for it’ () d=u-n ‘for it’ () w=u-n ‘for it’

This post-position may be found unincorporated, as in:

(88) daach’=usdłna ch’ees=untu m=u-n naa-s-ya

store

sugar

3SG-GOAL --go

‘He went to the store for sugar’

But it can also incorporate and lexicalize, as in:

(89) a. na-’-d-ł-ni ----strong ‘s/he is strong’
b. w=u-n-’=u-sh-d-ni 3SG-GOAL--1--strong ‘I am advising him/her’(lit.: ‘I am strong for him/her’)
c. sh-g=un-’=u-d-ni 1/-GOAL--strong ‘s/he is advising me’ (lit.: ‘s/he is strong for me’)

INTERNAL RECONSTRUCTION

155

8. Discussion
The reconstruction outlined above, of the putative history of the Tolowa Athabaskan verbal word, is a hypothesis. But it is the best hypothesis compatible with the synchronic facts of the language, with Tolowa’s typological situation, and with what is known about universals of syntactic change and grammaticalization. What is more, it is also compatible with comparative Athabaskan evidence — provided the evidence is interpreted from a theoretical perspective. It may well be, though, that better interpretations of the internal Tolowa evidence, or further comparative evidence, may force us to modify this admittedly complex hypothesis in whole or in part.
One way or another, the goals of this exercise, and the underlying assumptions motivating it, are consonant with the traditional goals and assumptions of Internal Reconstruction: that bizarre synchronic states must be interpreted as the evolutionary by-products of perfectly natural diachronic changes.12
The more protracted and multi-staged the evolution, and the less subsequent simpliﬁcation applied to it, the greater is the depth of possible internal reconstruction. It is perhaps a lucky break that Tolowa — and Athabaskan in general — seems to have been extremely conservative over its linguistic history; so that change upon change keeps piling up with relatively little attempt at simpliﬁcation. What may appear a convoluted synchronic nightmare to the language learner, thus turns out to be the internal reconstructionist’s gold mine.13
The theory-dependence of Internal Reconstruction was justly regarded by the 19th Century traditionalists as a grave liability.14 Bloomﬁeld’s caution in this respect was not altogether misplaced, and may have been somewhat prophetic:15
“…The fact that some features are, at any rate, widespread, is worthy of notice and calls for an explanation; when we have adequate data about many languages, we shall have to return to the problem of general grammar [universals] and to explain those similarities and divergences…” (Bloomﬁeld 1933: 20)
Hopefully in the past 150 years we have learned something about both synchronic and diachronic universals. So that old liabilities may have perhaps turned into new strength.

Acknowledgments
This work has been supported in part by a grant from the National Science Foundation (“Tolowa Dictionary and Grammar”, 1994–1997). I am indebted to Loren Bommelyn, Anthony Fox, Vic Golla,

156

T. GIVÓN

Ken Hale, Mike Krauss, Winfred P. Lehmann, Keren Rice and Chad Thompson for many helpful comments on various versions of this paper. The responsibility for the ﬁnal product remains mine.

Notes
1. This section follows, in the main, Givón (1989, ch. 8)
2. In my dissertation (Givón 1969) I didn’t wait this long to come up with the hypothesis. The beauty of abduction is that while it is fact-driven or fact-prompted, it is not in any systematic way fact-guided. The leap to hypothesis can be prompted by extremely few facts. In this connection, an old quote from George Watson comes to mind, concerning his joint discovery, with Francis Crick, of the double helix structure of DNA: “We didn’t just want to solve the puzzle. We wanted to solve it with the fewest possible facts.” (Quoted from memory of a published interview in The New Yorker, ca. 1976). The great fun of abduction, hypothesis formation and IR has always been just that: How early in the game can one take the gamble and solve the puzzle?
3. Less-bleached verbs of being in location, such as ‘stay, ‘stop’, ‘stand’, ‘sit’, ‘lie’, ‘stay the night’, ‘live’ etc. function in the very same capacity.
4. The marker -li- is still associated with past in Bemba.
5. The literature is neither totally consistent nor terminologically streamlined. General principles are covered, variously, in Givón (1971, 1973, 1975, 1979); Bybee 1985; Heine et al (1991); Traugott and Heine (eds 1991); Hopper and Traugott (1992).
6. Grammatical morphemes can shift their function or re-grammaticalize, so that the general constraints on grammaticalization and associated cliticization only hold true at the time of primary grammaticalization.
7. Obvious exception to this are morphemes that speciﬁcally mark non-neutral clauses, such as subordinators, speech-act markers, negation markers and de-transitivizing morphemes.
8. See discussion in Givón (1979, ch. 6; 1984, ch. 6).
9. This is at variance with claims made in Bybee (1985), to the eﬀect that proximity to the stem is determined by functional relevance (i.e. scope; see also Haiman ed. 1985). Rice (1991) has made similar claims for Athabaskan. To my knowledge, the only languages where this claim strictly holds are young Creole languages, whose verbal morphemes grammaticalize all at the same time. On the whole, Athabaskan verb morphology constitutes a giant counter-example to Bybee’s morpheme-order generalization.
10. Glottalization and nasalization have shown to be strongly associated elsewhere (Matisoﬀ, 1974). Quite plausibly, /’/ arose as a  marker for nasal-ending stems. The imperfective -ł and -sh are acoustically rather close.
11. See Givón (1995, chs 5,6) for further discussion of clause union in serial-verb languages.
12. Givón (1979, ch. 6).
13. The Galapagos islands seemed to have been just such a gold mine for Darwin’s theory of evolutionary.
14. For the considerable liabilities of the Comparative Method when practiced without a theoretical perspective, see Greenberg (1997; in this volume).

INTERNAL RECONSTRUCTION

157

15. In the context of his times, Bloomﬁeld was exorcising the ghosts of the facile universal mentalism of the late 19th Century Romantics such as Herman Paul, as well as the mentalist relativism of Sapir and Whorf. But his caution about universals without adequate cross-language data also anticipates Chomsky, whose latest incarnation seems to reject the reality of linguistic diversity altogether:
“…[Early generative grammar proposed that] each language is a rich and intricate system of rules that are, typically, construction-particular and language-particular… The principles-and-parameters approach that has developed in recent years, and that I assume here, breaks radically with this tradition… The notion of grammatical construction is eliminated, and with it, constructionparticular rules. Constructions such as verb phrase, relative clause, passive, etc., are taken to be taxonomic artifacts, collection of phenomena explained through the interaction of the principles of UG, with the values of parameters ﬁxed…” (Chomsky 1992: 3; italics added)

References
Bloomﬁeld, L. (1922) “Review of E. Sapir’s Language”, The Classical Weekly, v. 18 Bloomﬁeld, L. (1933) Language, NY: Holt, Rinehart & Winston Bommelyn, L. (1997) Prolegomena to the Grammar of Tolowa Athabaskan, MA Thesis,
University of Oregon (ms) Bommelyn, L. and T. Givón (1996) “Verbal complements in Tolowa Athabaskan”, IV
Encuentro Linguístico del Noroeste, Hermosillo: University of Sonora Bommely, L. and T. Givón (1998) “The evolution of de-transitive voice in Tolowa
Athabaskan”, V Encuentro Linguístico del Noroeste, Hermosillo: University of Sonora (in press) Bybee, J. (1985) Morphology, TSL#9, Amsterdam: J. Benjamins Carlson, R. (1991) “Grammaticalization of post-positions and word order in Senufo languages”, in E. Traugott and B. Heine (eds 1991, vol. 2) Carnap, R. (1963) The Philosophy of Rudolph Carnap, La Salle, Ill.: Open Court Chomsky, N. (1992) “A Minimalist Program for Linguistic Theory”, MIT Occasional Papers in Linguistics, #1, Cambridge: MIT Craig, C. G. and K. Hale (1987) “Oblique relations and reanalysis in some languages of the Americas”, Language, DeLancey, S. (1997) “Inverse” (Linguistics Colloquium, Febr. 1997, University of Oregon (ms) Fox, A. (1995) Linguistic Reconstruction: An Introduction to Theory and Method, Oxford: Oxford University Press Givón, T. (1969) Studies in ChiBemba and Bantu Grammar, PhD dissertation, UCLA (ms) Givón, T. (1971) “Historical syntax and synchronic morphology: An archaeologist’s ﬁeld trip”, CLS #7, Chicago: Chicago Linguistics Society Givón, T. (1973) “The time-axis phenomenon”, Language,

158

T. GIVÓN

Givón, T. (1975) “Serial verbs and syntactic change: Niger-Congo”, in C. Li (ed.) Word Order and Word Order Change, Austin: University of Texas Press
Givón, T. (1979) On Understanding Grammar, NY: Academic Press Givón, T. (1984) Syntax: A Functional-Typological Introduction, vol. I, Amsterdam: J.
Benjamins Givón, T. (1989) Mind, Code and Context: Essays in Pragmatics, Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum Givón, T. (1995) Functionalism and Grammar, Amsterdam: J. Benjamins Givón, T. (ed. 1995) Voice and Inversion, TSL#28, Amsterdam: J. Benjamins Greenberg, J. (1966) Universals of Language, Cambridge: MIT Press Greenberg, J. (1997) “The theoretical underpinnings of the comparative method”, Stanford
University (ms; in this volume) Haiman, J. (ed 1985) Iconicity in Syntax, TSL #6, Amsterdam: J.Benjamins Hanson, R. N. (1958) Patterns of Discovery, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press Heine, B., U. Claudi and F. Hünnemeyer (1991) Grammaticalization: A Conceptual
Framework, Chicago: University of Chicago Press Hoenigswald, H. (1960) Language Change and Linguistic Reconstruction, Chicago:
University of Chicago Press Hopper, P. and E. Traugott (1992) Grammaticalization, Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press Joos, M. (1957) “Introduction”, in M. Joos (ed.) Readings in Linguistics, Washington, DC:
American Council of Learned Societies Kibrik, A. (1993) “Transitivity increase in Athabaskan languages”, in B. Comrie and M.
Polinsky (eds) Causatives and Transitivity, Amsterdam: J. Benjamins Lakatos, I. (1978) The Methodology of Scientiﬁc Research Programmes, (Philosophical
Papers, vol. I), Cambridge: Cambridge University Press Lehmann, W. P. (1962) Historical Linguistics: An Introduction, NY: Holt, Rinehart &
Winston Lehmann, W. P. (1992) Historical Linguistics: An Introduction, third edition, London/NY:
Routledge Matisoﬀ, J. (1974) “Rhinoglottophilia in Southeast Asia: The mysterious connection
between nasality and glottality”, Nasalfest: A Symposium on Nasals and Nasalization, UC Berkeley, Nov. 1974 (ms) Peirce, C. S. (1934) Collected Writings, Cambridge: Harvard University Press Popper, K. (1934/1959) The Logic of Scientiﬁc Discovery, revised edition (1968) NY: Harper and Row Rice, K. (1991) “Predicting the order of disjunct morphemes in Athapaskan languages”, Linguistics, 11.1 Russell, B. (1956) Logic and Knowledge, London: Routledge Thompson, C. (1989) “Pronouns and voice in Koyukon Athapaskan: A text-based study”, IJAL, 55.1 Thompson, C. (1997) “The Na-Dene middle voice: An impersonal source of the D-element”, IJAL, 62.4

INTERNAL RECONSTRUCTION

159

Traugott, E. and B. Heine (eds 1991) Approaches to Grammaticalization, 2 vols, TSL #19.1/19.2, Amsterdam: J. Benjamins
Underriner, J. (1997) “The incorporation of postpositions in Tolowa”, paper presented at the Athabaskan Linguistics Conference, University of Oregon, Eugene (May 1997; ms)
Weir, E. M. H. (1986) “Footprints of yesterday’s syntax”, Lingua, 68 Wittgenstein, L. (1918) Tractatus Logico Philosophicus, tr, by C. F. Pears and B. F.
McGuinness NY: The Humanities Press (1968)

The Concept of Proof in Genetic Linguistics
Joseph H. Greenberg
Stanford University
1. The notion of proving a relationship
Virtually all historical linguists share a common notion which may be stated in something like the following terms. One starts with a hypothesis of relationship between two or more languages or groups of languages. If groups of languages are involved these in turn are conceived of as a number of languages which already have been proven to be related, e.g. the Indo-European family. Taking as examples binary hypotheses (these are the most frequent in the literature) we may illustrate the three possibilities by actual examples. An instance in which we deal with two single languages is the Japanese-Korean hypothesis, of a single language with a group of languages, the Eskimo-Indo-European hypothesis and of one group with another group the Indo-European-Uralic hypothesis. As an attentive reader may already have noted, in formulating it this way, what we call a group or distinct language is often a relative matter. Virtually every language has internal dialect divisions and the point at which we talk of a group or family as distinct from a single language is to some extent arbitrary. Moreover, some of these hypotheses as usually stated take some single language as part of the hypothesis because it is more important or better known and disregard the group of which it is a member. Thus Uhlenbeck who championed the Eskimo-IndoEuropean hypothesis treated Eskimo as though it were a single language using West Greenlandic, the best studied form, as representative of Eskimo as a whole. In fact, Eskimo contains at least two units, Inuit and Yuit which certainly deserve to be called separate languages. In addition, Eskimo is universally recognized as having Aleut as its nearest relative in a language family called Eskaleut. It is noteworthy in these typically binary hypotheses, that less important languages are generally disregarded. Thus, Aleut is almost never compared with anything else while the more prominent Eskimo is. So also for the purposes of

162

JOSEPH H. GREENBERG

Japanese-Korean comparison, the dialect group found in the Okinawa Islands and which certainly deserves the status of a separate language is generally disregarded in comparisons of Japanese with other languages or language groups.

2. Probability Versus Demonstration
When hypotheses such as those mentioned in the previous section are advanced, what is sought is ‘proof’, and indeed phrases like ‘to demonstrate’ the relationship of A to B, a terminology which is, of course, ultimately taken from geometry, are frequently used. What is sought is certainty of the kind attainable in mathematics and logic. I believe there is at least a dim realization that in all empirical sciences, as against logic and mathematics, in which truths ﬂow infallibly and tautologically from deﬁnitions, all that we can get are results so close to certainty that for all practical purposes we can consider them certain, that is, a hypothesis which is overwhelmingly better than any other. In the search for infallibility, certain criteria have been advanced which some linguists think will bring them results which are tantamount to certainty. The two most popular are the existence of sound correspondences and the reconstruction of a protolanguage from which the languages hypothesized to be related can be derived. Both of these will be considered later . For the moment, it is to be noted that the two approaches involve somewhat diﬀerent metaphors from diﬀerent nonlinguistic ﬁelds. Sound correspondences are often called laws, or more exactly, the sound changes that give rise to the correspondences, are the so-called ‘soundlaws’. Here the analogue is to the laws of nature, which like sound changes brook no exceptions. They thus vicariously share the certainty and prestige of such laws as the laws of gravitation, one which is of course empirically founded. The metaphor of reconstruction is more like that of logic. The reconstructed forms are like postulates, and the changes like laws of deduction. Thus, the forms to be explained are derived by a procedure which has some analogy to that of deductive logic and in this way participates in its prestige and certainty.
2.1 Analytic and Synthetic Truth
What we have been sketching is, of course, akin to the famous Kantian distinction between analytic propositions, true by deﬁnition and synthetic, drawn from experience and therefore only subject to lesser or greater degrees of conﬁrmation. All the twisting and turning in the world cannot make reconstruction or sound laws give the complete certainty attaching to the truths of the disciplines

THE CONCEPT OF PROOF IN GENETIC LINGUISTICS

163

of logic and mathematics. It is crucial to note that the view of genetic linguistics as concerned with
proving relationships and the notion of certain procedures as providing such proof are shared by the ‘conservatives’ who believe that there are a large number of independent, or at least not provably related families in the world, and those who undertake long-range comparisons like the Nostraticists. It is just that the ‘proofs’ of the latter are not accepted by the former as adequate. The Nostraticists, in particular, tend to belong to the camp of the reconstructionists, that is, those who believe that a reconstruction of an ancestral language proves the relationship of the descendant languages.
2.2 The Relativity of Proof
The existence of numerous points of dispute concerning language classiﬁcation so well-known to all historical linguists has just been alluded to. What it shows is that comparative linguists do not have a well-formulated and generally agreed on notion of what in fact constitutes proof of a hypothesis of relationship.
If one extends one’s view backward from contemporary linguistics to earlier periods the diﬀering notions of what proof is become even more striking. Consider the following statements from an earlier but not remote period regarding the Finno-Ugric family, actually along with Samoyed, a subgroup of Uralic, a family universally accepted.
The ﬁrst comes from Kai Donner (1901: 129), an eminent Finno-Ugricist and the founder of the journal Finnisch-Ugrische Forschungen.
‘Through J. Sajnovics (Demonstratio 1770) and S. Gyarmathi (Aﬃnitas 1799) Strahlenberg’s well-founded assertion regarding the Finno-Ugric (Uigur) group was proven once and for all.’
The reference here is to a work published by Strahlenberg in 1730. Later than Donner, a well-known Finno-Ugricist Ravila (1935: 21) stated that:
In 1770 the Hungarian Sajnovics published his famous Demonstratio,in which, using quite modern methods he proved the relationship of Hungarian to Lapp. By this and by the Aﬃnitas of Sámuel Gyarmathi which appeared in 1799 the Finnish-Hungarian relationship was regarded as ﬁnally established.
That this view is widely held by Finno-Ugricists up to the present is shown further by a review of an English translation of Gyarmathi written by Z. McRobbie (1986: 159) in which Gyarmathi’s achievements are summed up in the following terms:

164

JOSEPH H. GREENBERG

Sámuel Gyarmathi was the ﬁrst scholar to analyze all of the Finno-Ugric languages on a broad basis by emphasizing systematic lexical and morphological comparisons. He was able to deﬁne degrees of linguistic aﬃnity pointing out that Vogul and Ostyak are the closest relatives to the Hungarian language. And although Gyarmathi did not utilize regularities in sound correspondences he was nevertheless able to establish a number of Finno-Ugric etymologies still valid today.
Gyarmathi’s work of course preceded the major work of Bopp in 1816 generally viewed as the beginning of comparative linguistics in relation to IndoEuropean. It preceded the ﬁrst reconstruction of PIE by Schleicher in the 1850’s and of course the ﬁrst formulations by the Neogrammarians of the notion of exceptionless sound laws in the 1870’s. Yet, as we have seen, Gyarmathi’s work has been widely viewed by Finno-Ugricists as having proved the relationship of these languages.
At the other extreme, and very recently, Callaghan (1991: 131) in a review of a dictionary by Harvey Pitkin of Wintun, a Penutian language remarks,
There has been a long debate about whether all or part or none (italics mine) of the Penutian hypothesis is valid. A preliminary step to the determination of remote relationships is competent reconstruction of protolanguages at a lowest level.
Presumably, Penutian includes here California Penutian. Except for the extinct Costanoan whose likeness to Miwok is obvious, we have one or more dictionaries and grammars of all the languages Miwok, Yokuts, Wintun, and Maidu. What more evidence do we need to decide the validity of California Penutian at least, which was proposed by Dixon and Kroeber in 1919 more than seventy years before Callaghan’s statement? Moreover, Callaghan (1958: 193) herself had stated that a consensus of opinion among the four ﬁeld workers including herself concerned with these languages was that California Penutian does indeed constitute a linguistic stock. In the very same issue of IJAL there was an article by Pitkin and Shipley, two of the ﬁeld workers alluded to in the preceding statement, which contained over 400 etymologies of California Penutian with the usual apparatus of sound correspondence and reconstructed forms.
I have purposely counterpoised here two extremes, the ‘prescientiﬁc’ work of Gyarmathi on Finno-Ugric widely accepted as ‘proof’ of the validity of that stock, and the evidence apparently accepted by Callaghan in 1958, but rejected by her in 1991 as inadequate since she states that possibly none of Penutian hypothesis is correct.
From this we see what constitutes proof of relationship varies tremendously depending on the particular language group involved and the historical period. There is then no consensus as to how much and what sorts of evidence is

THE CONCEPT OF PROOF IN GENETIC LINGUISTICS

165

suﬃcient to ‘prove’ relationships. What we actually have at present, seen in encyclopedias and general reference works on linguistics, is a product of historical accident. Objectively, the California Penutian languages are probably closer to each other than Finnish is to Hungarian. If a stock was obvious enough and especially if it became established early enough it was then and generally is now an accepted grouping. If it was proposed later and in an atmosphere in which terms like the ‘rigorousness’ of the comparative method received more and more emphasis it became controversial or was rejected largely, again, for accidental historical reasons, this time changing fashions and the vicissitudes of the Zeitgeist.

3. Relationship Versus Classiﬁcation
The reason for what has been called in the previous section ‘relativity of proof’, is that the wrong question is being asked. If we ask whether A is similar to B, since everything in the universe is similar to everything else in some way, one never knows how similar something must be to something else (here, of course, one language or language group to another) to draw any conclusions. What is lacking is a standard of comparison, the standard being in this case other languages. But this already brings with it multilateral comparison, degrees of similarity and thus, when carried to its ultimate conclusion, a classiﬁcation of languages.
Ironically, this point has often been seen, but not carried through with thoroughness or impartiality by opponents of particular hypotheses of classiﬁcation. An interesting case in point is that of Yukaghir, in regard to the IndoEuropean-Uralic hypothesis. Yukaghir was up to that time, and still is now lumped by many with other languages in Siberia spoken by small populations in a Paleo-Siberian group with the proviso that none of them are provably related to any other.
Paasonen in 1907, in order to refute the hypothesis that Indo-European was related to Uralic, pointed out there were at least as many resemblances between Uralic and Yukaghir as between Uralic and Indo-European and everybody knew that Yukaghir was not related to Uralic. The hidden syllogism of Paasonen’s reasoning might be stated as follows. (1) Yukaghir is not related to Uralic (2) Yukaghir shows at least as many resemblances to Uralic as Indo-European does. (3) Therefore, Indo-European is not related to Uralic. By calling attention to the numerous resemblances of Uralic to Yukaghir, Paasonen inspired Collinder (1940) and others to advance the notion that Uralic was related to Yukaghir. This, of course, does not logically exclude the idea of a relationship between

166

JOSEPH H. GREENBERG

Uralic and Indo-European, only it is a more distant one. For A and B to be related in this broader framework means that they are more similar in essential ways requiring genetic explanation than some other group or groups of languages. Thus, Indo-European and Uralic are more similar to each other than either is to Sino-Tibetan. At this point, we do not posit a relationship between Indoeuropean and Sino-Tibetan until a still larger picture emerges.
Once we proceed in this way, we end up with a taxonomy, a classiﬁcation involving degrees of relationship, one in its abstract structure quite similar to that of a biological taxonomy. To make it complete we look for all the languages belonging with A at a particular degree of relationship. Such an entire group we traditionally call a linguistic stock and it corresponds to the biologist’s notion of a taxon.
An essential diﬀerence between the approach through relationship as against that through classiﬁcation is that comparison in the former case might be called decontextualized. We compare only A and B as though no other languages in the world existed. Hence, no standard of comparison exists leading to the diﬃculties that have just been seen.
3.1 The Orthodoxy of the Classiﬁcation Approach
The superiority of the classiﬁcation approach should be obvious. From classiﬁcations we derive numerous statements of relationship of various degrees but it is diﬃcult to see nor has, I believe, anyone shown how we can derive a taxonomy solely from statements of relationship. Moreover, a taxon at any level is a natural subject for comparative study and reconstruction. The proto-language thus reconstructed represents a real, historically valid entity. It implies a population who spoke it and we can derive important information about human history from hypotheses regarding its place of origin and from the reconstructed forms indicative of the culture of the speakers.
Contrary to some contemporary opinions, this has always been the basis of traditional comparative linguistics. Indo-Europeanists do not take two branches at random, say Slavic and Italic and make a restricted comparison between them to reconstruct a Slavic-Italic proto-language. On the other hand, there does exist a ﬁeld Balto-Slavic studies because of the fairly large number of features common to Baltic and Slavic compared to other Indo-European languages. This leads to the positing of an intermediate Balto-Slavic node between Proto-IndoEuropean on the other hand and Proto-Slavic and Proto-Baltic on the other. Buck (1933) in his comparative grammar of Greek and Latin makes it clear from the outset that there is no linguistic reason that would justify such a comparison only

THE CONCEPT OF PROOF IN GENETIC LINGUISTICS

167

the cultural importance of Greek and Latin literature and the fact that study of the two of them is commonly found in a single department of Classics.
The approach through multilateral comparison is merely an attempt to make explicit what the assumptions were that led to the ﬁrst and universally accepted classiﬁcations into linguistic stocks. It is an eﬀort to use the terminology of the logical positivists, to explicate the notions of linguistic stock and family tree of languages. Such an explication involves the elimination of decontextualized isolated comparisons as described above and its replacement by systematic multilateral comparison in order to produce a valid taxonomic scheme of languages.
3.2 Regular Correspondences as Proofs of Relationship
We now consider the two most frequently used criteria, as mentioned in 2.2, which are supposed to prove relationship, namely regular sound correspondences and the reconstruction of proto-languages. In fact, these two criteria are ultimately related. Textbooks of comparative linguistics, in their methodological chapters, start with sound correspondences and then show how, by using them, one can reconstruct the ancestral language. Viewed in this light they are part of a larger whole, the initial and ﬁnal stages respectively of the comparative method. Hence, one often encounters the statement that the validity of some particular stock has been demonstrated by the comparative method. Nevertheless, these two criteria deserve separate treatment.
Regarding sound correspondence, the detailed treatment in Greenberg (1987) can be summarized as follows. The statement that languages are related if they show regular sound correspondences is not so much denied as shown to be refutable in speciﬁc cases because there are so many alternative explanations of the sort universally accepted in historical linguistics, the most important probably being analogy. Here individual linguists may diﬀer in regard to preferences for particular types of processes as explanation. There are those who believe that sound laws have no exceptions and who are, therefore, likely to favor regular sound changes to account for the diﬀerence in forms which appear similar enough to be likely etymologies. On the other hand, there are those who refuse to multiply sound correspondences and either reject certain etymologies accepted by the ﬁrst group, or resort more frequently to other explanations including sporadic assimilation and dissimilation, metathesis and of course morphological analogy more frequently than the ﬁrst group. These are, of course, tendencies rather than two clearly deﬁned camps with fundamental methodological diﬀerences.
There is a further point which has been seen and accepted for some time now by many historical linguists, namely that where there have been extensive

168

JOSEPH H. GREENBERG

borrowings from one language into another, the two languages can show great regularity of sound correspondence, indeed, often greater than between cognate languages. A now famous case is that of Wolfenden who assigned Thai to SinoTibetan on the basis of borrowings from Chinese into Thai. His thesis is now universally rejected but it is not always realized that in a broader classiﬁcational attempt it would be unacceptable, not only because Thai basic vocabulary is hardly aﬀected but because every Thai resemblance to Sino-Tibetan points directly to Chinese as a source. If it were really Sino-Tibetan it would in its vocabulary frequently display resemblances to languages like Tibetan and Burmese but not found in Chinese.
3.3 Reconstructions as Proof of Relationship
The notion of reconstruction easily derives from that of sound correspondence. Suppose that among ﬁve related languages there is correspondence such that three have p and two have f. If we take the further step of assuming that the original sound was *p we are making an additional assertion, namely that the original p became f in two of the ﬁve languages. Suppose that four of the languages had f and only one had p? Should we go with the majority and reconstruct *f?. Clearly new and basically typological factors arise here. One has to do with the diachrony typology. Is the change *p > f more likely than *f > p? Most linguists would agree, I believe, and reconstruct *p. Suppose there were another correspondence in which all of the ﬁve languages had f. Since the reconstruction of *f here would be overwhelmingly favored, the reconstruction of *p for the ﬁrst correspondence would be strongly preferred even if only one of the languages had p. This would be for a diﬀerent and synchronic typological reason. The proto-language would otherwise have two *f phonemes. We would also require unconditional split, the sin against the Holy Ghost in comparative linguistics.
There are a fair number of instances e.g. Blackfoot in Algonkian, Cherokee in Iroquoian and Kamchadal in Chukotian, in which reconstructions have not been possible for the languages indicated yet everyone admits that they belong to these respective families. Given this and the possibility of reconstructing a perfectly good proto-system in some instances for loan words, reconstruction becomes neither a necessary nor a suﬃcient condition for the languages to be related.
Strictly speaking, I believe that reconstruction in cases such as Blackfoot and Cherokee is possible by positing a very large and typologically implausible number of phonemes for the proto-language.
In one well-known instance, the vowel system of Uralic, actually that of the

THE CONCEPT OF PROOF IN GENETIC LINGUISTICS

169

initial syllable where a full set occurs, there have been two major theories: that of Steinitz and that of Itkonen. The former makes the system like that of ProtoOstyak as he reconstructs it and the latter quite like that of Finnish. Steinitz posits a whole series of Ablaut variations in the proto-language which saves the regularity by assuming inherited vowel variations, while Itkonen is more tolerant of irregularities but in either case a large number of instances are irregular. At one point, Décsy said that in Finno-Ugric the second part of Voltaire’s famous bon mot concerning etymology holds, namely that the vowels count for nothing.
Since, as we have seen, Finno-Ugric was discovered even earlier than IndoEuropean and no one doubts its validity, the question arises as to whether lack of regular sound correspondences could ever disprove a relationship based on numerous and obvious similarities. The answer seems to be that it could not. In principle, there should not be any diﬀerence between consonants and vowels in this regard. If there was ever a case for rejecting a hypothesis on the basis of irregular correspondences it would be Finno-Ugric, but it is universally accepted. A theory not disprovable by any data is not an empirical theory.

4. The Internal Logical Structure of the Comparative Method
In the above discussion there has been an implicit assumption apparently shared by all historic linguists that there exists either a set of sound laws or a valid reconstruction that is, as it were, timelessly true. We need to distinguish here two things. One is the real history of investigations by historical linguists as they take place over time. The other is logical priority of certain steps in the process in relation to other, We have already seen something of the notion of logical priority in the discussion of the relation of sound correspondences to reconstruction. In fact, the logically prior is likely to occur ﬁrst historically. Sound correspondences are noted before protophonemes and reconstructed forms are set up. The two kinds of priority both ﬁgure in the following statement of Delbrück (1888: 47), the collaborator with Brugmann in the great comparative grammar of Indo-European.
Since obvious etymologies are the materials from which sound laws are drawn, and this is material can always be increased or changed, therefore new sound laws can continually be recognized and old ones transformed.
First, Delbrück is obviously portraying the development of linguistics over time. New sound laws arise and old ones are changed. The initial sentence, however, contains the key notion that sound laws are in the ﬁrst place drawn from obvious

170

JOSEPH H. GREENBERG

etymologies. But such obvious etymologies have then a kind of logical priority and must somehow be recognized by properties not involving sound laws since sound laws are derived from them.
Others have made essentially the same point. Goddard (1975: 25) says,
In general, the establishing of phonological correspondences goes on within a family of languages known to be related…, quoted with approval by Campbell and Mithum (1979: 52).
Somewhat earlier Newman (1970: 39) had similarly stated,
The proof of genetic relationships does not depend on the demonstration of sound laws. Rather, the discovery of sound laws and the reconstruction of linguistic history normally emerge from careful comparison of languages known to be related.
Regarding Newman’s observation, Watkins, a distinguished Indo-Europeanist, has said more recently (1990: 292), ‘As to the mystique of sound laws on the other hand, Greenberg is quite right to quote with approbation the Africanist Paul Newman (1970)’.
None of these citations face the problem of the initial step, namely how we recognize ‘a family of languages known to be related’ (Goddard) or ‘languages already presumed to be related’. (Newman). What I believe does emerge here is the recognition of at least three stages, which are in order of logical and usually historical priority the following: (1) Recognition of a family of related languages; (2) The discovery of sound laws; (3) The application of the comparative method, starting with sound laws, leading to the reconstruction of linguistic history and the proto-language. In this process, sound laws are often revised or abandoned and new ones found. A core of basic etymologies furnishes the starting point ( cf. Delbrück above) and it is rare for any of these to be abandoned. New ones are found, and some which are proposed become matter of debate with some linguists accepting and some rejecting. Etymology will never cease to exist as a ﬁeld of study in any linguistic stock simply because more etymological problems will always exist.
4.1 The Proto-Comparative Method
By the term ‘proto-comparative method’, I do not mean the total method of constructing a protolanguage, but rather an initial stage of the comparative method which logically and in actual practice but without explicit recognition, precedes what is usually taken to be the initial stage in the comparative method, namely, the discovery of sound correspondences.

THE CONCEPT OF PROOF IN GENETIC LINGUISTICS

171

The pre-sound-correspondence stage was illustrated brieﬂy in Greenberg 1987 (especially 24–26). There in Table 7 equivalents of nine common words are given for 25 languages in Europe. By the time one has gotten to the second word a three-fold division into Indo-European, Finno-Ugric, and Basque and even the major subgroupings of the ﬁrst two (the third being an isolated language) become apparent. In comparing for example the third item, equivalents for the English word ‘three’ we are making many judgements of diﬀerential phonetic similarities, the meaning here being kept constant. For example, we judge that Welsh tri is more similar to Italian tre than either is to Finnish kolme and in that, in turn, Finnish kolme is more similar to Estonian kolm than either is to the Welsh and Italian forms. Even these four equivalents for ‘three’ give us a grouping of Welsh and Italian (Indo-European) as against Finnish and Estonian (Finno-Ugric). But how do we arrive at these judgements? In doing so, we have as it were applied the comparative method in embryonic form. We compare the t of Welsh tri with the t of Italian tre and not with e in the latter word. So also the two r’s and the vowels are being compared. This set of equivalents for ‘three’ and the groupings it gives are already important evidence leading to the correct classiﬁcation and, of course, there is no recurrence of sounds within the words so there is no correspondence of t to t or r to r in the usual sense. When, however, we have found more words such correspondences will be found and the t and r in the words for ‘three’ will be examples of them. We might, therefore, call them proto-correspondences.
There is further in the same section in Greenberg (1987) a discussion of the equivalents for the PIE word for ‘tooth’ as leading back quite naturally to a single form that might be characterized as approximately *dant or *dent. This once again is based on exiguous data, without yet assuming anything like a complete original sound system or a regular set of sound changes. Such relatively amorphous hypotheses are the actual and the logical precursors of more fully elaborated but never conclusive formulations resulting from the application of the comparative method. They are the true ﬁrst steps in the method, never recognized in textbooks of comparative linguistics but worthy of fuller study and consideration.
4.2 Genetically Relevant Criteria
In all the preceding discussion there has been frequent reference to similarities and degrees of similarity among languages e.g. that English is more similar to German in genetically relevant ways than it is to French. However, there has been no explicit treatment of the question as to what kinds of similarities are

172

JOSEPH H. GREENBERG

involved. After all, languages can be like or unlike each other in innumerable ways. However, there has been an implicit answer to this question in the immediately preceding section, similarity in speciﬁc word forms, or more exactly morphemes, involving sound and meaning simultaneously. Resemblances of other kinds, e.g. in sound only as in the existence of glottalic ejectives in both languages, or meaning only as in agreement in a tense system including a future vs. non-future opposition, or in word or morpheme order are irrelevant and would normally be considered typological. Of course, languages can have typological agreement with other languages of the same stock which is part of their common inheritance from their common linguistic ancestor. However, such characteristics do not ﬁgure in our carrying out the classiﬁcation. They are, as it were, a bonus deriving from it and useful in considering the relative stability of typological traits and their historical development.
However, as self-evident as it might seem that it is from similarities in sound and meaning simultaneously that one ﬁnds the materials for genetic classiﬁcation, there is a strand of thinking in keeping with the strong tendency towards formalism in linguistics to dismiss phonetic similarity. All that would count would be regularity of correspondence in abstraction from phonetic content. Of course, semantic similarity is not suppressed. For some, it is narrowed to semantic identity which in practice can only mean translation equivalence. The reason for this is that they wish to make it as diﬃcult as possible to prove that anything is related to anything else.
I earlier thought that the importance of phonetic similarity was so obvious that it required no defense. We have seen in the previous section how diﬀerential similarities as in Welsh tri, Italian tre vs. Finnish kolme ‘three’ play a key conceptual role at the very initiation of comparison leading to classiﬁcation. Those who oppose this obvious and sensible approach emphasize the frequency of accidental resemblances and the existence of phonetically unusual correspondences. Let us consider examples of each in turn.
Meillet (1958: 92) gives the following example. French feu has nothing in common with German Feuer ‘ﬁre’, while the German form goes back to an original represented by words which are quite diﬀerent, Greek pur and Armenian hur. What Meillet fails to consider is how we know that French feu is only accidentally similar to German Feuer.
We know it because if we compare French feu with the Spanish form fuego and Italian fuoco, we see that it goes back to a form in which the second consonant is a velar. Compare also French peu ‘few’ with Italian poco. Why do we compare French with Spanish and Italian in this and other instances? A glance at Table 7 in Greenberg (1987: 24) will show why. From the very

THE CONCEPT OF PROOF IN GENETIC LINGUISTICS

173

beginning, in word after word French aligns with Spanish, Italian and other Romance languages, while English lines up with German, Dutch etc. Besides this, in Meillet’s example, German Feuer, English ﬁre, etc. are not all that diﬀerent from pur and hur since p>f>h is a very commonly encountered form of change and they agree in their ﬁnal r.
A favorite in recent discussion has been the correspondences between Greek dw and Armenian rk as seen in the word for ‘two’ and a few other words. All this shows is that phonetically improbable resemblences may occur in correspondences. However, they are rare. No similar instance to dw~erk has ever been found but t~d or t~t are commonplace.
More importantly, it has nothing to do with classifying Armenian as IndoEuropean. Scores of phonetically obvious resemblances between Armenian and other Indo-European languages exist and were noted earlier. Indeed, Hübschmann, the founder of modern Armenian studies who ﬁrst established the aﬃliation of Armenian on a ﬁrm basis does not have this correspondence in his seminal paper on the position of Armenian (1875), what Meillet was later to call the ‘bel article’ on this subject and he never accepted this correspondence.

5. The Biological Analogy
Beginning in the nineteenth century with Lyell and Darwin on the biological side and Schleicher on the linguistic, the basically similar structure of biological and linguistic evolution has been noted. In both instances, diﬀerential similarities result in hierarchial groups which are explained by historical development from no longer existing ancestral forms, whose distance from the present mirrors the degrees of diﬀerence. Primates had a common ancestor later than mammals of which they are a branch just as Germanic languages have an ancestor, ProtoGermanic, which is later than Proto-Indo-European of which it is a changed form.
Yet, in biology as I noted (1987: 34) nothing is equatable with sound correspondence. The same observation was made by Dyen in the same year (1987: 708) when he states that in biology there is no clear analogy to the law of regular phonetic change. However, he seems to view this as just one point, along with numerous other similarities and a few diﬀerences between linguistic and biological evolution without drawing any conclusions from it.
I believe that in the context of the present paper, since biological classiﬁcation is not only possible but is probably, if anything, more advanced than linguistic classiﬁcation, what we see is that in the very initial steps of the protocomparative method, before regular correspondences enter in, we already have a

174

JOSEPH H. GREENBERG

valid genealogical classiﬁcation. The existence of regular sound changes enables linguists to reconstruct but
reconstruction is not necessary in order to ensure the validity of the classiﬁcation. Once more, biologists do not reconstruct and it is not a part of their taxonomic theory nor does this imply any inferiority in biological taxonomic endeavors. I am conﬁdent that an application of the methods outlined here and elsewhere will ultimately lead to a taxonomy of languages not inferior to that of the biologists in their ﬁeld.

Acknowledgments
An earlier version of this paper was published in MOTHER TONGUE, 1995, 1, 207–16.

References
Bopp, Franz. 1816. Über das Conjugationssystem der Sanskritsprache in Vergleichung mit jenem der griechieschen, lateinischen, persischen und germanischen Sprache. Frankfurt: Andreäische Buchhandlung.
Buck, Charles Darling. 1933. Comparative Grammar of Greek and Latin. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Callaghan, Catherine A. 1958. “California Penutian: History and bibliography”. International Journal of American Linguistics 24:189–94.
Callaghan, Catherine A. 1991. “Review of Wintun Dictionary by Harvey Pitkin”. University of California Publications in Linguistics 95. International Journal of American Linguistics 57:129–31.
Campbell, Lyle and Mithun, Marianne. 1979. “Introduction”. In Lyle Campbell and Marianne Mithun (eds), The Languages of Native America. Austin: University of Texas Press. 3–69.
Collinder, Björn. 1940. “Jukagirisch und Uralisch”. Uppsala Universitets Årsskrift 8. Donner, Kai. 1901. “Die uralaltaischen Sprachen”. Finnish-ugrische Forschungen 1:
128–49. Dyen, Isidore. 1987. “Genetic classiﬁcation in linguistics and biology”. In George
Cardona and Norman Zide (eds), Festschrift for Henry Hoenigswald. Tübingen: Gunther Narr. 101–8. Goddard, Ives. 1975. “Algonkian, Wiyot and Yurok: Proving a distant relationship, linguistics and anthropology”. In M. Dale Kinkade, Kenneth L. Hale and Oswald Werner (eds), 249–62. Lisse: Peter de Ridder. Greenberg, Joseph H. 1987. Language in the Americas. Stanford: Stanford Press.

THE CONCEPT OF PROOF IN GENETIC LINGUISTICS

175

Hübschmann, Heinrich. 1875. “Über die Stellung des armenischen im Kreise der indogermanischen Sprachen”. Zeitschrift für vergleichende Sprachforschung 23:5- 42.
McRobbie, Z. 1986. “Review of English translation of Sámuel Gyarmathi’s Aﬃnitas by Hanzell”. Ural- Altaische Jahrbücher 58:159–60.
Meillet, Antoine. 1958. Linguistique historique et linguistique générale. Paris:Champion. Newman, Paul. 1970. “Historical sound laws in Hausa and Dera(Kanakura)”. Journal of
West African Languages 7:39–53. Paasonen, Heikki. 1907. Zur Frage von der urverwandschaft der ﬁnnish-ugrisch und
indoeuropäischen Sprachen. Finnish-ugrische Forschungen 7:13–30. Pitkin, Harvey and Shipley, William. 1956. “A comparative study of California Penutian”.
International Journal of American Linguistics 24:174–88. Ravila, Paavo. 1935. Die Stellung des lappischen innerhalb der ﬁnnish-ugrischen
Sprachfamilie. Finnish-ugrische Forschungen 23:20–65. Watkins, Calvert. 1990. “Etymologies, equations, and comparanda”. In Philip Baldi (ed.),
Types and Values, Criteria for Judgement in Methodology in Linguistic Change and Reconstruction. Berlin: Mouton de Gruyter. 289–304.

Grammaticalization chains across languages
An example from Khoisan
Bernd Heine
The evolution of grammatical forms has been described most frequently in terms of a discontinuous development from lexical or less grammatical to more grammatical uses. What tends to be ignored in such studies is that, rather than discontinuous, that evolution is actually gradual; terms such as continuum, cline, or grammaticalization chain have therefore been proposed to refer to the relevant evolution (Heine, Claudi & Hünnemeyer 1991; Hopper & Traugott 1993).
In Heine (1992), the internal structure of grammaticalization chains has been analyzed. While grammaticalization chains have ﬁrst been described as languageinternal entities, they may as well have a cross-linguistic dimension, as has been demonstrated by Gildea (1997). In the present paper, further traits of crosslinguistic chains are discussed by examining the structure of gender marking in the Khoe (= Central Khoisan) languages of southern Africa.
1. The structure of grammaticalization chains
Grammaticalization chains are linguistic categories involving a linguistic form or construction that is associated with a range of diﬀerent, contextually deﬁned uses. The structure of chains can be described with reference to the formal properties listed in (1) (Heine 1992: 348–9):
(1) Some properties of grammaticalization chains a. Other than the fact that all uses share one and the same (or at least a similar) form, no attribute is shared by all uses of the chain. b. No use combines all the attributes in question. c. Each use has at least one attribute in common with some other use. d. The endpoints of the chain have no attribute in common.

178

BERND HEINE

e. Immediately adjacent members have more attributes in common than non-adjacent members.
f. Uses located at opposite ends of the chain have the lowest number of attributes in common, while uses located at the center of the chain share the highest number of attributes.

The structure of a grammaticalization chain can be illustrated with the following English example. The sentences of (2), taken from Hopper and Traugott (1993: 2–3, 61, 88), can be said to include the attributes distinguished in (3).

(2) Examples of the use of be going (to)/be gonna in English (according to Hopper & Traugott 1993: 61) i. He’s going [to visit Bill] ii. He [’s going to] visit Bill iii. He [’s going to] like Bill iv. He [’s gonna] like/visit Bill

(3) Some attributes of the examples in (2)

Function of be

Type of main verb

Phonology of be

going (to)/be gonna

going (to)/be gonna

i. Progressive Directional (e.g. to go) Full form

ii. Future tense Verb of activity (to visit) Full form

iii. Future tense Any verb (to like)

Full form

iv. Future tense Any verb (to like/visit) Reduced form

The classiﬁcation of structural attributes presented in (3) is based on the information provided by Hopper and Traugott (1993: 61). One might think of alternative analyses; for our purposes, however, this would be largely immaterial. The four sentences of (2) can be interpreted as reﬂecting a minimal grammaticalization chain having all the attributes listed in (1):

a. None of the attributes distinguished in (3) is shared by all four uses, i.e. by all four sentences in (2). For example, the attributes ‘future tense’ and ‘full form’ are shared by three sentences, other attributes again are shared by two (‘any verb’), or by one sentence only (‘progressive’, ‘directional’, ‘verb of activity’, ‘reduced form’).
b. None of the sentences combines all the attributes. c. Each sentence has at least one attribute in common with some other sentence. d. The endpoints (i.e. (i) and (iv)) have no attribute in common. e. Immediately adjacent sentences share more attributes than non-adjacent
members. Thus, (i) and (ii) share one attribute, (ii) and (iii) two, (iii) and (iv) two, but (i) and (iv) have no attribute in common.

GRAMMATICALIZATION CHAINS ACROSS LANGUAGES

179

f. As just noted (e), the peripheral sentences (i) and (iv) share no attributes.
The synchronic properties just sketched have a systematic diachronic correlate: In accordance with general ﬁndings on the evolution of grammatical categories we will expect that the initial member of a grammaticalization chain represents the earliest form and the ﬁnal member the latest form. With reference to the present example this means that (i) can be expected to represent the earliest and (iv) the latest stage in the development of the English be going to-construction.
Grammaticalization chains share some characteristics with prototypes. At the same time, however, they are also incompatible with some main properties of prototypes; they are most appropriately described as linear family resemblance categories; the reader is referred to Heine (1992: 349ﬀ.) for more details.
To conclude, the structure of a grammaticalization chain can be deﬁned with reference to the following variables: (a) the endpoints of the chain, (b) relative distance along the chain, and (c) location on the chain.
That such chains cannot only be identiﬁed within a given language has been demonstrated by Spike Gildea (1997). Cross-linguistic chains, like the one described by him, diﬀer from the language-internal chain looked at above especially in the following:
a. Rather than being conﬁned to one language, they include uses of a form that is etymologically the same in genetically closely related languages.
b. The languages concerned can be classiﬁed with reference to the range of uses they exhibit along a given grammaticalization chain.
c. The grammatical behavior of a form or construction can be explained meaningfully only if all its uses involved are taken into account, even if these uses extend beyond the limits of a single language.
d. While language-internal chains can be accounted for with reference to established descriptive techniques, cross-linguistic chains require an explanatory framework that is comparative in nature.
With the example looked at in the following section I wish to demonstrate that the reconstruction of cross-linguistic chains can contribute to a better understanding of the nature and structure of some linguistic categories. The example chosen diﬀers in several ways from those discussed in Heine (1992) and Gildea (1998). The languages looked at belong to the Khoe (or Central Khoisan) family of southern Africa.

180

BERND HEINE

2. Gender in Khoe

The Khoe languages of southern Africa are spoken mainly in Namibia and Botswana, smaller groups are also found in Angola, Zambia, Zimbabwe, and South Africa. A list of these languages and their genetic sub-classiﬁcation is found in (4).

(4) The Khoe languages according to Vossen (1997) 1 Khoekhoe branch: Nama (Khoekhoe), !Ora (Korana), Xiri (Griqua) 2 Non-Khoekhoe branch 2.1 West Khoe 2.1.1 Kxoe group: Kxoe, Ani, Buga, Ganda 2.1.2 Naro- Gana group: Naro; Gana, Gui, Haba 2.2 East Khoe 2.2.1 Shua group: Xaise, Deti, Cara, Ts’ixa, Danisi 2.2.2 Tshwa group: Cua, Kua, Tsua

Typological characteristics of Khoe are the presence of a ‘rigid’ word-ﬁnal (SOV) syntax, of four click consonants ( = dental, = lateral, = palatal, and ! = alveolar click), and of a gender system. Gender marking is achieved by means of portmanteau morphemes which simultaneously express gender (masculine, feminine, and common), number (singular, dual, and plural) and person (ﬁrst, second, and third person; Köhler 1962; Vossen 1997). Following Hagman (1977: 16, 42) I will refer to these morphemes as pgn markers or, in short, as pgn’s, an abbreviation standing for ‘person-gender-number forms’. The wealth of pgn markers characteristic of these languages is illustrated in (5), where the pgn suﬃxes on personal pronouns reconstructed by Vossen for Proto-Khoe are presented (a list of the abbreviations used is found at the end of this paper; for more information on pgn’s in the various Khoe languages, see Köhler 1962; Vossen 1997; 1994).

(5) The Proto-Khoe pgn’s used on personal pronouns as reconstructed

by Vossen (1997)

Singular

Dual

Plural

1

*ta

(*tsabe)

* ae

1

*ta

*sabe

*s(a)e

1

(*ta)

(*khabe) *tae

2

*tsa

(*tsado)

* ao

2

*sa

*sado

*sao

GRAMMATICALIZATION CHAINS ACROSS LANGUAGES

181

2 3 3 3

-

(*khado) *to (OR *tu)

*ba

(*tsada)

* ua

*sa

*sada

?

*’i

*khada

*na

There is some variation in the use of these markers, both language-internally and cross-linguistically. For example, most third person pgn’s have two forms each, a long one and a short one. Further, instead of ba (b in the Khoekhoe branch) there is a third person masculine singular pgn ma in a number of languages; the reader is referred to Köhler (1962) and Vossen (1997) for details.
These markers occur in various positions in the clause, e.g. as aﬃxes or clitics on nouns, nominal modiﬁers, or within the verb phrase, or as self-standing pronouns. A characteristic of most, if not all, Khoe languages is the fact that nouns and nominal modiﬁers can occur either with or without a pgn suﬃxed to them. In some cases there are clear rules on the occurrence of these markers, but in many other cases, no rules have been found (see Section 3).
It is not possible to deal with all the various contexts in which pgn’s are used; rather, my interest in these markers will be restricted to their use as enclitics or suﬃxes on three kinds of words within the noun phrase. These words are adjectives, demonstrative attributes, and personal pronouns. The selection is determined mainly by the availabilty of comparative data.
It is not possible either to deal here with all the languages listed in (4), not only because this would exceed the size a paper but also because for most of these languages no grammatical data are available. The languages looked at and the respective sources consulted are: Hiechware (Dornan 1917), Kxoe (Köhler 1973, 1981, 1989, 1991), and Naro (Bleek 1928; Maingard 1961; Barnard 1985; Vossen 1997). The exact linguistic identity of Hiechware is unclear. Following Dornan (1917), Köhler calls it ‘the Tati Bushman language’ (1962: 529) and appears to equate it with his Tywa language (1962: 535). Whether Hiechware is in fact the same as what is variously called Tatí, Tetí, Tsetí, Deti, etc. is open to question (cf. Vossen 1997).

3. The chain
As noted earlier, there is some variation in the use of the pgn markers listed in (5) and their present-day reﬂexes, both across the various Khoe languages and within a given language. The following generalizations seem to hold for all languages for which enough data exists:

182

BERND HEINE

a. All languages have pgn markers on some but not on all uses of nouns, pronouns, and/or nominal modiﬁers.
b. No information exists on when exactly these pgn’s are used or may not be used. c. The function of these pgn’s is also unclear, but in perhaps the majority of cases
where information on their function is provided, pgn’s express what is referred to in the relevant literature as ‘emphasis’ on the preceding word stem.

In the present section I argue that the use of these markers has an internal structure that can be described as a cross-linguistic grammaticalization chain. The extent to which pgn’s are used on adjectives, demonstrative attributes, and personal pronouns is now examined in the three test languages chosen, that is, in Hiechware, Kxoe, and Naro.
Probably in all Khoe languages nominal attributes precede the governing noun. But not infrequently there are also ways of placing attributes post-nominally, typically involving some extra morphological means. In Nama, for example, pgn use is crucially determined by whether an attribute precedes or follows the head noun. Consider example (6) taken from Nama.

(6) Nama (Hagman 1977: 46)

a. xarí óán-p

small child-3.

‘the small boy’

b. óán-p

arí-p

child.3. small-3.

‘the boy, the small one’

The use of the pgn marker -p on the noun in (6) is obligatory. Its use on the adjective, however, correlates with word order: Whenever nominal modiﬁers like adjectives and demonstratives follow their head noun they must have a pgn on them, as in (6b), while preceding modiﬁers lack a pgn, as can be seen in (6a). Note further that there is also a diﬀerence in meaning: The adjective xarí ‘small’ is said to present “necessary information” in (6a) but “parenthetical information” in (6b); the latter is also referred to as an “appositive”, while in the former the meaning of the modiﬁer is said to be “emphasized” (Hagman 1977: 45–6). In many other instances of pgn use across the Khoe language family there are neither syntactic nor semantic clues that would be of help to account for the presence or absence of these markers.
In this paper only the most “unmarked” use of attributes is examined, which means e.g. that we will be preoccupied with the pre-nominal use of attributes.

GRAMMATICALIZATION CHAINS ACROSS LANGUAGES

183

3.1 Adjectives

Adjectives may be said to be morphosyntactic and functional “hybrids” in most, if not in all, Khoe languages: they are used in essentially the same way as verbs of state and as nominal attributes and, depending on the theoretical viewpoint adopted, they may be described alternatively as verbs which can also be used to modify nouns or as nominal modiﬁers which also serve as verbs of state. The present treatment of adjectives also covers numerals. Most Khoisan languages are poor in numerals, some languages have no more than two or three traditional numerals. Numerals behave in many ways like adjectives; as we will see, however, there are also diﬀerences.
In Hiechware, adjectives are invariable forms, that is, they have no pgn’s on them. As attributes they precede their head noun, as illustrated in (7).

(7) Hiechware (Dornan 1917: 64)

khoo hii

‘a large tree’

khoo hi-re

‘large trees’

khoo jube-ra ‘the large oxen’

Dornan’s data suggest that Hiechware numerals may either precede or follow their head noun; examples are found in (8a) and (8b), respectively. In either case, no pgn marking has been found (note that the meaning of tenses provided by Dornan is peculiar in many cases).

(8) Hiechware (Dornan 1917: 64, 65)

a. tse na jubesani koo koha-re go- aha !goa nyimwa

1  four big zebra- kill- mountain upon

‘we have killed four big zebras on the mountain’

b. ka chi kwa goo !khai- re

kamnye

 1  kill springbuck-

two

‘I killed two springbucks’

As in Hiechware, adjectives also precede the noun in Kxoe without any pgn marking. Köhler (1973: 38) observes that the nominalized adjective can be placed after the noun it modiﬁes, in which case it expresses “emphasis” and may be pgn marked. Such cases must be rare; an analysis of Kxoe texts suggests that prenominal adjectives without pgn suﬃxes are the rule, as in (9) below.

(9) Kxoe (Köhler 1991: 11f.) á kuún kx’óxò nò […]  small animal if ‘If it is a small animal […]’

184

BERND HEINE

There is an alternative pattern in Kxoe involving post-nominal adjectives followed by the possessive marker dì, which serves mainly to express contrastive ‘emphasis’ (Köhler 1973: 34). This pattern is associated with the use of the ‘indeﬁnite form’ ’à, but there is no pgn marking either.
The little information available on numerals in Kxoe suggests that pgn’s are not normally used on numeral attributes, if at all. Examples are found in (10). (Note that there are two diﬀerent terms for ‘three’; the ﬁrst [in 10a] being used in traditional contexts and the second [in 10b] in contexts relating to modern western-type life.)

(10) Kxoe (Köhler 1989: 565)

a. […] tá-xú-nò x’óa-ceu- ’oan-ko ’ée- re

0 then three

day- ?

tóan-xu. i nò […]

rest-. if

‘[…] then, after having rested for three days […]’

b. […] thùú-nò trí kìrókò nò […]

0 night-if three o’clock if

‘[…] at three o’clock at night […]’

Bleek (1928: 56) says that adjectives in Naro ‘[…] are sometimes used without endings, sometimes declined as the noun’. On the basis of the texts provided by her, however, adjectives used as attributes are not normally pgn marked, e.g.

(11) Naro (Bleek 1928: 57) nu: kwe-n […]
black person-3. ‘the black men […]’

Numeral attributes without pgn’s are fairly common in Naro; more often than not, however, numerals have a pgn on them. Example (12) might suggest that pgn use is more likely with human nouns (as in 12a) than with inanimate nouns (12b); the evidence is, however, not entirely conclusive.

(12) Naro (Bleek 1928: 57)

a. kam ku:nen ko _ha:

two wagons ? come

‘Two wagons came’

b. kam-v6ra vfk’au- v6ra vf-wa

kuru

two-3. doctor- 3. medicine-3. make

‘two medicine men work magic’

GRAMMATICALIZATION CHAINS ACROSS LANGUAGES

185

To summarize, pgn marking appears to be uncommon on attributival adjectives in all three languages. In Naro, however, numeral attributes have pgn’s in some of their uses though not in others.

3.2 Demonstratives

The demonstrative attributes of Hiechware are e ‘this’, a ‘that’, and ho ‘that yonder’; they are invariable, that is, they precede the noun they determine irrespective of gender, number, or other properties that the noun may have, e.g.

(13) Hiechware (Dornan 1917: 72) a hie cho that “bushman” ‘that San’

The situation is more complex in Kxoe. Köhler (1973: 67) recorded altogether nine demonstrative forms, which are n/né ‘this’, n/nè’é ‘this here’, n/né’e ‘this there’, n//nàá ‘that’, n/nín ‘that over there’, n/ní’e ‘that far over there’, and xàá, ’á (M), and ’í (F), the last three being called “distance-neutral” demonstratives by Köhler. Pgn’s have become an obligatory part of demonstratives in their masculine singular and common plural forms; an example is found in (14a). Since the relevant pgn’s (mà or m, 3. and -nà or n, 3.) are the only ones beginning with a nasal consonant, Köhler (1973: 67a) refers to the pgn use on demonstrative attributes in Kxoe as “nasal concord”. When neither of these two nasal-initial pgn’s is involved, no pgn’s are used on demonstrative attributes, as illustrated in (14b).

(14) Kxoe (Köhler 1973: 67a; 1991: 168)

a. n à- n´ kxòè- nà

- 3. person- 3.

‘those people’

b. […] n àá xù-djì

’à […]

0  thing-3. 

[…] ‘those things’ […]

Naro has a number of demonstratives. The following forms have been recorded: né, ni, n né, nà, n nà, xa, and ‘ì-sí-hà. The overall range of demonstrative categories and their exact functions are unclear (cf. Bleek 1928: 56; Vossen 1997: 231–2). Vossen (1997: 232) observes: “Auf Konkordanz zwischen Demonstrativ und regierendem Nomen wird von der Mehrzahl der Sprecher Wert gelegt; dennoch kann das Demonstrativpronomen Genus-Numerus-unmarkiert sein”. That

186

BERND HEINE

the use of pgn’s on demonstrative attributes is in fact the expected case is suggested by the text examples found in Bleek (1928), as e.g. in (15a) and (15b). Nevertheless, there are also examples where no pgn is found, like (15c).

(15) Naro (Bleek 1928: 55, 56)

a. ni-s

gfbe-wa ti-di-wa

i: […]

this-3. bag-3. 1--3. be

‘this bag is mine, […]’

b. […] xa-w

den-wa […]

0 that-3. bow-3.

‘[…] that bow […]’

c. xa !nu:-di-s

xum- wa

tam ka

that country--3. earth- 3. like:this

‘that country’s earth is like this’

To conclude, pgn’s are not found on demonstrative attributes in Hiechware, they occur in speciﬁc contexts but not in others in Kxoe, while in Naro they appear to be used in most contexts.

3.3 Personal pronouns

The paradigms of subject singular pronouns of the three test languages are summarized in (16).

(16) The subject singular personal pronouns of Hiechware, Kxoe, and

Naro (where gap = no information)

Hiechware Kxoe

Naro

(Dornan

(Köhler

(Vossen

1917: 65ﬀ.) 1962: 541) 1997)

1

chi

tí

tí-yá, tí-rá

2. cha

tcá

tsá-tsí, tsá

2.

hán

sá-sí, sá

3. e-be

xà-má

xà-bá

3.

e-be

xà-h¢7

xà-sá

3.

–

’í-xà

The data presented in (16) are simpliﬁed in a number of ways. More detailed accounts are found in the references cited in (16); the following in particular should be noted:

a. The ﬁrst and second person pronouns of Naro have both a “full form” and a “short form”. The former, consisting of two elements (separated by “-” in

GRAMMATICALIZATION CHAINS ACROSS LANGUAGES

187

[16]), are the ones primarily used as subject pronouns. The object pronouns are also “short forms” but they diﬀer from the subject “short forms” in tone and a few other phonological details (see Vossen 1997: 216–7). b. The third person pronouns of Kxoe and Naro are composed of the demonstrative stem xà- plus the respective pgn. In a similar fashion, the Hiechware third person pronoun e-be appears to be composed of the proximal demonstrative e ‘this’ (see 3.2) and the third person masculine singular pgn -be, which is likely to be a reﬂex of the pgn *ba of Proto-Khoe (see (5) above).
On the basis of these observations one may assume that in all three languages the demonstrative serves as a base for third person pronouns to which pgn’s were added. But Naro has gone one step further: It has extended the bi-morphemic structure of personal pronouns from third person pronouns to second and ﬁrst person subject pronouns.
While the exact nature of the process leading to the rise of complex nonthird person pronouns is not entirely clear (cf. Honken 1977; Vossen 1997), the most plausible hypothesis would be that a paradigm of earlier pronominal elements was ‘reinforced’ by pgn’s, the result being that Naro now has complex personal pronouns consisting of pgn’s plus another element etymologically related to the respective pgn, while Hiechware and Kxoe have retained the simple pgn’s as ﬁrst and second person pronouns.

3.4 Summary

The data looked at in the preceding sections is summarized in (17). Three kinds of situations or stages of pgn use are distinguished there: “0” signals that pgn’s are not normally used on the relevant word category, “I” means that pgn’s are used in some contexts but not in others, while “II” stands for a predominant or generalized use of pgn’s, even if there may be speciﬁc contexts where no pgn is found.

(17) Three stages in the use of pgn’s within the noun phrase

(Stages: 0 = not normally used; I = used in some contexts

but not in others; II = used predominantly or generally)

Language

NP category

Adjective Demon-

Personal

strative

pronoun

Hiechware 0

0

I

Kxoe

0

I

I

Naro

I

II

I-II

188

BERND HEINE

The data summarized in (17) can be described as an implicational scale in a double sense. First, the three word categories diﬀer in the degree to which they accept pgn’s: adjectives are the most resistant to pgn marking, while demonstratives and personal pronouns are much less so. This allows for a generalization of the following kind: If in one of these languages any of the word categories examined is associated with pgn marking (either of Stage I or Stage II) then all word categories to its right are also associated with pgn marking. (There is one partial exception, in that Naro has stage II for the use of pgn’s on demonstratives but an intermediate stage ”I-II” for personal pronouns.)
Second, the three languages also form an implicational scale relative to one another. Hiechware has the lowest rate of pgn marking, Kxoe a higher one, and Naro the highest rate. Now, if any of the three languages has pgn marking on any of the three word categories (either of Stage I or Stage II), then the languages located below it also have pgn marking of at least the same stage.
What was said about Hiechware, Kxoe, and Naro also applies in some way to other Khoe languages. Although the data available are too scanty to allow for any generalizations, it would seem that the remaining Khoe languages can be located somewhere between Hiechware and Naro along the scale of (17). It would seem, for example, that the languages of the Tshwa group (see (4)) occupy a place close to Hiechware along the chain (cf. Köhler 1962; Vossen 1997); while the data on Ani that Rainer Vossen generously made available to me suggest that this language is located close to Naro, exhibiting a fairly generalized use of pgn marking. For example, in Ani pgn’s are not only found on numerals, they have also spread to ‘proper’ adjectives, e.g. áú-n xàm¢-nà (big3. lion-3.) ‘big lions’ (Rainer Vossen p.c.).
(17) can be said to reﬂect a grammaticalization chain, but this chain diﬀers from the ones mentioned earlier in the following respect: While the chains discussed by Heine (1992) and Gildea (1997) both involve various parts of language structure, like semantics, syntax, morphology, and morphophonology, (17) concerns essentially only one part, namely morphology. There is an obvious reason for this restriction: no adequate data exist on other parts of the languages in question. Like the chain examined by Gildea (1997), (17) is an instance of a cross-linguistic chain, whose various members are not conﬁned to one language but are found in a cluster of closely related languages.
Each of the three languages examined here can be said to represent a diﬀerent use along the grammaticalization chain extending from personal pronoun to gender marker: Hiechware represents the initial use pattern, where there is no gender marking except for third person pronouns, Kxoe is suggestive of a more advanced use, where gender marking has become an obligatory part of

GRAMMATICALIZATION CHAINS ACROSS LANGUAGES

189

third person pronouns and an optional part of demonstrative attributes, and Naro represents the most advanced use pattern, where pgn’s have been generalized on demonstratives, have spread to second and ﬁrst person pronouns, and have become an optional part of numeral attributes. (17) has all the formal properties of grammaticalization chains listed in Section 1:
a. None of the three attributes of pgn use distinguished in (17) is shared by all languages.
b. No language combines all attributes. c. Each language has at least one attribute in common with some
other language. d. The endpoints of the chain, that is, the languages Hiechware
and Naro, have no attributes in common. e. Languages next to one another on the chain have more attrib-
utes in common than non-adjacent languages. Thus, Hiechware and Kxoe, or Kxoe and Naro, share more attributes than Hiechware and Naro. f. The peripheral languages Hiechware and Naro have the lowest number of attributes in common, whereas the central language Kxoe has the highest number of shared attributes.
3.5 The Khoekhoe languages
Work on Khoe languages has traditionally been conﬁned largely to Nama, in terms of its number of speakers the most important Khoe language. The present paper is conﬁned to non-Khoekhoe languages, even if the phenomena discussed can be observed in a similar way in the Khoekhoe languages Nama, !Ora, and Xiri. The structure of pgn use in Nama as well as the other Khoekhoe languages requires a separate analysis; nevertheless, the following rough remarks on pgn marking in Nama may be helpful:
a. Pgn marking on nouns has been generalized to the extent that Nama nouns do not normally occur without a pgn. In this respect, Nama has proceeded further than any of the languages examined above (see Vossen 1997: 246).
b. Similarly, personal pronouns in Nama have reached at least the same stage of evolution as personal pronouns in Naro, that is, they consist almost invariably of a pgn plus an additional pronominal element.
c. At the same time, pgn use has not spread to pre-nominal modiﬁers (and determiners) like adjectives, demonstratives etc., as illustrated by the

190

BERND HEINE

examples in (18). Nevertheless, Nama has developed a fairly rigid pattern of post-nominal modiﬁcation where pgn use is obligatory. Thus, there are two patterns of nominal modiﬁcation, the structure of which is sketched in (19) and exempliﬁed in (6), reprinted below for convenience as (20).

(18) Nama (Hagman 1977: 35) a. úí káí írí-p one big jackal-3. ‘one large male jackal’ b. ám káí írí-ku two big jackal-3. ‘two large male jackals’

(19) Nominal modiﬁcation in Nama a. modiﬁer — noun b. noun — modiﬁer + pgn

(20) Nama (Hagman 1977: 46)

a. xarí óán-p

small child-3.

‘the small boy’

b. óán-p

xarí-p

child-3. small-3.

‘the boy, the small one’

4. Accounting for the chain

4.1 How does a language acquire gender markers?

In a seminal paper, Greenberg (1978a) presented an account of how demonstrative markers are grammaticalized in certain languages. He proposed an evolutional scale roughly as sketched in (21) below (the reader is referred to Greenberg [1978a: 61ﬀ.] for further details. For example, by the ‘speciﬁc article’, he refers to ”an article in contexts in which a speciﬁc but unidentiﬁed item is referred to, that is, there is a presupposition of reference” [1978a: 62].)

(21) The evolution of gender markers according to Greenberg (1978a).

Stage 0:

Stage I:

Stage II: Stage III:

Demonstrative > Deﬁnite > Speciﬁc > Marker of

article

article

nominality

GRAMMATICALIZATION CHAINS ACROSS LANGUAGES

191

What Greenberg’s scale suggests is that demonstrative attributes may undergo an evolution whereby they develop ﬁrst into deﬁnite articles, subsequently into markers of speciﬁc reference, and ﬁnally into semantically more or less empty markers of nominality. In languages where the erstwhile demonstrative is marked for gender, this evolution leads to the rise of a new set of nominal gender markers at Stage III, since gender distinctions tend to be retained even if the demonstrative has lost its original function.
The evidence adduced by Greenberg also includes Khoe languages: In the “Hottentot” languages (= Nama, !Ora, and Xiri) and in Naron (= Naro) he ﬁnds evidence for a scale of evolution from unmarked to gender-marked nouns (Greenberg 1978a: 59). Whether Greenberg’s reconstruction is correct in every detail may be a matter of dispute; on the whole it would seem that what applies to the Khoekhoe (“Hottentot”) languages is immediately relevant to the present situation.
But there remain a few problems. First, Greenberg’s evolutional scale (21) has a demonstrative as a source for gender markers, whereas in the Khoe languages there is no evidence to suggest that a demonstrative was involved in the evolution of pgn’s. Rather, the pgn’s closely resemble the personal pronouns of Kxoe. Still, this fact is not necessarily at variance with Greenberg’s thesis. What he has in mind is what in the theory of grammaticalization is called polygrammaticalization: demonstratives can give rise to either deﬁnite articles or personal pronouns, or even to both, as has happened e.g. in the development of French: French il (‘he’) and le (‘the’ or ‘him’) are etymologically related in that both can be traced back to one and the same item, namely the Latin demonstrative ille (‘that’). But the pgn’s do not show any etymological relationship to the demonstrative stems found in the Khoe languages (see Kilian-Hatz & Heine 1997). We are therefore led to conclude that the reconstruction proposed by Greenberg, while being supported by a number of well attested evolutions in other language families, does not take care of the situation in the Khoe languages.
But there is an alternative account. The evolution of pgn’s appears to have been determined by a pragmatic strategy commonly employed in the Khoe languages whereby a noun or other element is further speciﬁed by adding a marker providing more information on semantic characteristics of the referent in question, especially information on the gender, number, and personal deixis of that referent. This marker has the status of an afterthought or appositive constituent. The following observations made in Kxoe may illustrate the eﬀect of this strategy:
a. While kin terms in Kxoe take the vocative enclitic ’è without any linkage, generic human nouns require the pgn to be placed between noun and vocative marker:

192

BERND HEINE

(22) Kxoe (Köhler 1973: 54)

(tcá) kxóé-tc-

è

2. person-2. 

‘you man (you)!’

( âo) àwà- áo

’è

2. ancestor-2. 

‘you ancestors!’

There is an obvious reason for treating kin terms and generic nouns diﬀerently. Kin terms are likely to be inherently associated with appropriate information on the person, gender, and number of the referent concerned; the English term uncle, as in my uncle, for example, stands for a single male, third person referent. Generic nouns, on the other hand, are less speciﬁc in this respect and, accordingly, pgn’s are a convenient means of specifying generic nouns for person, gender, and number.

b. The vocative enclitic is also used to form what Köhler (1973: 54) calls the emphatic imperative, in which case a second person pgn is placed between verb and vocative enclitic è, e.g.

(23) Kxoe (Köhler 1973: 54) kóm-tc-è listen-2.- ‘listen (you man)!’

kóm- àò

è

listen-2. 

‘listen (you men)!’

c. The vocative suﬃx can also be suﬃxed to the demonstrative stem à- and, once again, the pgn precedes the vocative enclitic:

(24) Kxoe (Köhler 1973: 54b) à-tcé- è ‘you (man) there!’ à- áò è ‘you (men) there!’

d. But even without a vocative enclitic, pgn’s are frequently added to nouns for person, gender, and number speciﬁcation, e.g.

(25) Kxoe (Köhler 1973: 61) tcá Kxoé-tci

GRAMMATICALIZATION CHAINS ACROSS LANGUAGES

193

‘You Kxoe man!’ áò Kxoé- àò ‘You Kxoe men!’

e. Speciﬁcation by means of pgn’s goes even one step further: it can have the eﬀect of introducing what may be called redundant predications. The interrogative attribute màá ‘which?’ can occur without speciﬁcation, as in (26a). But it may also have a pgn after it even if a virtually redundant question results, as in (26b).

(26) Kxoe (Köhler 1973) a. màá kxoè? which person ‘which person is it?, which people are they?’ b. mà-tcí? which-2. ‘who (you man)?’

In (27) there is even one more instance of pgn use:

(27) Kxoe (Köhler 1973)

a. tcá

ma-tcí

á-kì kx’úí-yé-tè-tcì?

2. which-2. there speak-I--2.

‘You there, who is it who (you) speaks?’

b. xà-má mà-má

á-mà?

he which-3. this-3.

‘who is this?’

To summarize, pgn’s can be added to various kinds of word to specify the person, gender, and/or number characteristics of the referent concerned.

4.2 Speciﬁcation

What the observations made in the preceding section (4.1) suggest is, ﬁrst, that it is not demonstratives but rather erstwhile personal pronouns that appear to be responsible for the spread of gender marking and the rise of gender agreement in the Khoe languages. Second, it is not a syntactic structure, like [head — modiﬁer], that is involved but rather a pragmatic pattern according to which a constituent of the noun phrase (= the speciﬁed) is further speciﬁed by means of a personal pronoun that provides more information on the personal deixis, gender, and number of that constituent (= the speciﬁer). The speciﬁer has the following properties or part thereof (cf. Heine 1997: 3.2):

194

BERND HEINE

a. It refers to the same general entity as the speciﬁed. b. It further characterizes the speciﬁed by narrowing down the range of
possible referents that may qualify as the speciﬁed. This can be achieved by providing more information on the speciﬁed, and/or by making clear which of the alternatives available qualiﬁes as the speciﬁed. c. It lays “emphasis” on the speciﬁed (e.g. by referring to it a second time by means of a diﬀerent expression). d. It makes the speciﬁed more easily recoverable in subsequent discourse. e. Typically, the speciﬁer follows the speciﬁed, although in some languages, the order of the two appears to be reversed.
All properties apply in some way to the pgn use described above. Perhaps the most immediately relevant property is that mentioned in (b). That pgn’s provide more information on the speciﬁed is perhaps most obvious in their derivative use: In all Khoe languages on which some grammatical information is available, pgn’s are used as derivative suﬃxes, where two kinds of functions can be distinguished. On the one hand, they serve “nominalization”, that is, they turn nominal modiﬁers into pronouns or verbs into nouns, as in (28).
(28) Naro (Vossen 1986: 380) kx’úí ‘to speak’ kx’ùí-sá speak-3. ‘language; law’
On the other hand, pgn’s also turn semantically less speciﬁc nouns into more speciﬁc ones, as in example (29).
(29) Naro (Bleek 1928: 53) hi ‘any plant’
hi-ba ‘tree’ plant-3.
hi-wa plant-3. ‘a broad low bush’
According to (c), speciﬁcation may have to do with emphasis. A number of authors dealing with Khoe languages have in fact pointed out that pgn use can

GRAMMATICALIZATION CHAINS ACROSS LANGUAGES

195

express “emphasis”. For example, we observed above (4.1) that the emphatic imperative in Kxoe requires a pgn to be placed between the verb and the vocative enclitic è (Köhler 1973: 54), and Bleek (1928: 55) refers to the xamarked third person pronouns in Naro as “the emphatic form” and, in a similar fashion, Barnard (1985: 15ﬀ.) calls the short form of the personal pronoun of Naro the “non-emphatic pronoun” and the full form the “emphatic pronoun”.
That the use of pgn’s has to do with “emphasis” can be shown perhaps most clearly with the following example from Kxoe. As observed earlier (Section 3.3), the third person pronouns of Kxoe consist of what is diachronically a demonstrative (in most cases xà-) plus the appropriate pgn, exempliﬁed in (30a). Now, the same structural pattern exists for ﬁrst and second person pronouns, except that in the latter two cases the combination [demonstrative + pgn] does not express a simple person pronoun but rather an “emphatic” one, as in (30b), while the “nonemphatic” ﬁrst or second person pronoun is identical with the pgn, as in (30c).

(30) Kxoe (Köhler 1971: 58)

a. xà-má (i) ‘he’ (3.);

(ii) ‘he’ (3.; emphatic pronoun)

b. xà-tí

‘I’ (1; emphatic pronoun)

c. tí

‘I’ (1; non-emphatic pronoun)

What these observations seem to suggest is that demonstratives are employed in Kxoe to “emphasize” personal pronouns, the result being a paradigm of “emphatic pronouns”, exempliﬁed in (30b). In the third person, “emphatic pronouns” have replaced the “non-emphatic” ones. In this way, they are now used as the unmarked third person pronouns. At the same time, they have also retained their earlier function, with the eﬀect that they are ambiguous between their earlier (“emphatic”) and their later (“non-emphatic”) uses.
Note, however, that neither is the term “emphasis” reported to be present in all uses of pgn’s in Kxoe and other Khoe languages, nor does it become entirely clear what “emphasis” exactly means (cf. Hagman 1977: 46 for a particularly idiosyncratic use of “emphasis”; see 3.5 above).

5. Conclusions
The structure of pgn use in the Khoe languages can tell us a story of how gender agreement may arise and spread. Hiechware represents the ﬁrst part of the story, where no gender agreement exists. Kxoe oﬀers the second part, where certain patterns of optional gender agreement arise, in the case of the “nasal concord”

196

BERND HEINE

also of obligatory agreement. Naro has reached an even more advanced part, but it is still far away from the ﬁnal part, where gender agreement is complete, as e.g. in the Bantu languages surrounding the Khoe languages.
One may wonder what purpose there may be to identify cross-linguistic chains. It would seem that there are at least two goals, a diachronic-comparative one and a synchronic-descriptive one. According to the ﬁrst goal, cross-linguistic chains are an immediate reﬂex of diachronic processes, and they provide a basis for reconstructing certain historical events. The reconstruction of such events is beyond the scope of alternative methods of historical analysis. The fact that an etymologically identical item occurs as a free form in one language but as an aﬃx in another, or as a personal pronoun in one language and as an agreement marker in another can be accounted for in a systematic way with reference to the grammaticalization chain in question.
According to the second goal, cross-linguistic chains can help us to understand the structure of a given language with reference to more general processes of linguistic evolution. For example, the question of why there are pgn markers on demonstratives or nouns in Kxoe in some contexts but not in others, can be answered with reference to the overall evolution of personal pronouns as appositive speciﬁers: The situation found in Kxoe is the result of processes that have not (or not yet) taken place in Hiechware, but have already taken place in Naro. For a better understanding of the nature and functions of gender agreement in Kxoe it is essential to know more about the mechanism that can be held responsible for the present situation in Kxoe, and for a reconstruction of that mechanism, a systematic comparison between Hiechware and Kxoe seems indispensible. At the same time, by comparing the Kxoe situation with that of Naro it is possible to predict within limits what is going to happen to gender agreement in the future development of the Kxoe languages.
A characteristic of grammaticalization chains can be seen in their overlapping structure, which can be represented in a simpliﬁed form as in (31).

(31) An idealized grammaticalization chain

Stages

I

II III

Properties

AAAAAA

BBBBBB

CCCCCC

The motivation for the presence of an overlapping structure can be seen in a structural property of grammaticalization according to which some components of a linguistic expression are grammaticalized earlier than others. Thus, all chains identiﬁed so far suggest that there is a principle according to which change in

GRAMMATICALIZATION CHAINS ACROSS LANGUAGES

197

meaning precedes change in syntax and phonology (see Heine, Claudi and Hünnemeyer 1991). For example, A may be the meaning of that exression which is found at Stages I and II but not at Stage III, while the syntactic form B associated with A does not occur at Stage I but rather is a characteristic of Stages II and III. While the data available for the Khoe languages is too scanty to allow for reliable reconstructions, it would seem to be in accordance with this principle: The pgn’s occur as semantically full ﬁrst and second person pronouns in Hiechware and Kxoe, but as semantically empty agreement markers e.g. on demonstrative attributes in Kxoe (3.2).
But our Khoe chain illustrates yet another principle, according to which a grammaticalization process is ﬁrst restricted to speciﬁc contexts before it spreads to other contexts. For example, pgn use has become a common feature on demonstrative attributes in Kxoe and Naro but has not spread to adjectives as yet. That adjectives are more conservative than demonstratives in the evolution of gender agreement is reﬂected e.g. in the cross-linguistic typology of gender systems. Among the 500–plus African gender languages there are quite a few that mark gender agreement on demonstratives but not on adjectives, whereas gender agreement on adjectives but not on demonstratives appears to be extremely rare.

Acknowledgments
The present paper has proﬁted greatly from discussions with Christa Kilian-Hatz, Yvonne Treis, Mathias Schladt, Matthias Brenzinger, and Rainer Vossen, and with the participants of the Houston symposium. I am especially grateful to Christa Kilian-Hatz, Rainer Vossen, Spike Gildea, Tom Givón and Sasha Aikkenvald for valuable comments on an earlier version of this paper.

Abbreviations

            

common gender dual feminine future tense habitual aspect locative postposition masculine object passive past tense perfect plural possessive marker

       1 2 3 I II

present tense particle subject singular terminative suﬃx tense marker vocative ﬁrst person second person third person juncture I juncture II

198

BERND HEINE

The writing system is essentially the one used by Köhler (1973) and Vossen (1997), with the following exceptions: (a) The bilabial fricative [ö] is written by Köhler as “ö” but as “b” by us since it is an intervocalic allophone of /b/. (b) The palatal fricative ç, is written here “c” (i.e. without cedilla). (c) Nasalized clicks are marked here with an “n” preceding the click symbol (e.g. n/), and voiced clicks with a “g” following the click symbol (e.g. /g). (c) Mid tones, both register and contour mid tones, remain unmarked in this paper. (d) Nasal or nasalized vowels are written for technical reasons by placing “n” immediately after the relevant vowel symbol. In cases where a nasalized vowel is followed in the same morpheme by an addental or alveolar nasal consonant [n], that consonant is written “nn”.

References
Barnard, A. 1985. A Nharo Wordlist, with Notes on Grammar. Durban: Department of African Studies, University of Natal [Occasional Publications 2].
Bleek, Dorothea F. 1928. The Naron. A Bushman tribe of the central Kalahari. Cambridge: CUP.
Brenzinger, Matthias. 1997. “Moving to survive: Kxoe communities in arid lands”. Khoisan Forum (University of Cologne) 2.
Claudi, Ulrike. 1985. Zur Entstehung von Genussystemen. Überlegungen zu einigen theoretischen Aspekten, verbunden mit einer Fallstudie des Zande. Hamburg: Helmut Buske.
Dornan, S. S. 1917. “The Tati-Bushmen (Masarwa) and their language”. Journal of the Royal Anthropological Institute 47:37–112.
Geider, Thomas and Kastenholz, Raimund (eds). 1994. Sprachen und Sprachzeugnisse in Afrika: Eine Sammlung philologischer Beiträge, Wilhelm J. G. Möhlig zum 60. Geburtstag zugeeignet. Cologne: Rüdiger Köppe.
Gildea, Spike. 1997. “Evolution of grammatical relations in Cariban: How functional motivation precedes syntactic change”. In Givón (ed.).155–198.
Gildea, Spike. 1998. On Reconstructing Grammar: Comparative Cariban Morphosyntax. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Givón, T. (ed.). 1997. Grammatical Relations: A functionalist perspective. Amsterdam and Philadelphia: John Benjamins [Typological Studies in Language 35].
Greenberg, Joseph H. 1978a. “How does a language acquire gender markers?” In Joseph Greenberg (ed.). 48–82.
Greenberg, Joseph H. (ed.). 1978b. Universals of Human Language. Volume 3. Word structure. Stanford: Stanford University Press.
Haacke, Wilfrid H. G. 1992. “Dislocated noun phrases in Khoekhoe (Nama/Damara): Further evidence for the sentential hypothesis”. AAP (Afrikanistische Arbeitspapiere) 29:149–62.
Hagman, R. S. 1977. Nama Hottentot grammar. Bloomington: Indiana University [Language Science Monographs 15].
Heine, Bernd. 1992. “Grammaticalization chains”. Studies in Language 16(2):335–68.

GRAMMATICALIZATION CHAINS ACROSS LANGUAGES

199

Heine, Bernd. 1997. Possession: Cognitive sources, forces, and grammaticalization. Cambridge: CUP.
Heine, Bernd, Claudi, Ulrike and Hünnemeyer, Friederike. 1991. Grammaticalization: A conceptual framework. Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press.
Heine, Bernd and Reh, Mechthild. 1984. Grammaticalization and Reanalysis in African Languages. Hamburg: Helmut Buske.
Honken, Henry 1977. “Submerged features and Proto-Khoisan”. In Anthony Traill (ed.). 145–69.
Hopper, Paul J. and Traugott, Elizabeth C. 1993. Grammaticalization. Cambridge: CUP. Kilian-Hatz, Christa and Heine, Bernd. 1997. “On nominal gender marking in Kxoe”.
Khoisan Forum (University of Cologne) 1. Köhler, Oswin. 1962. “Studien zum Genussystem und Verbalbau der zentralen Khoisan-
Sprachen”. Anthropos 57:529–46. Köhler, Oswin. 1973. Grundzüge der Grammatik der Kxoe-Sprache. Typescript, Cologne. Köhler, Oswin. 1981. “Les langues khoisan”. In J. Perrot (ed.), Les langues dans le monde
ancien et moderne. Part I: Manessy, Gabriele (ed.), Les langues de l’Afrique subsaharienne. Paris: Edition du Centre National de la Recherche Scientiﬁque. 55–615. Köhler, Oswin. 1989. Die Welt der Kxoé-Buschleute im südlichen Afrika: Eine Selbstdarstellung in ihrer eigenen Sprache. Volume I: Die Kxoé-Buschleute und ihre ethnische Umgebung. Berlin: Dietrich Reimer. Köhler, Oswin. 1991. Die Welt der Kxoé-Buschleute im südlichen Afrika: Eine Selbstdarstellung in ihrer eigenen Sprache. Volume II: Grundlagen des Lebens. Berlin: Dietrich Reimer. Maingard, L. F. 1961. “The central group of the click languages of the Kalahari”. African Studies 20(2):114–22. Traill, Anthony (ed.). 1977. Khoisan Linguistic Studies. Volume 3. Johannesburg: African Studies Institute, University of the Witwatersrand [A.S.I. Communication 6]. Vossen, Rainer (ed.). 1985. “Encoding the object in the ﬁnite verb: The case of “//Ani (Central Khoisan).” AAP (Afrikanistische Arbeitspapiere, Cologne) 4:75–84. Vossen, Rainer. 1986. “Some observations on nominal gender in Naro”. In Franz Rottland (ed.), Festschrift zum 60. Geburtstag von Carl F. Hoﬀmann. Hamburg: Helmut Buske [Bayreuther Beiträge zur Sprachwissenschaft 7]. 373–90. Vossen, Rainer. (ed.) 1988. New perspectives on the study of Khoisan. Hamburg: Buske [Quellen zur Khoisan-Forschung 7]. Vossen, Rainer. 1994. “Zur historischen Rekonstruktion der nominalen Genus-NumerusSuﬃxe in den Khoe-Sprachen”. In Geider and Kastenholz (eds). 429–441. Vossen, Rainer. 1997. Die Khoe-Sprachen: Ein Beitrag zur Erforschung der Sprachgeschichte Afrikas. Cologne: Rüdiger Köppe [Quellen zur Khoisan-Forschung 12].

The accidental intransitive split in the Cariban family
Sérgio Meira
Rice University and Museu Paraense Emílio Goeldi
1. Introduction
The Cariban language family consists of 30–60 languages spoken in lowland South America, most of which are chronically underdescribed (cf. Gildea 1998: 3–14). For several of those which have received some attention, an analysis of the verb system as split-S (in Dixon’s 1979/1994 terminology) has been proposed (beginning with Hall 1988 for De’kwana, followed by Tavares 1994 for Wayana, Gildea 1994a for Katxuyana, Apalaí, Kari’ña,1 Hixkaryana, and maybe Tamanaku; more recently, Gildea (pc) has suggested this analysis for Panare; Gildea 1998: 88–96 reconstructs the system back to Proto-Cariban).
The present study is a ﬁrst attempt at a critical evaluation of these claims by means of a closer look at data from the following Cariban languages: Apalaí (Koehn & Koehn 1996; my ﬁeld notes), Kari’ña (Hoﬀ 1968, Mosonyi 1978), Tiriyó (my ﬁeld notes), Wayana (ﬁeld notes by Tavares and me), Makushi (Abbott 1991, Williams 1932), Katxuyana (ﬁeld notes by Gildea and me) and Panare (Mattéi-Muller 1994). As we shall see, the semantics of the two intransitive verb classes do not seem to correlate with any of the factors that have been claimed to be relevant in the literature. The only clear correlation is that between the SA (or ‘active’) category and detransitivization: almost all verbs in the SA class are detransitivized forms of transitive verbs, either synchronically (with still exisiting transitive sources) or diachronically (with reconstructible but no longer existing transitive sources). The inﬂectional morphology associated with the SA verb class thus appears to be historically connected to reﬂexive morphology, in ways that are not entirely clear yet. The semantic anomalies of the ‘SA’ class become more understandable if seen as the result of the evolution of the original

202

SÉRGIO MEIRA

reﬂexive semantics into new areas (middle voice, passive, antipassive, etc.), extensions which are well-attested outside of the Cariban family (e.g. reﬂexives in Romance and Slavic). This leads to the conclusion that the modern split-S verb agreement pattern is wholly epiphenomenal, a casual consequence of the historical development of detransitivizing morphology in the family.
In what follows, the basic parameters of the split-S systems found in Cariban languages are described and exempliﬁed, with data from Apalaí, Wayana, Tiriyó, and Kari’ña (Sec. 2). The intransitive verb classes are examined for semantic consistency, based on the diﬀerent semantic parameters that have been proposed thus far (Sec. 3); after that, the connections between the split-S system and detransitivization are explored in detail (Sec. 4). The synchronic and diachronic consequences of detransitivization in Cariban are treated in Secs. 5 and 6.

2. Cariban split-S systems: the Tiriyó case
As a typical example of Cariban split intransitivity, let us consider the system found in Tiriyó, a language spoken by 1,500–2,000 people in several villages on both sides of the Brazil-Surinam border. In Tiriyó, four independent grammatical parameters identify the the two intransitive verb classes: person marking (which follows a split-S pattern), imperatives, nominalizations, and causatives. Each of these parameters will be considered in the following sections.
2.1 Person marking
On Tiriyó ﬁnite transitive verbs, both A- and O-marking preﬁxes occur. Their distribution can be interpreted as conditioned by a person hierarchy that ranks non-third persons (ﬁrst person ‘1’, second person ‘2’, and ﬁrst person dual inclusive ‘1+2’) as higher than third persons. According to this interpretation, whenever a participant (i.e. either A or O) is a non-third person, it is marked on the verb with the corresponding A or O preﬁx. If both participants are third persons, a special preﬁx n(i)- occurs on the verb. If neither participant is a third person, a special portmanteau preﬁx is used.2 These facts are summarized in Table 1 and illustrated in examples 1–3 (symbols in parenthesis indicate conditioned allomorphy). Note that the non-third-person O-marking preﬁxes coincide with the person-marking preﬁxes that occur on nouns (to indicate the possessor) and on postpositions (to indicate the object).

ACCIDENTAL INTRANSITIVE SPLIT IN CARIBAN

203

Table 1. A- and O-marking preﬁxes on verbs; person preﬁxes on nouns and postpositions.

Person

A-marking O-marking

Noun/Postpositon

1

w(i)-/w(G)- y(i)-

2

m(i)-/m(G)- 6-/a-/o-

1+2

kGt(i)-/k(˜)- kG-/k(e>6)-

y(i)6-/a-/okG-/k(e>6)-

3:3

n(i)-/n(G)- ‘both A and O = third person’

i-/∅-

1/2

kG-/k(e>6)- ‘both A and O = non-third person’

(1) eta

‘hear’ (transitive)

w-eta ‘I heard him/her/it’

A m-eta ‘you heard him/her/it’

k-eeta ‘we (2) heard him/her/it’

y-eta ‘(s)he/it heard me’

O 6-eta ‘(s)he/it heard you’

k-6ta ‘(s)he/it heard us (2)’

3:3 n-eta ‘(s)he/it heard him/her/it’

1/2 k-6ta ‘I heard you / you heard me’

(2) ewa ‘rope’ (noun) y-ewa ‘my rope’ 6-ewa ‘your rope’ k-6wa ‘our (2) rope’ Ø-ewa his/her/its rope’

(3) p6

‘about’ (postposition)

yi-p6 ‘about me’

6-p6 ‘about you’

kG-p6 ‘about us (2)’

i-p6 ‘about him/her/it’

Table 2. Person-marking preﬁxes on transitive and intransitive verbs compared

Person
1 2 1+2 3

A
w(i)-/w(G)m(i)-/m(G)kGt-/k(:)(n(i)-/n(G)-)

SA
w(G)-/s-/tm(i)-/m(G)k(G)-/kGt-/k(˜)n(i)-/n(G)-

O
y(i)6-/a-/okG-/k(e>6)(n(i)-/n(G)-)

SO
y(i)6-/a-/okG-/k(e>6)n(i)-/n(G)-

204

SÉRGIO MEIRA

The two intransitive verb classes (labeled SA and SO) take diﬀerent S-marking preﬁxes. SA verb preﬁxes are very similar to A-marking preﬁxes; SO verb preﬁxes are identical to O-marking preﬁxes. Both classes take n(i)- for third person S.

(4) SA: t6 wG-t6-e mG-t6-e kG-t6-e nG-t6-n

‘go’ ‘I go’ ‘you go’ ‘we (2) go’ ‘(s)he/it goes’

(5) SA: epG s-epG m-epG k-eepG n-epG

‘bathe’ ‘I bathed’ ‘you bathed’ ‘we (2) bathed’ ‘(s)he/it bathed’

(6) SO: ereeta ‘rest’

y-ereeta

‘I rested’

6-ereeta

‘you rested’

k-6reeta

‘we (2) rested’

n-ereeta

‘(s)he/it rested’

2.2 Imperatives

The imperative form of all verbs is marked by the suﬃx -k6 ‘Imperative’. If the verb is transitive, a ﬁrst-person object is marked by the preﬁx kG- / k(e>6)- while a third-person object is unmarked.

(7) eta ‘hear (transitive)’

k-6ta-k6 ‘hear me!’ Ø-eta-k6 ‘hear him/her/it!’

SA verbs take -k6 with no personal preﬁx; SO verbs, however, take -k6 plus the second person O/SO preﬁx 6-/a-/ o-.

(8) SA:

t6

‘go’

erama ‘return’

t6-k6 erama-k6

‘go!’ ‘return!’

(9) SO: ereeta ‘rest’

6-ereeta-k6 ‘rest!’

Despite the diﬀerence in form, there is a clear structural parallelism between O
and SO: both seem to be represented by preﬁxes on the imperative form. SA and A, on the other hand, are left unmarked.

ACCIDENTAL INTRANSITIVE SPLIT IN CARIBAN

205

Table 3. Person marking on the imperative form of verbs: structural parallelism.

Type of Verb
Transitive Active (SA) Stative (SO)

A/SA
UNMARKED UNMARKED –

O/SO
MARKED (kG-/k(e>6)-) ‘12AO’ – MARKED (6-/a-/o-) ‘2O’

2.3 Nominalizations and the n- and w- preﬁxes

Nominalizations can be derived from all verbs with the suﬃxes -to ‘circumstance nominalizer’3 and -Ø ‘general/action nominalizer’. Like most nouns, these nominalizations can bear possessive morphology (see Table 1 above for the set of possessive preﬁxes). If the nominalized verb is transitive, the possessor of the nominalization will be the original O:

(10) a. y-eta-Ø 1-hear- ‘hearing me’

b. y-eta-to 1-hear-: ‘(a place/instrument) to hear me’

With to-nominalizations, possession by the original A appears to be impossible.
With Ø-nominalizations, on the other hand, possession by the original A becomes possible if an intervening preﬁx n- ‘:’ co-occurs:4

(11) yi-n-eta-Ø 1-:-hear- ‘Something that I hear/heard/can hear’

Intransitive verbs can also be to- and Ø-nominalized. The possessor of the resulting nominalization will be the original S, since it is the only available participant. However, SA verb nominalizations can be distinguished from SO verb nominalizations in that the former take an extra preﬁx w-‘SA’ whereas the latter do not.5
(12) SA: 6turu ‘talk, converse’ a. yi-w-6turu-Ø 1-SA-talk- ‘my talking/conversing’ b. yi-w-6turu-to 1-SA-talk-: ‘(place/instrument) for my talk; my talk / speech’

206

SÉRGIO MEIRA

(13) SO: ereeta ‘rest’ a. y-ereeta-Ø 1-rest- ‘my resting’ b. y-ereeta-to 1-rest-: ‘(place/instrument) for my rest; my rest’
As in the case of the imperative forms (sec. 2.2), there is a structural parallelism between A and SA, and between O and SO, in spite of the diﬀerent morphemes that actually occur: SO is treated like O in that both can possess directly a to- or Ø-nominalized form of the verb, and SA and A are treated alike in that both need an intervening preﬁx (w- and n- respectively) on a nominalized form of the verb before they can possess it.6

Table 4. Structual similarities in the possession of nominalizations.

Type of Verb
Transitive Active (SA) Stative (SO)

Possession by O/SO
NO PREFIX – NO PREFIX

Possession by A/SA
PREFIX (n-) PREFIX (w-) –

The w- preﬁx distinguishes SA from SO verbs in yet another verb form: the participle/narrative past tense, indicated by a circumﬁx, t- -se. SA verbs, unlike SO, take an extra w- after the t- (which results in tG-w-):7
(14) SA: 6turu ‘talk, converse’ tG-w-6tur6-e t-w-6turu-se -SA-talk- ‘talked, conversed’
(15) SO: ereeta ‘rest’ t-6reeta-e t-ereeta-se -rest- ‘rested’
Transitive verbs in the t- -se form do not take any extra morphology:

ACCIDENTAL INTRANSITIVE SPLIT IN CARIBAN

207

(16) t-6ta-e t-eta-se -hear- ‘heard’
The original meaning of the t- -se form (still a possible one) seems to have been that of a past participle. With transitive verbs, it refers to the O; with intransitive verbs, to the S. There is an obvious similarity with the previous pattern (for toor Ø-nominalizations): an O/SO-oriented past participle can be derived without any extra preﬁx, whereas an SA-oriented past participle needs the presence of the intervening preﬁx w- ‘SA’.8
2.4 Causatives

All verbs in Tiriyó (with the idiosyncratic exception of t6 ‘go’ and ka ‘say/do’)
can take causative suﬃxes. Transitive (17) and SA verbs (19) take -po ‘’; an optional causee may appear, marked by the postposition ya (also used for
datives/ benefactives and a few allatives). Note that, surprisingly, SA verbs have reﬂexive meaning when causativized (19). SO verbs take -ka, -n6pG or -nGpG, depending on the last syllable of the verb stem; the causee is coded as the O of
the resulting causativized verb (18).

(17) Causativized Transitives: V [A, O]
a. eta ‘hear O’ b. ene ‘see O’ c. tuuka ‘beat O’

⇒ VCAUS [A’,  (=A) ya, O] eta-po ‘make  hear O’
ene-po ‘make  see O’
tuuka-po ‘make  beat O’

(18) Causativized SO verbs: V [SO]
a. ereeta ‘rest’

⇒ VCAUS [A, O (=SO)] ereeta-nGpG ‘make O rest’

b. yatu ‘be burning’

yah-ka ‘make O be burning, burn O’

c. yemipamG ‘be hungry’

yemipan-n6pG ‘make O be hungry’

(19) Causativized SA verbs:

V [SA]

⇒ VCAUS [SA,  ya]

epG ‘take a bath, bathe’

epG-po ‘make  bathe SA’

The above pattern displays one similarity between O and SO: both become the O of the causativized verb, whereas A and SA never do. Causativized SA verbs, in fact, do not even have an O (i.e. they are still intransitive), since the original

208

SÉRGIO MEIRA

active verb did not have an O/SO to be the source of the O of the causativized verb. Once more, O and SO can be argued to pattern together.
2.5 Cognate forms in other languages.

The same parameters, with cognate morphology, can be found in other languages of the family, as shown in Table 5 below.

Table 5. Cognate morphology for split-S parameters in some Cariban languages.

Parameter

Tiriyó

Kari’ña

Wayana

Apalaí

1. Preﬁx sets

SO
y(i)6k(G)-

SA
w(i)m(i)k(˜)-

SO
∅(y)a(y)k(G)-

SA
w(i)m(i)kGt-

SO

SA

G-/y- w(i)6(w)- m(i)k(u)-/h- k-/h-

SO

SA

y-/∅- ∅o-/(m-) m-/(o-) s-/k(u)- k(u)-/s-

2. Imperatives 6- -k6 -k6 a(y)- -ko -ko 6(w)- -k -k

o- -ko -ko

3. Deverbals -∅, -to, taking w- t- -se

-∅, -to, -se, -∅, -top,

t- -se

t- -se

t- -se

4. Causatives -nGpG -po -n6p6 -ka

-nGpG -po -nGp -po

-nopG

-n6p

-ka

-ka

nG‘- -po no‘-ka

By grammatical criteria, the verbal systems of these Cariban languages appear to show a prototypical Split-S system. However, none of the criteria suggested thus far in the literature as relevant to the distribution of intransitive verbs in each subclass seem to account for the Cariban case.

3. Possible accounts
Split-S systems have been treated from two main perspectives: semantic and syntactic. Both approaches shall be discussed here.
3.1 Semantic criteria
Semantic proposals have come up with a number of diﬀerent factors that purport to explain class membership in split-S systems: control, volitionality, agency,

ACCIDENTAL INTRANSITIVE SPLIT IN CARIBAN

209

inherent aspect (‘Aktionsart’), animacy, eventivity, etc. Let us now consider how well these factors correlate with class membership in Cariban languages, with data from a computer database currently containing approximately 1,500 verbs from nine diﬀerent languages (Tiriyó, Wayana, Apalaí, Kari’ña, Katxuyana, Tunayana/Waiwai, Pemon, Tamanaku, Panare).
3.1.1 ‘Activities’ vs. ‘Non-Activities’ Van Valin 1990, using the Role and Reference Grammar (RRG) framework, proposed a semantic analysis for the intransitive verb classes of Italian and Georgian, according to which ‘activity’ intransitive verbs belong to the SA category while ‘non-activity’ ones belong to the SO category.
RRG assumes a theory of semantic representation of verbs (in fact, of

Table 6. Tests for predicate subcategorization in RRG.
States: know, be broken, have, believe, like Achievements: learn, break (intr.), die, arrive, notice Accomplishments: teach, break (tr.), kill, make a chair, eat a piece of pizza Activities: run, dance, swim, eat pizza, squeak
OK = semantically normal bad = semantically anomalous d.n.a. = test does not apply

CRITERION

States

Activities Accomplish- Achievements ments

1. meets non-stative tests

no

yes

yes

2. has habitual interpretation no

yes

yes

in simple present tense

3. f for an hour/spend an

OK

OK

OK

hour fing

4. f in an hour/take an hour bad

bad

OK

to f

5. f for an hour entails f at yes

yes

no

all times in the hour

6. x is fing entails x has fed d.n.a.

yes

no

7. complement of stop

OK

OK

OK

8. complement of ﬁnish

bad

bad

OK

9. ambiguity with almost

no

no

yes

10. x fed in an hour entails d.n.a.

d.n.a.

yes

x was fing during that hour

11. occurs with studiously, bad

OK

OK

attentively, carefully, etc.

? yes
bad
OK
d.n.a.
d.n.a. bad bad no no
bad

210

SÉRGIO MEIRA

predicates) based on Dowty’s 1979 proposal of lexical decomposition, derived from Vendler’s 1967 classiﬁcation of verbs into states, achievements, activities and accomplishments. Table 6 above is from Van Valin 1990; see also Foley & Van Valin 1984 for a detailed presentation of RRG.
Now let us consider the examples in Table 7 below.

Table 7. Activities and non-activities in Cariban languages.

Activities

SA

SO

TIRIYÓ etainka ‘run’ t6 ‘go’ 6epG ‘come’ wa ‘dance’ 6tamoreht6 ‘dream’ 66nGkG ‘sleep’ 6ewetG ‘feed’

eremina ‘sing’ emamina ‘play’ eerana ‘laugh’ wa ‘dance’ arina ‘grow’ urakana ‘go around’ :suhta ‘urinate’

Non-activities

SA

SO

emoihka ‘be envious’ akinta ‘be tired’

6emuuma ‘become sad’ tatG ‘be lost’

epahka ‘break (intr.)’ ewatamG ‘tremble; faint’

6empa ‘learn’

nyota ‘marry a man’

erowaka ‘open (intr.)’ kepG ‘stop, ﬁnish’

epataka ‘go out, exit’ aumu ‘stand up’

emokG ‘move away’ tunta ‘arrive’

KARI’ÑA emaamina ‘work’ oturu ‘talk/narrate’ epaato ‘cross a river’ ewotoka ‘ﬁsh’ otamo ‘cry, wail’ otaro ‘hunt’ esaapima ‘play’ o‘napG ‘eat; feed’

ixponuumG ‘swim’ uwa ‘dance’ enaapiwa ‘tell lies’ waareta ‘sing’ eekatumG ‘run’ auwa ‘laugh’ aurana ‘speak’ o‘nGkG ‘sleep’

oomG ‘enter’

itGGna ‘get silent’

otaxkarGGka ‘get afraid’ aura]gepG ‘stop talking’

owanopG ‘be incited’ mi‘meemG ‘get sleepy’

opGima ‘jump over’ poosiina ‘get sweet’

etGxka ‘be afraid’

weetGta ‘get rusty’

orexko ‘get angry’

pGta ‘marry a woman’

oxka ‘come out’

yopotomamG ‘get big’

oma ‘fall’

kaata ‘get fat’

WAYANA

6hamo ‘cry’

emnata ‘breathe’

6henema ‘fast’

ewakta ‘laugh’

6tuku ‘feed, eat’

r6w6ita ‘tremble’

6hetamika ‘play’

urakanum ‘hunt’

ehopumt6 ‘soap self up’ etakina ‘whistle’

6hetG ‘dream’

eremi ‘sing’

6tGrG ‘be, become’ etuwaronuma ‘get
ready’ 6hekupt6 ‘stop’ 6tuhmo ‘fall’ emuririma ‘get
wrinkled’ emtop ‘yawn’

ekakta ‘be born’ asikapam ‘get angry’ etomam ‘wake up’ epeta ‘bear fruit’ pGta ‘marry a woman’ akpiram ‘redden’

APALAÍ epG ‘bathe’ oepG ‘come’ tõ ‘go’ oturu ‘talk’ osemeika ‘play’ osenetG ‘dream’

wa ‘dance’ ewiana ‘laugh’ GnGkG ‘sleep’ weka ‘defecate’ eremia ‘sing’ su‘ta ‘urinate’(?)

omomG ‘enter’(?) ka ‘say’ tu˜ta ‘exit, go out’ epore‘ka ‘arrive’ etGmG ‘get drunk’ epuka ‘fall’

ero‘kepG ‘stop (working)’
mu˜ta ‘bleed’ enuru ‘be born’ orikG ‘die’ tatG ‘get lost’ owomG ‘stand up’

ACCIDENTAL INTRANSITIVE SPLIT IN CARIBAN

211

As can be seen, there are SA and SO activities as well as SA and SO non-activities. This criterion does not seem to predict class membership.
3.1.2 Agency The notion of agency is also important in RRG, serving as the basis for a further subcategorization of predicate types (Foley & Van Valin 1984: 40). In fact, Van Valin (1990: 248ﬀ) argues that, in Acehnese, it is agentiveness rather than lexical semantics that conditions split intransitivity. Mithun 1991, citing Foley & Van Valin 1984, considers as a prototypical agent ‘the participant which performs, eﬀects, instigates, or controls the situation denoted by the predicate’, while a prototypical patient ‘does not perform, initiate, or control any situation but rather is aﬀected by it in some way’ (1991: 516). She further shows how languages can be more sensitive to diﬀerent speciﬁc features of agency: e.g. Lakhota diﬀerentiates performers from non-performers regardless of control, while Central Pomo separates controllers from non-controllers regardless of performativity (1991: 516–20). Therefore, verbs of performance without control, such as hiccough, snore, cry, vomit, yawn, etc. pattern diﬀerently in Lakhota and Central Pomo.
As for Cariban languages, the examples in Table 8 seem to indicate that agentiveness (both as performance/eﬀect/instigation and control/volitionality) is not a good class indicator.
Van Valin 1990: 252 predicted that agentive activity verbs should belong to the SA class in all languages. However, clear cases of SO agentive activity verbs can be found in the Cariban data, e.g. Tiriyó eremina ‘sing’, emamina ‘play’, urakana ‘go for a walk’.
3.1.3 Animacy Merlan’s 1985 comparative study of eight languages with split intransitivity concluded that the more ‘marked’ intransitive class (not necessarily always the SA or SO class) consistently had one common property: with few or no exceptions, they required animate subjects. She noted that animacy is necessary but not suﬃcient: animate-subject verbs can also be found in the larger, unmarked class. She also pointed out that in one language, Georgian, verbs with non-animate subjects were found in the marked class, but that they were still relatable to animate-subject verbs in that they denoted ‘capacity for spontaneous manifestation of various (often externally perceptible) phenomena, for example production of noise, light, and displacement or other motion or transition without external agency’ (1985: 350); examples included ﬂicker, shine, ﬂash, sparkle, tremble, turn, shake, ﬂutter, crawl, trip, roam, thunder (1985: 343).

212

SÉRGIO MEIRA

Table 8. Agentive and patientive verbs in Cariban languages.

Agentive with control

SA

SO

Agentive without control

SA

SO

Patientive

SA

SO

TIRIYÓ t6 ‘go’ ka ‘say, do’ epG ‘bathe’ 6turu ‘talk’ eeseka ‘jump’ 6mGmG ‘enter’

emamina ‘play’ entapo ‘yawn’

eremina ‘sing’ 66sena ‘cry’

potGna ‘whistle’ esaraka ‘slip’

tunta ‘arrive’ etohka ‘burst’

:suhta ‘urinate’ 6tamoreht6

urakana ‘go

‘dream’

around’ emoihka ‘feel

envy’

eerana ‘laugh’ ei ‘Copula’ yatu ‘be

ahpota ‘burp’ 66nGkG ‘sleep’

burning’

wenahta

epahka ‘break’ arina ‘grow up’

‘vomit’

emuririma

anGhta ‘grow

weyahta ‘fart’ ‘wrinkle’

up’

aeruta ‘make 6emuma ‘get akGkG ‘harden’

noise’

sad’

yemipamG ‘be

t6t6p6mG

ekGrGtGhka

hungry’

‘tremble’

‘shorten’ (i)n6epamG ‘be

thirsty’

KARI’ÑA

ewotoka ‘ﬁsh’ waareta ‘sing’ oma ‘fall’

rombG ‘die’

ekuupi ‘bathe’ eekatumG ‘run’ oxtorooroka eenapoowa

to(]) ‘go’

aurana ‘speak’ ‘roll’

‘snore’

onGxto ‘go

poroopG ‘stop’ otamo ‘wail, eraamuta

down’

emaamina

cry’

‘sweat’

esaapima ‘play’ ‘work’

oxkoroika ‘slip’ ixkaita

otaro ‘hunt’ uwa ‘dance’ oxpeekG ‘sink’ ‘diarrhoea’

etGtGxka

auwa ‘laugh’

‘tremble’ andGGta ‘grow

a tail’

e:i ‘Copula’ anGGta ‘fall ill’

etGGma ‘get kuumGrG ‘be

drunk’

hungry’

etGxka ‘be

ere‘na ‘faint’

afraid’

utaapG ‘get lost’

aipGGna ‘be one mi‘meemG ‘get

with one’s

sleepy’

people’

atGGta ‘grow up’

o‘nGkG ‘sleep’

WAYANA

m6k ‘come’ womita ‘speak’ 6takurika ‘burst’ewakta ‘laugh’ 6taoh6n6ma ekakta ‘be born’

6hetamika ‘play’eremi ‘sing’ 6hekukta

r6w6ita ‘tremble’ ‘be in

kGpam ‘feel

6hetarepa ‘pray’ereta ‘rest’

‘bloom’ eramukta‘sweat’ need’

lazy’

et6hp6ma‘shrug’ (u)wa ‘dance’ 6tuhmo ‘fall’ wenata ‘vomit’ epGsipt6 ‘get awikapam ‘get

6tupoka

upkurum ‘dive’ emtap ‘yawn’ hpokGrGta ‘have ashamed’

angry’

‘undress’

6hetG ‘dream’

goosebumps’ 6tahama ‘get urata ‘get

sad’

thin/weak’

6hnamept6 ‘get p6r6p ‘get tired’

drunk’

APALAÍ

oepG ‘come’ wa ‘dance’ osetapa

ewiana ‘laugh’ ewi ‘Copula’ zekitapa ‘get

ka ‘say, do’ G‘to ‘go down’ ‘stumble’

o‘pata ‘burp’ ataosanoma

angry’

osemeika ‘play’ omomG ‘enter’ epuka ‘fall’ wita ‘cry, weep’ ‘suffer’

epuwi ‘get fat’

ewGwG‘na

eremia ‘sing’ osenamG ‘choke’mu˜ta ‘bleed’ atamorõka ‘be enuru ‘be born’

‘scratch’ urakana ‘hunt’ emiri‘ma

enakuta ‘sweat’ wrong’ tatG ‘get lost’

otGrG ‘embark’

‘wrinkle’

atapiaka ‘be (w)ãta ‘grow

ãtaka ‘yawn’

scattered’

up’

e‘wiro ‘be

ashamed’

ACCIDENTAL INTRANSITIVE SPLIT IN CARIBAN

213

Table 9. Verbs with animate/inanimate subjects in Cariban languages.

Verbs Taking Animate Subjects

SA

SO

TIRIYÓ epG ‘bathe’ 66sena ‘cry’ 6empa ‘learn’ ekaika ‘scratch’ epoka ‘undress’ 6tamoreht6 ‘dream’ eeseka ‘jump’ epataka ‘go out, exit’

enta ‘wake up’ eremina ‘sing’ emamina ‘play’ eerana ‘laugh’ yomita ‘speak’ urakana ‘go around’ enuta ‘remember’ k6htumu ‘shout’

KARI’ÑA etGGmG ‘get drunk’ esaapima ‘play’ etGxka ‘be afraid’ onume]ga ‘think’ oxpotG ‘look, gaze’ osiima ‘hurry’ otamo ‘wail, cry’

kox(ta) ‘shout’ kuumGrG ‘be hungry’ anGGta ‘fall ill’ poruuku ‘wait’ rombG ‘die’ aurana ‘speak’ emaamina ‘work’

WAYANA ka ‘say/do’ 6turu ‘talk, converse’ eporepka ‘arrive’ 6hetarepa ‘pray’ epohn6p ‘miss; pity’ epGsipt6 ‘get ashamed’ 6henema ‘fast’

(u)wa ‘dance’ GnGk ‘sleep’ etomam ‘wake up’ ewakta ‘laugh’ umoita ‘be jealous/
concerned’ emnata ‘breathe’

Verbs Taking Non-Animate Subjects

SA

SO

epahka ‘break’

kahta ‘drip’

ekGrGtGhka ‘shorten’ kamihta ‘produce coals

etohka ‘burst, explode’ (ﬁre)’

eyika ‘ooze’

amenta ‘get moldy’

6tap6ma ‘be scattered, karapamG ‘ferment’

spilled (water)’

akuta ‘soften in water’

6entama ‘spill (water)’ m6m6tG ‘boil’

eturuka ‘spill (grains)’ tGna ‘beat (pulse)’

otaapika ‘get wide’ akuuta ‘get soft’

otuweseka ‘get torn’ ewaarumaamG ‘get dark’

osexkei ‘be baking’ mootG ‘boil’

oxkG ‘be rasping’

koota ‘decay, rot’

oxpeekG ‘sink’

miita ‘be rooted’

oxtorooroka ‘roll over’ piipata ‘get ﬂat’

oma ‘fall’

poosina ‘get sweet’

6htopka ‘spill (grains)’ yehna ‘ferment’

6hkam ‘spill (liquid)’ pokta ‘get moldy’

6hparaka ‘be scattered’ hmomot ‘boil’

6takurika ‘burst’

akGp ‘harden’

6hekuka ‘bloom’

enat ‘be over’

emuririma ‘get

yetarahpam ‘produce

wrinkled’

coals (ﬁre)’

6tapk6r6 ‘break’

APALAÍ emGnG‘ma ‘feel pity’ atamorõka ‘be wrong’ osenetG ‘dream’ atamorepa ‘learn’ otupoma ‘dress’ oserema ‘rest’ atakirima ‘speak
angrily’

wa ‘dance’ enGna ‘feel envy’ omita ‘speak’ rowota ‘get dizzy’ emize‘na ‘be hungry’ mGkGtG ‘choke’ eatamG ‘die’

ekuamG ‘spill (liquids)’ (z)e‘na ‘ferment’

eputoka ‘spill (grains)’ mau‘ta ‘get moldy’

atapiaka ‘be scattered’ kirita ‘dry out (leaves)’

eto‘ka ‘break, burst’ amori‘ta ‘grow

epuka ‘fall’

branches’

e‘mo ‘break’

a‘ta ‘bud, germinate’

eta‘ka ‘break’

akGtG ‘harden’

(z)atG ‘be burning’

214

SÉRGIO MEIRA

In Cariban languages, as is shown in Table 9, verbs characteristically taking animate (or inanimate) subjects can be found in both classes.
3.1.4 Aktionsart: States vs. Events Mithun (1991: 512–4) uses lexical aspect or Aktionsart to account for the two intransitive verb classes of Colloquial Guaraní: SA verbs denote events (“the activities, accomplishments, and achievements of Vendler 1967, adopted in Van Valin 1990” [1991: 513]; see 3.1.1 above), whereas SO verbs describe states, characterized by time stability. In Guaraní, SA verbs include go, walk, run, come, swim, dance, play, work, fall, sleep, while typical SO verbs are be sick, be hungry, be wet, be weak, be short, be round, be wise, be strong/powerful, be lazy. There are very few exceptions, and Mithun provides convincing explanations for them.
In Cariban languages, most time-stable states are not verbs but adverbs/ adjectives or nouns (e.g. Tiriyó kure ‘good, well, pretty’, kaw6 ‘high, tall’, piya ‘small’ [adverbs], mono ‘big (one)’, kainan ‘new (one)’ [nouns]). Nouns and adverbs/adjectives can occur as predicates simply by taking a subject NP (20a)–(20b), or as adverbial complements in a copular construction (20c)–(20d).
(20) a. kure m6e well s/he(, ) ‘(S)he is well’
b. mono 6m6 big:one you ‘You are big’
c. kure nai y-ekG well 3: 1-pet ‘My pet is pretty/well’
d. mono me nai m6e big:one  3: s/he(, ) ‘(S)he is big’
Some state-describing verbs do exist, as seen in Table 10. By itself, the copula does not describe a state, but rather serves as a connector between the stateindicating adverbial complement and the subject. The other verbs may conceivably have inceptive/inchoative rather than (or perhaps together with) stative meanings; since the glosses are either taken from secondary sources or are the result of ﬁeldwork on a previously unstudied language, they must be considered approximative.
With this in view, the stative/eventive opposition seems to correlate (though perhaps with exceptions) with a lexical distinction between verbs

ACCIDENTAL INTRANSITIVE SPLIT IN CARIBAN

215

Table 10. State-describing verbs in Cariban languages.

SA
TIRIYÓ ei ‘Copula’ 66sap6k6ma ‘be in need’ 6tapama ‘be scattered’

SO
yempamG ‘be hungry’ akumpamG ‘be lazy’ akinta ‘be tired’ (:)n6epamG ‘be thirsty’

SA
KARI’ÑA etGxka ‘be afraid’ osexkei ‘be baking’ oxkG ‘be rasping’ osene ‘be visible’

SO
kuumGrG ‘be hungry’ G‘noota ‘smell raw’ kuuma ‘be high tide’ miita ‘be rooted’

WAYANA

ei, esi ‘Copula’

umoita ‘be jealous’

6taohan6ma ‘be in need’eriku ‘be in danger’

ehparaka ‘be scattered’ enat ‘be over/ﬁnished’

APALAÍ atamorõka ‘be wrong’ emize‘na ‘be hungry’ atapiaka ‘be scattered’ (z)atG ‘be burning’ ataosanoma ‘be in need’akinutapa ‘be lazy’

(denoting events) and adverbs/adjectives and nouns (denoting states) rather than with the distinction between SA and SO intransitive verbs.

3.1.5 Perturbating factors: aﬀectedness and grammatical aspect
Certain factors seem to interact with the semantic basis for class membership.
Mithun (1991: 520–3, 531–2) describes how, in Central Pomo, Caddo, and Mohawk, states that do not signiﬁcantly aﬀect their participants end up in the SA category, despite their lack of agentive properties; for instance, inherent-state
predicates, such as being tall, strong, good, big, or alive. States in which the participant is signiﬁcantly aﬀected, either eventive ones such as falling, dying, or slipping, or patientive, aﬀecting, non-inherent-state ones, such as being cold,
afraid, or sleepy, are in the SO category. The other important factor is aspect. In Mohawk, intransitive verbs inﬂected
for perfect aspect take SO person markers, regardless of other semantic factors (Mithun 1991: 532–3). Thus, a SA intransitive verb that takes SA person markers in the habitual present and punctual (perfective) forms has to take SO person markers in the perfect form; speakers have no choice. This can be seen in the
following Mohawk example (from Mithun 1991: 533; person markers are in bold):

(21) a. habitual present b. punctual (perfective) c. perfect

kaht%¢î tye‘s ‘I (SA) go away (often)’ %î kaht%¢î ˜ti‘ ‘I (SA) will go away’ wakaht%¢î tyuî ‘I (SO) have gone away’

Neither interfering factor is relevant in Cariban languages. Aﬀectedness concerns mainly states,9 i.e. potential SO intransitives. As we have seen, most (if not all) states in Cariban languages are not verbs, regardless of the level of aﬀectedness,
e.g. Tiriyó kure nai m6e ‘s/he is good/well’, kaw6 nai m6e ‘s/he is tall’ (non-
aﬀecting states), nari ke nai m6e ‘s/he is afraid’, 66nGhpo nai m6e ‘s/he is sleepy’

216

SÉRGIO MEIRA

(aﬀecting states). Hence, aﬀectedness does not correlate with verb class membership.10 Grammatical aspect does not cause any perturbations either: all
ﬁnite tenses consistently take the same person markers, as illustrated in the Tiriyó paradigms in 22.11

(22) Tiriyó: a. SA: 6turu ‘talk’ present/progressive: future: recent past: distant past: narrative past: b. SO: k6htumu ‘shout’ present/progressive: future: recent past: distant past: narrative past:

m-6turu-yae m-6turu-tae m-6turu m-6turu-ne tG-w-6tur6-e

‘you are talking’ ‘you will talk’ ‘you talked’ ‘you talked’ ‘talked’

6-k6htun-yae ‘you are shouting’ 6-k6htun-tae ‘you will shout’ 6-k6htumu ‘you shouted’ 6-k6htun-ne ‘you shouted’ tG-k6htun-ye ‘shouted’

3.2 Syntactic criteria

Syntactic approaches to split intransitivity suppose distinct representations for the arguments of intransitive verbs. For instance, in the Relational Grammar framework, SA (‘unergative’) verbs have both an initial and a terminal 1 (subject), while SO (‘unaccusative’) verbs have an initial 2 (direct object) and a terminal 1; this is known as the ‘Unaccusative Hypothesis’. Though Perlmutter 1978 admitted a possible semantic basis for class membership, subsequent works (e.g. Harris 1982, Rosen 1984) have denied the existence of any consistent semantic rationale for it. Being unergative or unaccusative is thus an idiosyncratic characteristic of each verb, which must be speciﬁed in the lexicon.
Government-Binding approaches have basically adopted the same idea, though with a diﬀerent formalism: they suppose that SA (‘unergative’) verbs only occur in D-structures in which the only argument NP is outside of the VP node, whereas SO (‘ergative’) verbs can only ﬁt in D-structures in which the only argument NP is inside the VP node (Burzio 1981). Again, the speciﬁc D-structure in which a certain intransitive verb can occur is semantically unpredictable, and must be speciﬁed for each verb in the lexicon. Therefore, for both theories, the class membership of a speciﬁc intransitive verb is one of its idiosyncratic characteristics, much like its phonetic shape, which must be independently

ACCIDENTAL INTRANSITIVE SPLIT IN CARIBAN

217

memorized by the speakers. Since, as we have seen in the previous section, semantic factors do not seem
to correlate with class membership in Tiriyó, it may be preferable to ‘give up’ and consider that each Tiriyó verb has as part of its lexical features the speciﬁcation ‘+SA’ or ‘-SA’. In the absence of any semantic criteria to identify a verb as being SA or SO, this seems to be the simplest analysis.
However, such an analysis would presuppose that there is nothing else to be said about the two intransitive verb categories: they would seem to be just as arbitrary as e.g. verb conjugations in Romance languages. Interestingly enough, there is something else to be said about this system in Cariban languages.

4. The detransitivizing preﬁx

It is, at ﬁrst sight, very diﬃcult to imagine a functionally plausible origin for the two categories of intransitive verbs in Cariban languages, given their apparent lack of semantic coherence. However, a closer inspection of the verbal morphology of these languages soon reveals a good candidate for the lead role in the history of the Cariban split-S system: the detransitivizing preﬁx.
The Cariban detransitivizer is a small preﬁx with many allomorphs, some of which appear to be lexically conditioned. A reﬂex is found in every Cariban language, which implies that the morpheme must be reconstructed to Proto-Carib (though its speciﬁc phonological shape is still unclear). Its main function is to derive an intransitive verb stem from a transitive verb stem. Although the most frequent meaning of the resulting intransitive verb is reﬂexive/reciprocal, other meanings are well attested, as will be seen below.

4.1 Examples of detransitivization

In the following examples, the detransitivizing preﬁx is exempliﬁed in several Cariban languages, thus illustrating its complicated and idiosyncratic allomorphic patterns.

(23) The Tiriyó detransitivizer: 6t-/66s-/6-/et-/es-

6-

/ __e

66s- ~ e- / __y (with 66s-, the y disappears)

e- ~ 6i-

/ __C (C ≠ y)

6t-, et-

/ __V (V ≠ e)

218

SÉRGIO MEIRA

a. eta ‘hear O’

⇒ 6-eta ‘hear self’

b. yahka ‘burn O’ ⇒ e-yahka, 66s-ahka‘burn self’

c. ene ‘see O’

⇒ 6-ene ‘see self’

d. suka ‘wash O’ ⇒ e-suka, 6i-suka ‘wash self’

e. onamG ‘hide O’ ⇒ 6t-onamG ‘hide self’

f. tuuka ‘beat O’ ⇒ e-tuuka, 6i-tuuka ‘beat self’

g. nonta ‘abandon O’ ⇒ e-nonta, 6i-nonta ‘abandon each other’

(24) The Kari’ña Detransitivizer: ot- / os- / o- / ea. G‘mo ‘break O’ ⇒ e-‘mo ‘break, fall to pieces’ b. emepa ‘teach O’ ⇒ o-mepa ‘learn’ c. kuupi ‘bathe O’ ⇒ e-kuupi ‘bathe self’ d. andG‘mo ‘seat O’ ⇒ ot-andG‘mo ‘sit’ e. peekG ‘sink O’ ⇒ o(x)-peekG ‘sink’

(25) The Wayana Detransitivizer: 6t- / 6h- / 6- / e-

a. ewaru ‘burn O’

⇒ 6h-ewaru ‘burn’

b. muririma ‘crumple O’ ⇒ e-muririma ‘get wrinkled’

c. onam ‘hide O

⇒ 6t-onam ‘hide’

d. yomt6 ‘wrap O’

⇒ e-yomt6 ‘wrap self’

e. petukwa ‘adorn O’ ⇒ e-petukwa ‘adorn onself’

f. ekupt6 ‘stop O’

⇒ 6h-ekupt6 ‘stop’

(26) The Apalaí Detransitivizer: os- / ot- / at- / o-(‘) / e-

a. pG ‘bathe O’

⇒ e-pG ‘bathe self’

b. ewio ‘break O’

⇒ os-ewio ‘break’

c. emeika ‘play with O’ ⇒ os-emeika ‘play’

d. upoka ‘undress O’ ⇒ ot-upoka ‘undress’

e. sa‘pauma ‘soap O up’ ⇒ e-sa‘pauma ‘soap self up’

f. aku‘mo ‘break O’

⇒ at-aku‘mo ‘break’

Table 11 exempliﬁes the unpredictability of the surviving semantic argument with ‘medio-passive’ and ‘antipassive’ cases from various languages.

4.2 The SA verbs as the result of detransitivization
The productivity and full vitality of detransitivization in Cariban is quite striking, as the preceding tables show. If one adds to this the fact that detransitivized verb stems conjugate exactly like SA verbs (all the four grammatical parameters examined in Section 2 treat detransitivized verbs and SA verbs alike), it becomes

ACCIDENTAL INTRANSITIVE SPLIT IN CARIBAN

219

Table 11. Intransitivization with different surviving semantic arguments in Cariban languages.

A = O (‘Reﬂexive’)

O survives (‘Medio-passive’) A survives (‘Antipassive’)

TIRIYÓ e-pG ‘bathe (oneself)’ 6-ewetG ‘feed (oneself)’ 6t-arama ‘adorn (oneself)’ 6t-onamG ‘hide (oneself)’ e-yahka ‘burn (oneself)’ e-yont6 ‘wrap (oneself)’

e-pahka ‘break’ e-rowaka ‘open’ 6t-ap6ma ‘be scattered’ e-pGima ‘get ashamed’ 6t-am6r6mG ‘be mistaken’ e-turuka ‘spill (grains)’

6t-amoreht6 ‘dream’ 6i-puun66pG ‘think’ et-ainka ‘run (away)’ e-rama ‘return’

KARI’ÑA

e-kuupi ‘bathe (oneself)’

e-tGxka ‘be afraid’

o-mepa ‘teach (oneself)’

os-ene ‘be visible’

os-e]guuna ‘comb (each other)’ o(x)-peekG ‘sink’

o(x)-tG]ga ‘stretch (oneself)’ o-wanopG ‘be incited’

ot-unamG ‘hide (oneself)’

ot-uweseka ‘get torn’

o(x)-piika ‘skin (oneself)’

e-wotoka ‘ﬁsh’ ot-amo ‘wail, cry’ o‘-napG ‘eat’ o(x)s-enGrG ‘drink’

WAYANA 6h-epa ‘teach (oneself)’ 6t-upoma ‘dress (oneself)’ e-petukwa ‘adorn (oneself)’ e-wGpka ‘scratch (oneself)’ 6t-akowa ‘wash (oneself)’ e-puka ‘pierce (oneself)’

6t-apk6r6 ‘break’ e-pGsipt6 ‘get ashamed’ 6t-akurika ‘explode’ 6h-kam ‘spill (liquid)’ 6h-tokpa ‘spill (grains)’

6h-amo ‘weep’ e-porepka ‘arrive’ 6h-etamika ‘play’

APALAÍ ot-upoka ‘undress (oneself)’ e-kurãka ‘adorn (oneself)’ ot-umoka ‘remove one’s pubic
hair’ e-kurika ‘wash (oneself)’ ot-onemG ‘hide (oneself)’

os-ewio ‘break’ e-‘wiro ‘get ashamed’ at-apiaka ‘be scattered’ e-kuamG ‘spill (liquids)’ e-putoka ‘spill (grains)’

os-emeika ‘play’ e-pore‘ka ‘arrive’ at-akirima ‘speak
angrily’

MAKUSHI e-po]t6 ‘dress (oneself)’ es-ekarit6p6 ‘feed (oneself)’ e-kema ‘make oneself muddy’ es-esat6 ‘name (oneself)’ e-w6 ‘kill (oneself)’ e-roma ‘wash (oneself)’

es-e]bo ‘bear a child’ es-epit6 ‘be satisﬁed’ es-ere]ka ‘sing’ at-atwi]ba ‘be happy’ es-eri]t6 ‘boil’

e-wenaime ‘follow’ e-wenaimap6t6 ‘run
about’ e-marituma ‘marry’ e-nama ‘be afraid’
(< ‘fear O’)

PANARE atw-ehka ‘bite (oneself)’ atw-ereema ‘feed (oneself)’ atw-itwirika ‘pierce (oneself)’ at-ahka ‘cut (oneself)’ as-am6ht6 ‘poison (oneself)’ as-anompa ‘paint (oneself)’

u‘-mukuka ‘(be) open’ atw-eemeku ‘be swept’ at-aarGht6 ‘get full’ as-akakta ‘melt’ as-akG‘ma ‘be(come) painted’ atw-i‘kemG ‘get entangled’

atw-uwepa ‘illuminate’ as-aht6 ‘wait’ as-amaanGpG ‘play’ atw-GpapG ‘take revenge’
(<‘avenge O’)

220

SÉRGIO MEIRA

hard to separate them out. As a matter of fact, a closer look at a list of SA verbs quickly reveals that almost all of them bear at least a reﬂex of the detransitivizing preﬁx. In most cases, the transitive source exists as an independent verb in the language. In many of the cases for which no transitive source was found in a given language (a minority), a potential source was found in some other language, thus suggesting that the verb in question was detransitivized but that its source was lost. Thus, it appears that detransitivization is the source for almost all the SA verbs, at least etymologically (and synchronically as well, according to Derbyshire’s 1985 analysis of Hixkaryana, Hoﬀ’s 1968 analysis of Kari’ña, and Koehn and Koehn’s 1986 analysis of Apalaí). This is illustrated with the Tiriyó examples in (27).

(27) Deriving Sa verbs in Tiriyó

a. epG ‘bathe’

⇐ pG ‘bathe O’

b. epataka ‘exit’

⇐ pataka ‘take O out’

c. 6empa ‘learn’

⇐ empa ‘teach O’

d. 6ewetG ‘feed’

⇐ ewetG ‘feed O’

e. erama ‘return’

⇐ rama ‘return O’

f. epoka ‘undress’

⇐ poka ‘undress O’

g. 6tamoreht6 ‘dream’ ⇐ amoreht6 ‘dream of O’

h. epont6 ‘dress’

⇐ pont6 ‘dress O’

Incidentally, if detransitivization is taken into account, the unexpected reﬂexive semantics of causativized verbs (mentioned in Sec. 2.4) become understandable. Consider the Tiriyó examples in 28a-b, involving the transitive causative suﬃx -po.

(28) a. m-epG-Ø

2SA-bathe-: ‘You bathed’ (i.e. you bathed yourself)

b. m-epG-po-Ø

(sesu ya)

2SA-bathe--: (Sérgio ) ‘You made him/her/it (Sérgio) bathe you’

If (28b) is interpreted as a reﬂexive (or SA) verb being causativized, it does not seem natural that the meaning should be reﬂexive to the causer, rather than reﬂexive to the causee; the expected meaning is ‘you made him/her bathe him/ herself’, as in Figure 1.
The actual meaning, ‘you made him/her bathe you’, is suggestive of an analysis in which an already causativized verb is detransitivized, as shown in the diagram in Figure 2.

ACCIDENTAL INTRANSITIVE SPLIT IN CARIBAN

221

Detransitivization (make A=O)

Causativization (add new agent A2)

V [A, O]

> V [A=O]

> V [A2, A=O]

A bathe O

>A bathe A

> A2 make A bathe A

Figure 1. [[DETR-verb]-CAUS] = [SA-CAUS] derivation

Causativization (add new agent A2)

Detransitivization (make A=O)

V [A, O]

>V [A2, A ya, O]

> V [A2=O, A ya]

A bathe O

>A2 make A bathe O

> A2 make A bathe A2

Figure 2. [DETR-[verb-CAUS]] derivation

5. Split-S or lexicalized detransitivization

The vitality of the detransitivization process, as illustrated in the previous section, suggests an alternative analysis in which all SA verbs are still transitive verbs. If this analysis is accepted, the ‘SO’ verbs would be the true intransitive verbs in the language, and the person-marking pattern could be described as ergative (since the true intransitives treat their subjects as if they were transitive objects). In this view, the detransitivizer preﬁx is not derivational (i.e. the reﬂexivized verb is not a derived verb stem), but inﬂectional.
This analysis, though appealing at ﬁrst sight, has problems. The main points against it are:
(i) The existence of (apparently very old) exceptional non-detransitivized SA verbs. There are 5 to 7 verbs (depending on the language) which have the morphological properties of an SA verb without any hint of detransitivizing morphology, not even diachronically; they are listed in Table 12. The existence of these verbs suggests the existence of a lexical category SA verb independently of the morphologically detransitivized verbs.
(ii) The existence of semantically anomalous pairs. There seem to be, in each language, several language-speciﬁc cases of detransitivized verbs with meanings that diverge strikingly from the meanings of their transitive sources, as seen in numerous examples above, highlighted in Table 13. Such semantic anomalies are expected in a derivational process which creates new words, but are problematic

222

SÉRGIO MEIRA

Table 12. Non-detransitivized SA verbs in Cariban languages.
Stems in parentheses are potentially non-cognate.

Language Go

Say, Do Copula Come

Go Down Defecate Sleep

Tiriyó t6n (SA) Kari’ña to]˜ (SA) Wayana t6m (SA) Apalaí tõ (SA) Makushi tG] (SA) Panare t6n (SA)

ka (SA) ei (SA) ka (SA) ei (SA) ka (SA) e(w)i (SA) ka (SA) ewi (SA) ka, ku (SA) etwi (SA) ka (SA) e‘/eh (SA)

6epG (SA) oopG (SA) (m6k) (SA) oepG (SA) (yibG) (SA) 6pG (SA)

iht6 (SA) weka (SA) 66nGkG (SA)

onGxto (SA) wexka (SA) o‘nGkG (SA)

Gpt6 (SA) wika (SO) GnGk (SO)

G‘to (SA) ueka (SO) GnGkG (SO)

aut6 (?SA) –

(wetun) (SO)

6ht6

(a)i‘ka (SA) (oketi) (?SO)

for an analysis which considers the detransitivizer to be an inﬂectional process. The Panare example as-ahka ‘to shave, comb’ is particularly interesting: not only is it semantically divergent (the source transitive ahka means ‘to cut O’), but there is a second reﬂexive form, with a diﬀerent allomorph of the detransitivizer preﬁx, for the regular reﬂexive meaning ‘to cut oneself’.

(iii) The unpredictability of the surviving argument. As we have already seen (cf. Table 11), even when the meaning of the detransitivized verb is very close to that of the transitive source, there are certain idiosyncratic details, such as which argument (A, O, or both) survives. Like semantic unpredictability, this is more consistent with derivation than inﬂection.

(iv) Loss of source transitive in certain cases. There are also several cases of detransitivized verbs which have lost their original transitive sources (29–30); these cases have become synchronically basic (though diachronically they must certainly have had a transitive source at some earlier stage of the language). The detransitivizing morpheme could hardly be an inﬂection on a stem which is otherwise unattested in the modern language.

(29) Panare a. atw-awe\ta ‘be transparent’ b. atw-e\ako‘ka ‘wash one’s hands’ c. atw-e‘petG ‘dream’

(30) Katxuyana a. os-me b. atw-amnotG

‘shout’ ‘burp’

(v) ‘Basic’ meanings in the SA category. A look at any of the lexical tables (Tables 6–10) reveals a number of detransitivized verbs that represent ‘basic’ concepts (e.g. laughing, dancing, singing, vomiting, etc.).12 The basic word for
these concepts appears to be, in each case, the detransitivized verb, which creates

ACCIDENTAL INTRANSITIVE SPLIT IN CARIBAN

223

Table 13. Semantically anomalous cases of detransitivization in Cariban languages

Detransitivized Form

Original Transitive Source

TIRIYÓ 6i-meneka ‘look puzzled, amazed’ 6i-wa ‘hunt (intr.), ﬁnd game’ 6t-akaama ‘refuse to cooperate’ e-ntapo ‘yawn, feel sleepy(?)’ 6t-uru ‘talk, converse’ e-yomp6 ‘pray’

:meneka ‘choose, select O’ wa ‘search, look for O’ akaama ‘reprehend, rebuke O’ ntapo ‘open O’s mouth’ (less deviant) uru ‘warn; scold’ yomp6 ‘talk to O’

KARI’ÑA ot-aro ‘hunt’ ot-uxku ‘count; draw’ ot-apoi ‘get stuck’ o-ma ‘fall’

aro ‘take O’ uxku ‘try O; aim at O’ apoi ‘seize O’ ema ‘throw O’

WAYANA 6t-uhmo ‘fall’ 6t-GrG ‘become’ 6h-etarepa ‘pray’

uhmo ‘hit O’ GrG ‘make O’ etarepa ‘talk to O’

APALAÍ os-etapa ‘stumble’ os-enetuputG ‘remember, think’ os-e˜ma ‘wrap oneself with cloth’

etapa ‘hit O’ enetuputG ‘believe O, recognize O’ e˜ma ‘bury O, throw O out’

MAKUSHI e-n6]ma ‘be afraid’ at-akama ‘dream’ e-p6 ‘ﬁght’

n6]ma ‘keep O to oneself; value O’ akama ‘shoot and miss O’ p6 ‘shoot O (with blowpipe)’

PANARE as-ahka ‘shave, comb’ as-ap6si ‘start; turn on; leave; begin’ atw-inke‘ka ‘be afraid/careful’

ahka ‘cut O’ [cf. at-ahka ‘cut oneself’] ap6si ‘seize O’ inke‘ka ‘become O’s enemy; take advntg. of O’

a mismatch between morphological and semantic complexity. For instance, in Panare, atachiima [atatwiima] ‘dance’ is a detransitivized stem derived from achiima [atwiima] ‘dance with O’ (Mattei-Muller 1994: 30); the transitive source, though morphologically simpler (in that it does not have the detransitivizer preﬁx), is semantically more complex (cf. Payne 1990 for the original observation and more examples). The diﬀerent factors listed above basically suggest that it is not a good idea to analyze all SA verbs as simple cases of transitives with reﬂexive inﬂectional morphology. Even though etymologically reﬂexivized, the synchronic meaning is not always reﬂexive; a number of stems have lexicalized, to varying degrees, and must be considered synchronically to be independent lexical items.

224

SÉRGIO MEIRA

One might argue that this lexicalization, though important, is not so massive as to be a major factor in the analysis of the verb system. Since the number of lexicalized items varies from language to language, it is possible that, for some of them, a ‘list of irregularities’ analysis might prove more useful. However, at least for some of them, a considerable number of verbs have lexicalized, to the point that the ‘list of irregularities’ analysis would seem out of place.
For instance, in Katxuyana, a number of SA (reﬂexivized) verbs with rather ‘basic’ meanings (‘bleed’, ‘yawn’, ‘get ashamed’, ‘grow’, ‘work’, etc.) were found, for which other Cariban languages usually have SO verbs. Upon closer inspection, these Katxuyana SA verbs are formed in two ways:

(i) Detransitivizer + [SO root + Causativizer/Transitivizer]. SA verbs formed in this way are based on old (sometimes not synchronically occurring) SO roots that were ﬁrst transitivized and then detransitivized (e.g. from an SO ‘to be ashamed’, an SA ‘to make oneself be ashamed’ is derived). At some point, they acquire the same meaning that the original SO verbs had; the SO verbs are then replaced.

(31) Katxuyana causativized, detransitivized Sa verbs

a. e-hG‘-nohG ‘get ashamed’ vs. Ø

b. e-konham-nohG ‘get poor’ vs. Ø

c. o‘-ta‘-nohka ‘get lost’

vs. ta/-nohka ‘lose O’

d. o‘-yat-ka ‘burn’

vs. yat-ka ‘burn O’

(ii) Detransitivizer + [N root + -ka ‘remove-verbalizer’].

The -ka verbalizer derives a transitive verb from a noun; the ﬁnal meaning is
that of removing the noun from its possessor, which becomes the O (e.g. from
kami ‘blood’, kamii-ka ‘draw blood from O, bleed O’). When such a stem is
detransitivized, its meaning becomes ‘remove N from oneself’ (e.g. ot-kamii-ka
‘draw blood from oneself’), but many such complex stems have developed a new
middle-like meaning, more like ‘produce (spontaneously) N’ (e.g. ot-kamii-ka
‘bleed’, for instance from a wound). These new SA “middle verbs” apparently have replaced older SO verbs with identical meaning, formed by adding the SO verbalizer -ta ‘produce, be characterized by N’ (e.g. Katx. kamii-ta ‘menstruate’,
etymologically ‘bleed’ as well). While the opposing SA and SO forms have drifted apart semantically, at least both still exist in combination with kamii
‘blood’; in many cases the etymologically prior SO form has been lost, leaving behind only the new SA middle (32). Similar patterns can be found in other Cariban languages as well (33–4).

ACCIDENTAL INTRANSITIVE SPLIT IN CARIBAN

225

(32) Semantically innovative Katxuyana Detr-N-ka verbs

SA verb a. ot-kamii-ka ‘bleed’

SO verb vs. kamii-ta ‘menstruate’

b. ot-wenar-ka ‘vomit’ vs. ?wenar-ta ‘vomit’ ⇐ not very good

c. e-mtakara-ka ‘yawn’ vs. Ø

d. at-akin-ka ‘rest’

vs. Ø

e. e-hoit-ka ‘grow (tree)’ vs. Ø

f. at-arGm-ka ‘get angry’ vs. Ø

g. at-akrGw-ka ‘work’

vs. Ø

(33) Semantically innovative Makushi Detr-N-ka verbs

a. ere] ‘song’

⇒ es-ere]-ka ‘sing’

b. m6n6 ‘blood’

⇒ e-m6n6]-ka ‘bleed’

(34) A semantically innovative Detr-N-pan ‘provide with N’ verb in Ikpeng13
pGt ‘wife’ ⇒ ot-pGt-pan ‘get a wife, marry a woman’ (*pGt-ta ‘marry’)

The Katxuyana data suggests that a number of SA roots have replaced SO equivalents. It is not known to what extent this process has aﬀected the Katxuy-
ana lexicon, but in the limited lexical database available, roughly half of “basic”
intransitive verbs are SA, half SO. In Panare, this replacement seems to have gone much farther: out of a sample of 120 intransitive verbs, 80 (67%) were SA (cf. Examples in 35). Notice that, in spite of this large number of ‘lexicalized’ SA, the detransitivizer preﬁx still exists and is used as the main reﬂexive marker in
prototypical reﬂexive situations.

(35) Semantically “basic” Panare SA verbs a. (a)tw-emuku ‘smell’ (emuku ‘smell O’) b. (a)tw-ityapo ‘be heard’ (tya ‘hear O’) c. (a)tw- eøama ‘sparkle, ﬂash’ (e\ama ‘dazzle O’) d. (a)t-arGGka ‘give birth’ (arGGka ‘empty O’) e. (a)tw-imenty6 ‘be jealous’ (imenty6 ‘worry O’) f. (a)s-ahta ‘shave, comb’ (ahta ‘cut O’)

Apparently, as far as the amount of lexicalization is concerned, Panare has gone further than Katxuyana (which is already a step ahead of languages like Tiriyó, Wayana, etc.), as in the diagram in Figure 3.

226

SÉRGIO MEIRA

Tiriyó

Katxuyana

Panare

>

Proportion of Lexicalized Detransitivized Verbs

Figure 3. Lexicalization scale

6. Conclusion: the overall diachronic picture
After examining detransitivization and its interaction with the split-S casemarking pattern in Cariban languages, one is struck by the impression that what really is going on, rather than a semantically based split in the intransitive verb class, is the semantic evolution of a reﬂexive marker into new semantic areas (cf. Kemmer 1993). Apparently, the morphological behavior of the SA verb class is an accidental consequence of the fact that detransitivization, as far back as we can reconstruct, entails all the morphology described in Section 2 as typical of SA verbs. The alignment of person-marking preﬁxes appears not to be driven by any semantic forces in the language; it is as though they were being dragged by the evolution of the reﬂexive marker. Apparently, most of the typologically common areas have been covered: reﬂexives as ‘middle’, ‘medio-passive’, ‘antipassive’, ‘passive’, etc. (cf. Kemmer 1993).
In at least some languages, the process of lexicalization of detransitivized stems has led to the creation of a new verb class. To the extent that this aﬀects the overall grammar of the language (which would otherwise only have SO verbs, i.e. it would be ergative), the emergence of this new verb class can be seen as an instance of grammaticalization. As often happens in cases of grammaticalization, it is sometimes very diﬃcult to agree on ‘how much’ lexicalization is necessary to posit a new class, rather than just a list of exceptional cases; the analysis of individual languages will probably vary according to the preferences of the analyst. Since so many Cariban languages remain almost totally unknown, it is not possible to say what range of variation this phenomenon might show. The possibility cannot be excluded that, in some as yet undescribed Cariban language, the SA class might have grown beyond the size it has in Panare, thus becoming overwhelmingly predominant, while the former SO class has become a small set of exceptions, or perhaps even disappeared completely. More descriptive work is urgently necessary.
Another important point involves the relationship between this process of ‘class emergence’ and the marking of grammatical relations. Since the two verb classes show very little semantic coherence, they tend to look more like morpho-

ACCIDENTAL INTRANSITIVE SPLIT IN CARIBAN

227

logical classes (similar to, e.g., the diﬀerent Romance conjugation classes in are, -ere, -ire, or the diﬀerent Germanic strong verb classes) than like the semantically based classes found in typical split-S languages.14 The morphological diﬀerences in these cases, and apparently also in Cariban languages, serve no purpose other than being ‘class markers’, without any obvious semantic or functional load.
The person-marking alignment, so strikingly split-S in its form, appears thus to be epiphenomenal to the evolution of detransitivization. In fact, the irrelevance of the person-marking system in this evolution can be seen in the fact that a Cariban language like Makushi, in which the original set of person markers was lost due to other factors (cf. Gildea 1998: 18–21, 28, 161–182 for a description of this change), can nevertheless continue to lexicalize detransitivized verbs without any obstacles (cf. examples in the previous section). The fact that, for some yet unknown historical reason, detransitivization and A-marking preﬁxes became connected seems to be the only reason for the case marking to have shifted from a hypothetical earlier ergative pattern (with all truly intransitive verbs being from the SO category) to a split-S pattern, with the possibility of an eventual nominative pattern arising, if the trend continues.15 We are thus apparently confronted with a language family in which the case-marking system has changed, so to speak, by accident, producing a pattern that, albeit certainly present, carries no meaning by itself. One feels like saying that, just as the existence, in a given language, of a word that is pronounced /hæt/ does not imply that it means ‘hat’, the discovery of a certain formal pattern in the grammar of a language does not necessarily entail that it has the same meaning or functional motivation that similar patterns have in other languages. The relationship between meaning and form is more complicated than that.

Acknowledgments
Fieldwork carried out with support of National Science Foundation grant number BNS-8609304, CNPq, FUNAI, ORSTOM, Rice University Dean of Humanities.

Notes
1. This language is known in the literature as Carib, Carib of Surinam, Cariña, or Galibi. The name ‘Kari’ña’, which is used by the native speakers, is preferred here.

228

SÉRGIO MEIRA

2. This interpretation follows Gildea’s 1994 analysis of Cariban person-marking systems as ‘inverse alignment’. Other interpretations are possible and do, in fact, occur in the literature (cf. Hoﬀ 1995: 351 for a portmanteau analysis of the cognate Kari’ña person-marking preﬁxes).
3. This suﬃx has a fuller form -topo, but the ﬁnal syllable is not realized unless a certain kind of suﬃx or clitic particle follows. This fact is not idiosyncratic to this suﬃx; rather, it is part of a larger pattern of allomorphy based on syllable reduction and loss, widely attested in the family; cf. Gildea 1995 for a cross-Cariban perspective. Cf. also Gildea 1998: 119–133 for an overview of Cariban nominalizations.
4. This preﬁx is called ‘O Nominalizer’ in Gildea 1998: 129, 133, and ‘Actual O Nominalizer’ in Meira 1999: 171.
5. A small complication is the fact that w- ‘SA’ only occurs on vowel-initial verbs. However, even on the few consonant-initial verbs, a few cues (e.g. vowel lengthening of the possessive preﬁx) suggest that a w- was there at an earlier stage. Comparative evidence conﬁrms this, since there are languages (e.g. Kari’ña) in which even consonant-initial verbs take the w- preﬁx.
6. This is strictly valid only for Ø-nominalizations, since to-nominalizations of transitives cannot take n-.
7. Cf. Meira 1995, 1999: 333 for the allomorphic pattern of t- -se and other interesting properties of this verb form; cf. Gildea 1998: 24, 140–151, 218–232 for a family-wide perspective.
8. Notice that the t- -se pattern would be identical to the Ø-nominalization pattern if it were possible to derive an A-oriented participle from transitive verbs with an intervening preﬁx (say, n-, to keep the parallelism); in this case, there would be a structual similarity between A and SA as well. Since, however, forms like *tG-n-eta-e ‘hearing / having heard’ are not possible, the t- se forms are more similar to to-nominalizations.
9. In Central Pomo, aﬀectedness seems to be the factor that causes inchoative/inceptive predicates to be SA, since entering a state can be viewed as aﬀecting a participant signiﬁcantly (Mithun 1991: 521). In Cariban languages, there are inchoative/inceptive verbs in both the SA (e.g. Tiriyó 6emuma ‘sadden, become sad’, 6enema / etGma ‘get drunk’, epGima ‘become ashamed’) and SO (aamita ‘blush, redden’, emmerepG / yorohpamG ‘get dizzy’, ripita ‘be/become thin/weak’) classes; the aﬀectedness associated with entering a state does not seem to inﬂuence class membership.
10. It must be said that the few possibly state-denoting intransitive verbs that were found in the SO category (Table 10, Sec. 3.1.4) all seem to signiﬁcantly aﬀect their participants. However, as was said there, these verbs may have an inchoative/inceptive meaning, and such verbs appear to have unpredictable class membership (cf. previous fn).
11. In one verb form, the participle/narrative past, case-marking is ergative: an overt A is marked with a speciﬁc ergative morpheme, while O and S remain unmarked; SA and SO are equally unmarked, and the verb bears no person-marking. This is diﬀerent from the Mohawk perfect forms, which are all ‘SA’-like. Intransitive class membership is marked only by the presence of the w- ‘SA’ preﬁx described in sec. 2.3 (cf. also Meira 1995 for a fuller treatment of the development of the Tiriyó narrative past, Gildea 1998: 218–232 for a comparative account of its evolution).
12. This, of course, depends on some notion of what a ‘basic’ concept is. This topic is too complex to be taken up here. Suﬃce it to suggest that the concepts being considered here are probably basic enough, in an intuitive sense, for the argument to be valid.
13. Ikpeng data are from Gildea’s 1994 ﬁeld notes.

ACCIDENTAL INTRANSITIVE SPLIT IN CARIBAN

229

14. It is not unthinkable that, in some language, the existence of the morphological alignment between transitive and intransitive preﬁxes may lead to a typical split-S system by means of ‘semantic reanalysis’: speakers might conceivably reinterpret the SA markers as conveying, e.g., agentivity because of their resemblance to A markers. Most transitive verbs are fairly agentive, and their detransitivized versions conserve this agentivity (‘bathe O’ ⇒ ‘bathe oneself’, etc.), a fact which might contribute to this reinterpretation. Such ‘spontaneous generation’ of a split-S system has not been observed yet (the Katxuyana case mentioned above, in which originally agentive verbs like ‘to make oneself bleed’ become less agentive, i.e. ‘bleed’, points in the opposite direction: the Katxuyana SA verbs seem to be ‘losing agentivity’).
15. It would be interesting to look for other cases of this correlation. For instance, in most ergative language families (e.g. Mayan, Panoan), detransitivized verbs become fully intransitive, and their subjects get absolutive case marking. Should there be any other language families in which, for some historical reason, detransitivized verbs retained the ergative verb agreement of their transitive sources, other epiphenomenal split-S systems like the Cariban one may have arisen.

References
Abbott, Miriam. 1991. “Macushi”. In Desmond C. Derbyshire and Geoﬀrey K. Pullum (eds). 23–160.
Burzio, Luigi. 1981. Intransitive verbs and Italian auxiliaries. MIT, Ph.D dissertation. Derbyshire, Desmond C. and Pullum, Geoﬀrey K. (eds). 1991. Handbook of Amazonian
Languages. Vol. 3. Berlin: Mouton de Gruyter. Dixon, R. M. W. 1979. “Ergativity”. Language 55:59–138. Dixon, R. M. W. 1994. Ergativity. Cambridge: CUP. Dowty, David. 1979. Word Meaning and Montague Grammar. Dordrecht: Reidel. Foley, William A. and Van Valin Jr., Robert D. 1984. Functional Syntax and Universal
Grammar. Cambridge: CUP. Gildea, Spike. 1994a. Gramatica comparative como meio de entender análise sincrônica:
O preﬁxo w- e sistemas ativos-estativos em línguas Karibe. Paper presented at the Quintas Lingüísticas — Colloquium of the Área de Lingüística, Museu Paraense Emílio Goeldi, Belém, PA, Brazil. Gildea, Spike. 1994b. “Semantic and pragmatic inverse: ‘Inverse alignment’ and ‘inverse voice’ in Carib of Surinam”. In Givón (ed.). 187–230. Gildea, Spike. 1995. “Comparative Cariban syllable reduction”. International Journal of American Linguistics 61:62–102. Gildea, Spike. 1998. On Reconstructing Grammar: Comparative Cariban morphosyntax. Oxford: OUP. Givón, T. (ed.). 1994. Voice and Inversion. Amsterdam and Philadelphia: John Benjamins [Typological Studies in Language 28]. Hall, Katherine Lee. 1988. The Morphosyntax of Discourse in De’kwana Carib. Washington University in St. Louis, Ph.D. dissertation. Harris, Alice C. 1982. “Georgian and the unaccusative hypothesis”. Language 58: 290–306.

230

SÉRGIO MEIRA

Hoﬀ, Berend. 1968. The Carib Language. The Hague: Martinus Nijhoﬀ. Hoﬀ, Berend. 1995. “Conﬁgurationality and nonconﬁgurationality in the Carib language
of Surinam”. International Journal of American Linguistics 61:347–377. Kemmer, Suzanne. 1993. The Middle Voice. Amsterdam and Philadelphia: John Benjamins
[Typological Studies in Language 23]. Koehn, S. and Koehn, E. 1996. Dicionário Apalaí-Português, Português-Apalaí. Brasília:
Summer Institute of Linguistics. Mattei Muller, Marie Claude. Diccionario ilustrado panare-español, índice español-
panare. Caracas: Comisión Quinto Centenário. Meira, Sérgio. 1995. From adverb to verb in Tiriyó (Cariban). Paper presented at the
Summer Meeting of the Society for the Study of the Indigenous Languages of the Americas, Albuquerque, NM. Meira, Sérgio. 1999. A Grammar of Tiriyó. Rice University, Ph. D. dissertation. Merlan, Francesca. 1985. “Split intransitivity: Functional oppostions in instransitive inﬂection”. In Johanna Nichols and Anthony C. Woodbury (eds). 324–62. Mithun, Marianne. 1991. “Active/agentive case marking and its motivations”. Language 67:510–46. Mosonyi, Jorge C. 1978. Diccionario básico del idioma kariña. Universidad Central de Caracas, Venezuela, Thesis for the title of Profesor Agregado. Nichols, Johanna and Anthony C. Woodbury (eds). 1985. Grammar Inside and Outside of the Clause. Cambridge: CUP. Payne, Doris L. (ed.). 1990. Amazonian Linguistics: Studies in lowland South-American languages. Austin: University of Texas Press. Payne, Thomas E. 1990. “Transitivity and ergativity in Panare”. In Doris L. Payne (ed.). 429–53. Perlmutter, David. 1978. “Impersonal passives and the unaccusative hypothesis. Berkeley Linguistics Society 4:157–89. Perlmutter, David and Rosen, Carol (eds). 1984. Studies in Relational Grammar 2. Chicago: The University of Chicago Press. Rosen, Carol. 1984. “The interface between semantic roles and initial grammatical relations”. In David Perlmutter and Carol Rosen (eds). 38–77. Tavares, Petronila. 1994. O Sistema Ativo/Estativo na língua Wayâna. Paper presented at the Nono Encontro da Associação Nacional dos Cursos de Pós-Graduação em Lingüística e Literatura, Caxambu, MG, Brazil. Van Valin Jr., Robert D. 1990. “Semantic parameters of split intransitivity”. Language 66:221–60. Vendler, Zeno. 1967. Linguistics in Philosophy. Ithaca: Cornell University Press. Williams, James. 1932. Grammar Notes and Vocabulary of the Language of the Makuchi. St.Gabriel-Mödling near Vienna, Austria: International Review “Anthropos” (Internationale Sammlung Linguistischer Monographien), vol. VIII. Schmidt & Hölker (eds).

The reordering of morphemes
Marianne Mithun
University of California, Santa Barbara
Several kinds of proposals have been put forth to explain the relative sequencing of morphemes we ﬁnd in languages. Some are purely synchronic, such as Baker’s 1985 Mirror Principle that morphological derivations must directly reﬂect syntactic derivations. According to his analysis, for example, if a sentence in some language is analyzed as the result of ﬁrst an applicative process (changing ‘The zebras handed the crowbar to the girl’ to ‘The zebras handed the girl the crowbar’) and then passivization (changing ‘The zebras handed the girl the crowbar’ to ‘The girl was handed the crowbar’), applicative and passive aﬃxes will be added to the verb in that order. Other explanations of morpheme order, such as that proposed in Rice 1991, have focused on the relative semantic or grammatical scope of morphemes. Thus in a word like [[[beauti]ful]ly], the outer suﬃx -ly has scope over the full adjective stem beauti-ful to its left, deriving an adverb from the adjective. The inner suﬃx -ful has scope over just the noun root beauty to its left, deriving an adjective ‘full of beauty’. Bybee (1985: 33–5) accounts for morpheme order in terms of ‘relevance’: ‘the semantic relevance of an aﬃx to a stem is the extent to which the meaning of the aﬃx directly aﬀects the meaning of the stem’ (1985: 4). More relevant aﬃxes are predicted to occur closer to the root. Her prediction can be illustrated with markers of aspect and tense. A shift in aspect can signiﬁcantly alter the nature of an event: sleeping is a diﬀerent kind of activity than its inceptive counterpart falling asleep. Tense, by contrast, simply situates an event as a whole at some point in time, with little eﬀect on its essence: sleeping today is much the same kind of activity as sleeping yesterday. Aspect aﬃxes are accordingly predicted to occur inside of tense markers within verbal morphology.
Yet we know that morpheme order is not usually the result of spontaneous on-line decisions at each moment of speech. Morphological structures are built up over time, as independent words are gradually reduced to dependent aﬃxes

232

MARIANNE MITHUN

through processes of grammaticalization. Diachronic considerations were appropriately brought into the discussion of morpheme order with Givón’s provocative maxim that ‘today’s morphology is yesterday’s syntax’ (1971: 413), further discussed by Comrie (1980). Bybee proposes that ‘the order of morphemes is in large part a result of the order of words in the verb phrase, and the frequency of occurrence of certain categories as verbal inﬂections is a reﬂex of their frequent occurrence contiguous to the main verb’ (1985: 41). Of course a full sentence is not reduced to a morphologically complex word in a single operation. Morphological structures usually develop step by step, category by category. Morpheme order might thus be better seen as a reﬂection of the historical sequence of grammaticalization of aﬃxes.
The various synchronic and diachronic accounts of morpheme order need not be at odds. Synchronic analyses of morpheme order cast in terms of derivational processes could, for example, reﬂect the historical order of the grammaticalization of these processes. These might in turn mirror their relative scope or relevance. Such relations might have been the basis underlying earlier word order. Comparative evidence within many language families indicates that morpheme order often does reﬂect the sequence of grammaticalization of aﬃxes: those aﬃxes closest to the root are indeed the oldest, and those on the periphery of words can be seen to be more recent additions. The picture is more complex, however. Once built up, morphological structures are not immune to further change. A variety of processes may alter morpheme order after attachment has occurred. (Discussions of some of these changes are in Haspelmath 1993, Mithun 1995, and Harris 1997). In what follows we will see a kind of reordering that can be stimulated by a shift in status of certain markers from derivational to inﬂectional.

1. Types of morpheme order: layered versus templatic morphology
A distinction sometimes drawn in work on morpheme order is that between ‘layered’ or ‘hierarchical’ structures on the one hand, and ‘templatic’ or ‘slot and ﬁller’ structures on the other. In layered structures, words are analyzed as having been built up step-by-step, aﬃx-by-aﬃx, with each morphological process creating a new stem that can serve as a base for another, as in [[beauti]ful]ly discussed above. Such structures are elaborately developed in the Eskimoan languages, illustrated here with material from Central Alaskan Yup’ik. Examples have been drawn from the speech of Elena Charles, Elizabeth Ali, and George Charles of Bethel, Alaska.

THE REORDERING OF MORPHEMES

233

Both nouns and verbs in Yup’ik consist of an initial root, any number of derivational suﬃxes, and a ﬁnal inﬂectional ending.



 

 

Figure 1. Yup’ik Morphological Order

The inventory of suﬃxes is extremely rich; Jacobsen (1984) has identiﬁed over 450 derivational suﬃxes in Yup’ik and even more inﬂectional suﬃxes. A root may be inﬂected directly to form a word, or it may serve as the input to a derivational process which creates a new stem that can in turn be inﬂected as a word, and so forth. (Yup’ik examples are presented in the practical orthography.1)
(1) Yup’ik layered morphology: George Charles, speaker a. ayagtua ayag-tu-a go-:-1 ‘I’m going’ b. ayagyugtua ayag-yug-tu-a go-want-:-1 ‘I want to go’ c. ayagyuumiitua ayag-yug-umi-ite-u-a go-want-be:in:state-not-:-1 ‘I don’t want to go’ d. ayagyuumiitqapiartua ayag-yug-umi-ite-qapiar-tu-a go-want-be:in:state-not-really-:-1 ‘I really don’t want to go’
The Yup’ik suﬃxes do not always occur in the same order with respect to each other. Ordering diﬀerences can reﬂect diﬀerences in semantic or grammatical scope. Each added suﬃx qualiﬁes the preceding stem as a whole, rather than just the root or the preceding suﬃx. In (2a), for example, the stem ‘giant’ is ﬁrst derived (from ’person-big’), then qualiﬁed by ‘little’, while in (2b), the stem ‘midget’ is ﬁrst derived (from ‘person-little’), then qualiﬁed as a unit by ‘big’.

234

MARIANNE MITHUN

(2) Yup’ik scope alternations: Elizabeth Ali, speaker a. yugpacuaq yug-pag-cuar person-big-little ‘little giant’ b. yucuarpak yug-cuar-pag person-little-big ‘big midget’
In (3a), the suﬃx -yugnarqe- ‘probably’ modiﬁes just the projected going, expressed by the material to its left. It is followed by a suﬃx -ni- ‘claim’ and a past tense marker -llru-. In (3b), the same suﬃx follows both -ni- and -llruand modiﬁes the full derived stem: ‘claimed he would go’. In both, the past tense -llru- appears to the right or outside of the future tense -ciq-, conveying a past statement about a projected event.
(3) Yup’ik scope alternations: Jacobson 1995: 324 a. ayagciqsugnarqnillruuq ayag-ciq-yugnarqe-ni-llru-u-q go--probably-claim--:-3 ‘He said he would probably go.’ b. ayagciqnillruyugnarquq ayag-ciq-ni-llru-yugnarqe-u-q go--claim--probably-:-3 ‘He probably said he would go.’
Yet even within a system like Yup’ik, morpheme order is not fully free. Of course some orders occur more often simply because the scope reﬂected in one order corresponds to what speakers wish to say more often than the reverse. Certain recurring orders in Yup’ik are reﬂected in the development of what could be called compound suﬃxes: multi-suﬃx chunks that are processed as a single unit. One such unit is the negative desiderative seen in (1): -yuumiite-, from the combination -yug-umi-ite- --. There is no grammatical or semantic reason why a diﬀerent sequence of suﬃxes could be used to mean ‘not want’, such as -: speakers simply use the ready-made unit -yuumiite- rather than building up a negative desiderative each time from possible components. Suﬃx clusters often show greater phonological fusion than other sequences of suﬃxes, and they are not necessarily equivalent in meaning to the sum of the meanings of their parts. Such semantic indepen-

THE REORDERING OF MORPHEMES

235

dence is well illustrated in the cluster -ngssaar- ‘secretively, unnoticeably, without letting oneself be seen’.
(4) Yup’ik suﬃx complex: Elizabeth Ali, speaker atungssaaralriit atur-ngssak-arar-lri-it sing-small-a:little:at:a:time--3 ‘They’re singing in secret.’
Jacobson (1984: 517) derives this suﬃx complex from -ngssak- ‘small, non-vital …ing’ plus -arar- ‘to … a little at a time’. The link between ‘small’ and ‘secretive’ is not diﬃcult to imagine. One often makes small movements in order to avoid attracting notice. The base atu-ngssaarak- can be used, for example, for someone humming under her breath. In the modern language, the movements no longer need be small: someone could be singing robustly out of the earshot of those from whom she wanted to conceal her actions. The verb in (4) was used to refer to the fact that traditional songs were kept alive through most of this century because ceremonies, forbidden by missionaries, were held in secret.
The routinization of frequently occurring morphological sequences constrains morpheme order to some extent. Yup’ik morpheme order is further constrained in another way. There is a clear distinction between the derivational and inﬂectional suﬃx zones. Every noun and verb must have one and only one inﬂectional ending. For nouns, the ending encodes number and case and, if the referent is possessed, the number and person of the possessor as well. For verbs, the inﬂectional ending consists of two parts, a mood marker (indicative, interrogative, optative, etc.) and a pronominal suﬃx specifying the core arguments of the clause. The mood and pronominal suﬃxes form a tight-knit unit: the choice of mood determines the choice of pronominal paradigm, and the mood and pronominal suﬃxes are fused.
Templatic systems, by contrast, show a ﬁxed order among morphemes. The order does not necessarily reﬂect scope considerations. An example of templatic ordering can be seen in languages of the Iroquoian family. As in many polysynthetic langauges, morphological complexity is concentrated in the verb. Verb structure is schematized in Figure 2.

       



      

Figure 2. Iroquoian Morphological Structure within the Verb

236

MARIANNE MITHUN

None of these morphemes ever appears outside of its regular position. It would be diﬃcult to argue that the order consistently reﬂects semantic or grammatical scope. Two of the prepronominal preﬁxes, the cislocative and the translocative, appear to represent perfectly opposite distinctions. The cislocative typically indicates action directed toward a point of reference (‘come’, ‘bring’), and the translocative indicates motion away (‘go’, ‘take’). Yet the two preﬁxes occur in diﬀerent positions in the template. The cislocative is an inner prepronominal preﬁx, usually appearing immediately before the pronominal preﬁxes; the translocative is an outer prepronominal preﬁx, occupying the ﬁrst or second position in the word.

 

 TRANSLOCATIVE   CISLOCATIVE  





 

 

TRANSLOCATIVE







 

CISLOCATIVE


Figure 3. Prepronominal Preﬁxes

The diﬀerence in the positions of the two directional preﬁxes reﬂects their diﬀerent histories: the cislocative preﬁx developed some time before the translocative preﬁx.2
Any hope of describing Iroquoian aﬃx order in terms of either synchronic derivation or scope relations is further undermined by the existence of dependencies among non-adjacent morphemes. Within the Northern Iroquoian languages, for example, a large number of verb stems require the presence of a preﬁx tetermed the dualic. The semantic contribution of the dualic is elusive; it sometimes implies two-ness of some kind, sometimes a change of state or position. (The Cherokee cognate of the Northern dualic preﬁx has the same shape te-, but it serves as a distributive, spreading events over various locations or absolutive participants.) In any case it is often impossible to predict the appearance of the dualic in the Northern languages. It simply always cooccurs with certain verb stems, a fact that must be learned with each stem. It occurs in the Mohawk verb ‘stand up’, for example, but not in the verb ‘sit down’, though both could be argued to involve a change of position.

THE REORDERING OF MORPHEMES

237

(5) Mohawk: unpredictable use of the dualic a. tésta‘n te-s-t-a‘n -2:-stand- ‘Stand up!’ b. sáty%î s-at-y%î 2:--set ‘Sit down!’
The dualic is never adjacent to the verb root; it is always separated from it by at least the pronominal preﬁx and often many others. We thus have a discontinuous dependency.
(6) Mohawk: discontinuous dependency tauî sahsater%î nó:t%î t-auî -sa-hs-ate-r%î n-ot-%î -’ dualic---2:--song-stand- ‘You should sing again’
Another characteristic of many templatic systems, noted by Rice (1991), is that diﬀerent areas of the morphology may show diﬀerent kinds of phonological boundaries. In Athabaskan languages, for example, the inner or ‘conjunct’ preﬁxes are more tightly fused phonologically than the outer or ‘disjunct’ preﬁxes. The Iroquoian languages show similar diﬀerences between inner and outer preﬁxes. Such diﬀerences are easily explained as a function of their longer history as aﬃxes, subject to more internal sandhi processes.
The ordering properties of layered and templatic structures thus diﬀer in signiﬁcant ways, with layered structures showing more variability, more often reﬂecting scope relations among morphemes. In both layered and templatic systems, however, morpheme order is substantially more rigid than word order in sentences.

2. Aﬃx order as the reﬂection of the historical sequence of grammaticization
Comparative evidence within the Iroquoian family largely bears out our expectation that the synchronic order of morphemes in a language tends to reﬂect their historical order of grammaticalization. The family consists of two main branches,

238

MARIANNE MITHUN

Southern Iroquoian, represented uniquely by modern Cherokee (spoken in North Carolina and Oklahoma), and Northern Iroquoian, which underwent successive splits over the course of its history. The ﬁrst group to split oﬀ from the Northern Iroquoian branch became the Tuscarora, who lived until the early 18th century in North Carolina when they migrated to western New York and then into southern Ontario. The next group to separate became the Huron, encountered in the early 17th century in Ontario. Warfare at mid-century forced some of the Huron to move to Quebec and others to join with neighbors, ultimately migrating west toward Detroit and south into Oklahoma, where they became known as the Wyandot. The remainder of the Northern Iroquoians, the Iroquois proper, occupied present New York State, with the Seneca and Cayuga in the west, the Onondaga in the center, and the Oneida and Mohawk in the east. A simpliﬁed schema of this series of splits can be seen in Figure 4. Other groups are known to have been Iroquoian as well, including the Nottoway (close relatives of the Tuscarora), the Susquehannock (Iroquois proper), and the Petun, Erie, Neutral, and Wenro, living between the Huron and the Seneca. All of these groups are now gone, and documentation of their languages is sparse.

PROTO-IROQUOIAN

SOUTHERN IROQUOIAN

NORTHERN IROQUOIAN LAKE IROQUOIAN

IROQUOIS PROPER

Cherokee Tuscarora Huron-Wyandot Seneca Cayuga Onondaga Oneida Mohawk
Figure 4. The Iroquoian Language Family
A consideration of internal relationships within the family is important for establishing the relative chronology of development of the morphology. If a structure is found in Cherokee and at least one of the Northern Iroquoian languages, we can attribute it to the common parent, Proto-Iroquoian. If it is found in Tuscarora and any of the the other Northern languages, we can reconstruct it for Proto-Northern-Iroquoian. The verbal morphologies of the modern Iroquoian languages show great similarity. All share the basic morpho-

THE REORDERING OF MORPHEMES

239

logical structure schematized in Figure 2, repeated here.

       



      

Figure 2. Iroquoian Morphological Structure within the Verb

Examples of the inner morphology shared by all languages in the family can be seen in the verbs in (7). All contain a pronominal preﬁx, reﬂexive preﬁx, incorporated noun root, verb root, and aspect suﬃx. The Tuscarora material comes primarily from speaker Elton Greene, of Tuscarora, New York. The Mohawk material is from speakers at Kahnawà:ke, Kanehsatà:ke, and Ahkwesáhsne Quebec, with special help from Kaia’titáhkhe’ Jacobs of Kahnawà:ke and Kanerahtenhá:wi Nicholas of Kanehsatà:ke.
(7) Core verbal morphology a. Cherokee: Cook 1979: 134 ka‘lskuhwska k-ali-hsk-uw-sk-a 1:--head-shake-:- ‘I am nodding’ b. Tuscarora: Elton Greene, speaker ka‘n6î ta‘rúhar k-at-ta‘r-uhar-h 1:--head-wash-: ‘I’m washing my hair’ c. Mohawk: Kaia’titáhkhe’ Jacobs, speaker katkuî hsóhares k-at-kuî hs-ohare-s 1:--face-wash-: ‘I’m washing my face.’
For the most part, the prepronominal preﬁxes, derivational suﬃxes, and aspectual suﬃxes are also cognate across the family. The situation is diﬀerent at the periphery of words, however. Each branch shows outer aﬃxes, in wordinitial and word-ﬁnal position, not shared by the other branch. Cherokee contains an initial conditional preﬁx that does not appear in the morphology of the Northern languages. The Northern languages contain an initial contrastive preﬁx that has no counterpart in the morphology of Cherokee. The Lake languages

240

MARIANNE MITHUN

contain a coincident preﬁx that appears neither in Tuscarora nor Cherokee. In word-ﬁnal position, following the aspectual suﬃxes, Cherokee shows a set of modal suﬃxes lacking counterparts in the Northern languages. The Northern languages contain word-ﬁnal past tense suﬃxes without counterparts in Cherokee. The comparative evidence thus conﬁrms the fact that the inner morphology is old, dating back to Proto-Iroquoian, while some outer aﬃxes appear to be recent additions. The synchronic order of aﬃxes does then reﬂect the historical sequence in which the grammatical categories they represent evolved. Certain
factors may intervene to alter this order, however.

3. The externalization of inﬂection in a layered system: Yup’ik mood
It is well known that derivational aﬃxes generally occur inside of inﬂectional aﬃxes, that is, closer to the root, yielding maximal structures like that in Figure 5.

 

 



 

 

Figure 5. Inﬂection outside of derivation

Yet we know that all derivational aﬃxes in a language are not necessarily older than all inﬂectional aﬃxes. Haspelmath (1993) brings to our attention a set of diachronic shifts in morpheme order whose result was to restore the external position of inﬂection after grammaticalization had added new derivational aﬃxes to the outside of words, trapping inﬂectional aﬃxes inside. Speakers restored the preferred structure in two stages. First the inﬂection was doubled, with a copy of the inﬂectional suﬃx repeated outside of the new derivational suﬃx. Next the original internal inﬂection faded, perhaps by analogy to other inﬂected words that contained no internal inﬂectional aﬃxes. Only the external copy of the inﬂectional suﬃx remained. Haspelmath termed this process the ‘externalization of inﬂection’. Here we will examine another kind of externalization of inﬂection.
A disturbance in the peripheral position of inﬂection can result from another diachronic process as well. Existing derivational aﬃxes may evolve into inﬂectional markers, at ﬁrst in their original internal positions. At a certain point, they may be reanalyzed as part of an inﬂectional paradigm and take their place among the other members, at the edge of the word. The evolution of their function (a kind of grammaticalization) and subsequent formal reanalysis can thus stimulate a shift in position. Such a situation can be seen in Yup’ik. It will

THE REORDERING OF MORPHEMES

241

be recalled that Yup’ik, like other Eskimoan languages, exhibits the morphological structure in Figure 1, repeated here.



 

 

Figure 1. Yup’ik Morphological Order

The same structure is reconstructed for Proto-Eskimoan by Fortescue, Jacobson,
and Kaplan (1994). Both verbs and nouns show this structure, but the two are morphologically distinct. The inﬂectional suﬃx complex in nouns speciﬁes the referent and its possessor (if present), as well as case. (Absolutive case is formally unmarked.) The inﬂectional suﬃx complex in verbs speciﬁes mood and the core arguments of the clause. The pronominal suﬃxes on unpossessed nouns resemble those on third person intransitive verbs. The pronominal suﬃxes on possessed nouns resemble those on transitive verbs. All nouns and verbs contain one and only one inﬂectional suﬃx complex.



/





 /

Figure 6. Inﬂectional Suffix Complexes

On the basis of comparative evidence, Fortescue et al. reconstruct four moods for Proto-Eskimoan: indicative, subordinative, interrogative, and optative/imperative. All four persist in modern Yup’ik. A number of additional moods appear in Yup’ik that are not reconstructed for the parent. Many of the new inﬂectional mood markers are transparently descended from derivational suﬃxes that are reconstructed for Proto-Eskimoan. One new mood suﬃx is the past contemporative -ller-, usually translated ‘when (in the past)’. Examples of its use can be seen in (8).
(8) Yup’ik past contemporative mood -ller-: Elizabeth Ali, speaker a. Ak’a ayagyuarullemni ak’a ayagyuaq-u-ller-mni past teenager-be-:-1 ‘Long ago when I was young …’

242

MARIANNE MITHUN

b. ilaka

tauna kassuuteqatallrani

ila-ka

tauna kassuute-qatar-ller-ani

relative-1/ that marry--

:-3

‘when one of my relatives was going to get married …’

The past contemporative is transparently descended from a nominalizer that persists in modern Yup’ik with the same form -ller- ‘former (noun)’ or ‘the one that …-ed or was …-ed’.

(9) Yup’ik derivational suﬃx -ller- ‘the one who (was) …ed’: Elizabeth

Ali, speaker

a. ekualleq

ekua-lleq

burn-:

‘the one that burned’

b. pagaaggun

anellret

pagaa-ggun

ane-ller-t

up:above- go.out-:-

:

‘those who had left through the upper door’

The ancestor of the nominalizer is reconstructed by Fortescue et al. with the same shape: *-ł6t. (Yup’ik orthographic ll is a voiceless fricative [ł], e is a schwa [6], and r is a voiced uvular fricative [t]. Velar and uvular fricatives regularly alternate with stops in ﬁnal position, like the r and q here.)

(10) Proto-Eskimo derivational source: Fortescue et al. 1994: 408–9

Proto Eskimoan

*-ł6t

Nominalizer (participial or action)’

Central Alaskan Yup’ik

-ł6q

‘former, one that (has) …, act or state of ..’ PAST CONTEMPORATIVE

Alaskan Alutiq Yupik

-ł6q

‘former, one that has -ed, or was -ed’

Naukanski Yupik

-ł6q

‘action of …-ing’

Central Siberian Yupik

-l6q

‘one that (has) …-ed, or has been …-ed, act of … -ing

Sirenikski

-ł6x»

‘action of …-ing’

Seward Peninsula Inuit

-łiq

THE REORDERING OF MORPHEMES

243

North Alaskan Inuit Malimiut

-łiq

‘action, result of …-ing’

Traces of the diachronic source of the past contemporative mood are still visible in the shape of the pronominal suﬃxes that appear with intransitive verbs in this mood. An example of a nominal inﬂectional suﬃx complex can be seen in (11). The pronominal suﬃx is transitive, specifying the possessor and possessed. The case is locative.

(11) Yup’ik inﬂection of nouns: Elizabeth Ali, speaker angyaatni angyar-at-ni boat-3/3- ‘at/in their boat’

The same nominal endings, complete with locative case suﬃx, appear with intransitive past contemporative verbs.

(12) Yup’ik mood suﬃx with intransitive pronominal suﬃx: Elizabeth

Ali, speaker

tangvagkai

ayallratni.

tangvag-ke-ai

ayag-ller-atni

watch--3/3

leave-:-3

‘He watched them as they were leaving (at their leaving).’

It is clear, however, that contemporatives like ayallratni ‘as they were leaving’ are no longer nominals. They have crossed the line and become verbs. In nominal possessive constructions like ‘the man’s boat’, a noun identifying the possessor (‘the man’) appears in the ergative case. With past contemporatives like ‘as the man left’, a noun identifying the leaver (‘the man’) appears in the absolutive case, consistent with the intransitive status of ‘leave’. The man is no longer classiﬁed grammatically as a possessor.

(13) Yup’ik past contemporative with absolutive: Elizabeth Ali, speaker

a. angutem

angyaani

angute-m

angyar-a-ni

man-

boat-3/3-

‘in the man’s () boat’

b. angun

ayallrani

angun

ayag-ller-ani

man:

leave-:-3

‘as the man () was leaving’

244

MARIANNE MITHUN

In transitive verbs, the traces of the historical nominal source of the past contemporative are disappearing. The past contemporative mood suﬃx is now usually followed by the verbal transitive pronominal suﬃxes that appear with other connective moods.
(14) Yup’ik transitive past contemporative tangallraki tangag-ller-aki watch-:-3/3 ‘when he watched them’
These endings diﬀer from the locative possessive counterparts that would appear with nouns: angya-atni ‘in his boats’.
Other modern Yup’ik mood suﬃxes can easily be seen to be developing from derivational suﬃxes as well, derivational suﬃxes that can be traced back to Proto-Eskimoan and in some cases to Proto-Eskimo-Aleut. The simultaneous contemporative mood marker -(ng)inaner- ‘while’ can be linked to the derivational suﬃx -nginar- ‘to just (verb)’ plus the nominalizer -neq- ‘activity of …ing’. The consequential mood -(ng)a- ‘because’, has the same form as a derivational suﬃx -(ng)a- translated ‘to be in the state of having …-ed’, or ‘having been …-ed’, essentially portraying a result. The conditional mood -ku‘when, if’ resembles a derivational suﬃx -ku- that derives adverbs pertaining to the future: wani ‘now’, wani-ku ‘soon’; unuk ‘night, last night’, unu-ku ‘tonight’. The participial mood suﬃx -lria has the same form as a derivational nominalizer -lria. Comparative evidence indicates that the new moods were not all added at the same time, but have been developing during diﬀerent periods in the history of the family. In fact alternations between nominal and verbal endings on them in the modern language show that some are still in the process of evolving. Yup’ik speakers accept both tangallr-atni (nominal ending) and tangallr-aki (verbal ending) for ‘when he watched them’. Jacobsen 1982 lays out the range of nominalizing constructions in modern Yup’ik along a continuum, from those which are still primarily nominal to those which are primarily verbal.
The evolution of the derivational nominalizers into inﬂectional mood suﬃxes has resulted in a shift in morpheme order, consistent with the preference for derivation close to the root and inﬂection at the periphery of the word. In (15) the derivational nominalizer has a somewhat internal position, followed by a derivational verbalizer -u- ‘be’, then a suﬃx -yaq- ‘indeed’, then the inﬂectional suﬃx complex consisting of the intransitive indicative mood -u- and the pronominal suﬃx -q. In (16) the inﬂectional mood suﬃx appears immediately before the pronominal suﬃx -ani.

THE REORDERING OF MORPHEMES

245

(15) Yup’ik derivational nominalizer -ller-: Elizabeth Ali, speaker ekuallrunritellruyaquq ekua-llru-nrite-ller-u-yaq-u-q burn---:-beindeed-:-3 ‘Indeed it is not the object that burned!’
(16) Yup’ik inﬂectional mood -ller-: Elizabeth Ali, speaker qumacunguallrullerani qumar-cuk-u-aq-llru-ller-ani worm-ugly:old-be-indeed--:-3 ‘As he was indeed a low-life worm, …’
It appears that the marker -ller- has moved some distance, over several suﬃxes (here -llru- , -u- ‘be’, and -yaq- ‘indeed’), before landing in the inﬂectional mood slot. But Yup’ik shows a layered structure rather than a templatic one. Derivational suﬃxes do not occupy ﬁxed positions, so there are no special derivational slots for the nominalizer to hop over. A somewhat diﬀerent kind of mechanism led to the apparent change in order.
Nominalizers may occur deeply embedded within the derivational morphology, as in (15), but they appear most often at the end of the derivational string, immediately before the case and pronominal endings. Now the pronominal suﬃx complexes that indicate possession are similar in form to those that specify the core arguments of indicative verbs. Nouns contain no mood markers: the pronominal suﬃxes directly follow the noun stem. In many deverbal forms, it would be easy to reanalyze a nominalizer immediately preceding the pronominal complex as a mood marker. The important initial shift was not one of position, but rather from derivational to inﬂectional status. Only as later derivations were constructed would the shift in status lead to a visible shift in position.

4. The externalization of inﬂection in a templatic system: Cherokee inﬁnitives
The evolution of derivation into inﬂection occurs in templatic structures as well, where slots are well deﬁned. In both the Southern and Northern branches of the Iroquoian family, every indicative verb is inﬂected for aspect. Aspect is indicated by suﬃxes that occur word-ﬁnally or that are followed by just one other suﬃx. The aspectual categories in the two branches are similar but not identical. Cook (1979) analyzes North Carolina Cherokee as containing ﬁve aspects: two

246

MARIANNE MITHUN

imperfectives (often the same in form), a perfective, a stative, and a category he labels an inﬁnitive. The Northern languages show imperfectives, perfectives, and statives, but no inﬁnitive. (Stative suﬃxes are also used to mark perfects, essentially resultant states such as ‘he has arrived’ or ‘I have sat down = I am seated’.) All of the languages show a variety of forms representing each category, but certain similarities can be identiﬁed across the Southern and Northern branches: imperfectives in both contain -s, for example, and the Cherokee stative -%î corresponds in a regular way to the most common Northern stative *-oî . In both branches of the family, imperfectives and perfectives generally appear with agentive pronominal preﬁxes, while statives indicating resultant states generally appear with patient pronominal preﬁxes.
Cherokee thus shows an additional category within the aspectual paradigm not found in the Northern languages: an inﬁnitive. It is used in dependent clauses (‘for him to give it to her’) and (with a diﬀerent modal suﬃx) for potential events (‘he has to give it to her’).

(17) Cherokee inﬁnitive: Cook 1979: 96 u:n%î :-‘t-í:yi a: kwatu:liha ‘I want him to give it to her’ u:n¢%î :-‘t-i ‘he has to give it to her’

(a:kwatu:liha ‘I want it’)

Inﬁnitives show an intriguing set of allomorphs, not relatable by regular phonological rule: -ihst, -hst, -‘st, -o‘t, -‘t, -%î ht, -oht, and -ht.

(18) Cherokee inﬁnitive allomorphs: Cook 1979: 100–10

a:kík‘-ihst-i

‘I have to eat it’

a:kwahné:k-hst-i

‘I have to build it’

i:ya:kíwe-‘st-i

‘I have to say it’

a:ki:tal:k-o‘t-i

‘I have to plow’

a:kiko:lí:ye-‘t-i

‘I have to read’

a:kikohwth-¢%î ht-i

‘I have to see it’

ti:kwatshi:ló:st-oht-i

‘I have to draw’

a:khinóhé-ht-i

‘I have to tell it’

The diachronic source of the new Cherokee inﬁnitive markers can still be recovered. Among the derivational suﬃxes in the Iroquoian languages are a set of causative-instrumentals. They show a striking array of shapes, appearing in Cherokee as -ihst, -hst, -‘st, -%î hst, -o‘t, -‘t, -%î ht, -oht, and -ht, and in all of the Northern languages as -hst, -‘st, -‘t, -ht, and -hkw. They contribute either causative or instrumental applicative meanings, depending to some extent on the

THE REORDERING OF MORPHEMES

247

animacy of the introduced participant.

(19) Causative-instrumentals

a. Cherokee: Cook 1979: 138–9, King 1975: 88

kohwe:li‘sko‘i

‘he writes’

kohwe:l-é‘t-ihsko:‘i ‘he writes with it’, ‘he makes him write’

koho:hska koh-%î ht-iha

‘it (round) is falling’ ‘he is dropping it (round)’

ats%î :‘ka ats%î :‘-ihst-iha

‘it is spilling’ ‘he is pouring it out’

b. Tuscarora: Elton Greene, speaker

wah¢6î ‘q6î‘

‘it fell’

wahrá‘q6î -ht

‘he made it fall, he dropped it’

yusná:th6î : 6î ksná:th-a‘t

‘it is dry’ ‘I will make it dry, I will dry it’

y6î tshù:rih y6î tshury-á‘t-ha‘

‘one eats’ ‘one eats with it, kitchen’

c. Mohawk yohstáth%î wa‘khstátha-‘t-e‘

‘it is dry’ ‘I dried it’

yo‘s%¡î :‘%¡î wa‘kà:s%î -ht-e‘

‘it has fallen’ ‘I dropped it’

yehwistà:‘eks yehwista‘ékstha‘

‘one strikes metal’ ‘one strikes metal with it’ = ‘bell’

Because they occur in both branches of the family, we can reconstruct the causative-instrumental suﬃxes *-ihst, *-ht, *-‘t for Proto-Iroquoian. We can do even more. Languages from both branches of the family retain reﬂexes of a full verb root that was an apparent lexical source for some of the forms: *-ihst- ‘use’.

(20) Lexical source: verb root *-ihst- ‘use’ a. Cherokee: King 1975: 89 nikahlstiha ni-k-al-hst-ih-a -1:--use-- ‘it is happening’

248

MARIANNE MITHUN

b. Tuscarora: Elton Greene, speaker kíhstha‘ k-ihst-ha‘ 1:-use- ‘I use it’.
c. Mohawk kátstha‘ k-át-st-ha‘ 1:--use- ‘I use it.’

The probable antecedent of the suﬃx -(%î )ht- is retained in another Cherokee verb root: -%î ht- ‘use’.

(21) Lexical source: verb root -%î ht- ‘use’ Cherokee: King 1975: 89 k%î htihsk%î :ki ka-%î ht-ihsk-%î :ki 3:-use-- ‘he was using it’

The odd array of allomorphs exhibited by the Cherokee causative/instrumentals (and reconstructible for Proto-Iroquoian) is exactly the same as the odd array exhibited by the new Cherokee inﬁnitive. The array is too unusual for the resemblance to be due to chance. It strongly suggests that the older derivational causative/instrumental markers evolved into the new inﬂectional inﬁnitive markers. It appears unlikely that the original verb roots that served as the sources of the causative/instrumentals could have evolved directly and independently into the inﬁnitive markers, given the perfect correspondence between the arrays of instrumental and inﬁnitive forms. Furthermore, individual stems within Cherokee exhibit the same allomorphs of the instrumental and inﬁnitive suﬃxes, though the allomorphy is not phonologically conditioned. The verb root -hne:‘- ‘speak’, for example, appears with both the instrumental -ihst- and the inﬁnitive -ihst-.

(22) Same allomorphy with instrumentals and inﬁnitives:

Cook 1979: 134, 123

tsi‘ne:‘-ihst-iha ‘I am talking about it’ ()

ti:khiné:‘-ihst-i ‘I have to speak’

()

It is clear that by now, the instrumental and inﬁnitive are distinct suﬃxes. They may cooccur within a verb.

THE REORDERING OF MORPHEMES

249

(23) Cherokee instrumental with inﬁnitive: Cook 1979: 138

a:kwohwe:l-ó‘t-oht-i

‘I have to write with it’

The development of the inﬁnitive category in Cherokee may have been stimulated by language contact. The Southeast constitutes a recognized linguistic area, including not only Cherokee of the Iroquoian family, but also languages of the Muskogean and Caddoan families. Both Creek, a Muskogean language, and Caddo, a Caddoan language, contain inﬁnitives (Jack Martin p.c. and Wallace Chafe p.c.) Whatever the initial stimulus, Cherokee speakers exploited languageinternal resources for the new inﬁnitive markers. In the Iroquoian languages, morphological verbs are commonly used periphrastically as syntactic nominals, providing descriptive names of objects, such as the Mohawk tehahuî htané:k%î ’his ears are side by side’ = ‘rabbit’. No overt category shifter is necessary: morphological verbs simply function syntactically as nominals, without special marking. The instrumental suﬃx appears in large numbers of such constructions, because introduced objects have so often been described in terms of their uses.

(23) Mohawk instrumental verb as syntactic nominal yuî tkuî hsokewáhtha‘ ye-at-kuî hs-okew-ht-ha‘ :--face-wipe- ‘one wipes one’s face with it’ = ‘towel’

In all of the Northern languages, the imperfective aspect suﬃx -ha‘ in particularly common constructions of this type has been replaced with the noun suﬃx a‘. In some of the languages, the forms have been shortened, omitting the instrumental and imperfective. The Mohawk term for ‘car’, for example, probably ﬁrst coined for ‘wagon’, originated as an instrumental verb based on the root -‘sre- ‘drag’. The instrumental suﬃx is now omitted in Mohawk, though it is retained in some of the other Northern Iroquoian languages. When the noun root for ‘car’ is incorporated into another verb, however, the instrumental suﬃx must be present. There is a general grammatical requirement that only formal morphological noun stems may be incorporated. The instrumental suﬃx can now apparently function on its own as a marker of nominalization.

(24) Mohawk instrumental verb as nominal a. kà:sere‘ ka-‘sre-e‘ :-drag- ‘it drags’

250

MARIANNE MITHUN

b. *ka‘seréhtha‘

>

kà:sere

ka-‘sreh-ht-ha‘

‘car’

:-drag--

‘it is used to drag’

(cf. Cayuga k‘atréhtha‘ ‘car’)

c. ka‘serehtí:yo

ka-‘sre-ht-iyo

:-drag--be:nice:

‘it is a nice car’

(‘what is used to drag is nice’)

A number of other modern nominals in the languages show a similar pattern, though no verbal origin is now recoverable. When incorporated, they include an additional sequence identical in form to one of the instrumental suﬃxes.

(25) Mohawk nominalizers under incorporation

rúî :kwe ‘man’

ruî khwe‘tí:yo ‘he is a nice man’

áhta ‘shoe’

wahtahkwí:yo ‘it is a nice shoe’

Why should such forms evolve into inﬁnitives? Inﬁnitives in many languages serve to reify or objectify events and states, a kind of nominalizing function. This nominalizing function may have served as a semantic link between Cherokee instrumentals, frequently used in nominals, and inﬁnitives. Describing Oklahoma Cherokee, Pulte (1975) points to the match in form between certain nominals and inﬁnitives, with only a change in pronominal preﬁx.

(26) Cherokee nominalized verbs and inﬁnitives: Pulte 1975: 321

u-n%î kwalosti utuliha ‘he wants to hammer’

ka-n%î kwalosti

‘something to be hammered,

hammer’

()

Of particular interest here is the fact that the evolution from instrumental to inﬁnitive appears to have been accompanied by a drastic shift in morpheme order. The instrumental is an inner derivational suﬃx in all of the Iroquoian languages, while the aspect markers are outer inﬂectional suﬃxes. The suﬃx morphology of the two branches of the family is compared in Figure 6.

   CAUS-INSTRUMENTAL        ASPECT 
   -        


Figure 7. Suffixes

THE REORDERING OF MORPHEMES

251

(Suﬃxes are the  ‘un(do)’, - ’with’, ‘cause’,  for  ‘with’,  for - ‘for’,  for  ‘go and’,  for  ‘in order to’,  for  ‘repeatedly’,  for  ‘again’,  for ‘distributive’,  for , and  for  ‘ﬁnish’.)
Both the derivational suﬃxes and the inﬂectional aspect markers appear to have been in place in the parent language. The inner derivational suﬃxes generally appear to be cognate, though precise reconstructions are not possible given the brevity of the forms. The Cherokee reversive is -ki:-/-y- and the Northern Iroquoian counterparts *-hkwi-/-hsy-. The Cherokee dative-benefactive ‘for’ has Cherokee forms -e:-/-hsi- and Northern Iroquoian counterparts *-‘se-/ ‘s-/-ati-/-ahs-/-hse-/-7î -. The andative ‘go and’ has forms -hi-/-ihl- in Cherokee and *-h-/-hr-/-hn-/-hsr- in the Northern languages. The purposive ‘in order to’ has the form -e:- in Cherokee and -e- in the Northern languages. (This suﬃx is probably descended from the root -e- ‘go’ which retains reﬂexes in all of the modern languages.) The last derivational suﬃxes are comparable in function between the two branches of the family and show some similarity in shape, but it is diﬃcult to determine whether or not they are cognate. Cook lists the reiterative as -hi‘s-, somewhat reminiscent of the Northern Iroquoian distributives -‘s and -‘shó˛. The progressive (termed ‘ambulative’ by Cook for Cherokee) is attached to stative verbs in all languages and shows similar but not identical shapes, -i:to:-/-i:ta in Cherokee and *-atye‘ in the Northern languages, with similar meanings ‘go along …-ing’, ‘go about …-ing’.
In their development from instrumentals to inﬁnitives, the suﬃxes appear at ﬁrst to have jumped over the dative, the andative, the purposive, the reiterative, the progressive, the repetitive, and the completive, all of which precede the aspect suﬃxes. The actual mechanism was probably not a long-distance hop, however, but rather a multi-step process of reanalysis, parallel to that observed in Yup’ik. All of the derivational suﬃxes that follow the instrumental are optional; most often the instrumental is the last suﬃx in the stem. The marker probably ﬁrst began to acquire an inﬁnitival sense in its original position within the derivational morphology. As its function was generalized from that of a derivational instrumental suﬃx through that of a nominalizer to that of an inﬁnitive, it showed increasing semantic aﬃnity to the set of existing aspectual suﬃxes. At a certain point it was reanalyzed as part of the aspectual paradigm, to which it was usually adjacent. The shift in status from derivational to inﬂectional did not necessarily entail a shift in position of the marker itself. If anything, it was the boundary between derivation and inﬂection that shifted in these constructions, from the right to the left of the suﬃx. It was only when

252

MARIANNE MITHUN

new complex forms were derived, and other derivational suﬃxes were positioned to the left of the new inﬁnitive, that the reanalysis became visible.

5. Conclusion
The comparative method conﬁrms our expectation that to a signiﬁcant extent, the order of aﬃxes within words reﬂects their historical order of attachment. Those aﬃxes closest to the root were generally grammaticalized earlier than those on the periphery of the word. The comparative method also shows us some of the situations that can stimulate a change in this order. An important one is the evolution of derivational aﬃxes into inﬂection. Derivational markers are usually inner aﬃxes, occuring closer to the root, while inﬂectional markers are generally outer aﬃxes, occurring at the periphery of words. In Yup’ik, a language with layered morphology, we saw the shift of derivational nominalizers to inﬂectional mood markers. A similar situation occurred in Cherokee, a language with templatic morphology. Earlier derivational instrumental suﬃxes, whose ultimate source can be traced to verb roots meaning ‘use’, evolved into inﬂectional inﬁnitive markers, and in the process shifted their position outward, across a number of other derivational suﬃxes, to take their place within the inﬂectional aspectual paradigm. In the end, the distinction between the layered and templatic structures had little eﬀect on the processes examined here. They did not involve a simple one-stage hop across morpheme slots, but rather a reinterpretation of the boundary between derivation and inﬂection. Since none of the suﬃxes that might occur between the derivational markers in question and the ﬁnal inﬂectional markers is obligatory, the markers often appeared immediately before the inﬂectional suﬃxes, a good position for reanalysis of their status as part of the adjacent inﬂectional paradigm. It would only be when new derivationally complex forms were created that the implications of the reanalysis for morpheme order would become visible, as derivational suﬃxes were systematically added to the left of the new inﬂectional suﬃxes.
Developments such as these conﬁrm that though morpheme order may be routinized and rigidiﬁed within a language, it is not necessarily fully frozen or opaque. Speakers must still have suﬃcient access on some level to the general architecture of the morphology and the functions of individual morphemes, perhaps when they are ﬁrst learning their languages, to restore the external position of inﬂection when it is threatened.

THE REORDERING OF MORPHEMES

253

Notes

1. The following symbols are used in the practical orthography developed at the Alaska Native
Language Center and currently in wide use. There are plain stops p, t, k, q with their usual IPA values, and an aﬀricate c that varies between [ts] and [tš]. Voiced fricatives are v, s (=[z]), l, y, g (=[g]), ug (=gw), r (=t) and ur (=tw). Voiceless counterparts are written with doubled consonants: vv (=[f]), ss (=[s]), ll (=[ł]), gg (=[x]), w (=[xw]), rr (=[x» ]), and urr (=x» w).
Fricatives are automatically devoiced adjacent to voiceless segments and word-initially and -ﬁnally. There are voiced and voiceless nasals m, n, and ng (=[]]). Vowels are i, a, u, and e (=[6]).

2. Internal semantic reconstruction may also provide evidence of the relative sequence of grammaticization. As noted above, all of the Iroquoian languages contain a cislocative preﬁx *ta-/t- indicating motion directed toward some reference point (often the speaker) and a translocative preﬁx *w- indicating motion away. (The translocative has various shapes in the modern Northern languages, including y- and h-, but all of the languages contain at least relics of the earlier *w-. Thus the basic command ‘Go!’ or ‘Get away!’ in Tuscarora wá‘qeh ‘go!’, Mohawk is wá:s.) The cislocative and translocative preﬁxes seem to be perfect counterparts, just the kind we would expect to occupy the same slot in a morphological template.

(i) Cislocative *ta-/t- and translocative *w-

a. Cherokee: Cook 1979: 63, 76

a:‘i

‘he is going’

t-%î :‘i

‘he is coming’



w-a:‘i

‘he is going away’



b. Tuscarora: Elton Greene, speaker

rú:‘n6î h ‘he has thrown it’

t-hrú:‘n6î h ‘he has thrown it here’ 

we-hrú:‘nh ‘he has thrown it away’ 

Yet the cislocative is an inner preﬁx, while the translocative is an outer preﬁx. Several preﬁxes

can appear after the translocative but before the cislocative in all of the languages.

 

 TRANSLOCATIVE   CISLOCATIVE  





   TRANSLOCATIVE  
 

 

CISLOCATIVE


Figure 3. Prepronominal Preﬁxes

A comparison of the precise functions of the cislocative and translocative suggests that the diﬀerence in position reﬂects the fact that they were grammaticized at diﬀerent moments.
When the cislocative and translocative appear with verbs involving a change of location, as above, they signal direction: ‘toward’ or ‘away’. When they appear with non-directional verbs,

254

MARIANNE MITHUN

they indicate location. The cislocative indicates unspeciﬁed location, often made more speciﬁc

by another word or phrase or by context.

(ii) Cislocative

a. Cherokee: Cook 1979: 63

kato:‘ka

‘he’s standing’

ti-kato:‘ka

‘he’s standing there’

b. Tuscarora: Elton Greene, speaker

ru‘na‘níhr h

‘he is standing’

t-hru‘na‘níhr h

‘he is standing there’

When the translocative appears with verbs not involving directional motion, it has a marked

sense, specifying distant location.

(iii) Translocatives without directional motion

a. Cherokee: Cook 1979: 63

kato:‘ka

‘he’s standing’

wi-kato:‘ka

‘he’s standing over there’

b. Tuscarora: Elton Greene, speaker

ru‘na‘níhr h

‘he is standing’

we-hru‘na¡níhr h

‘he is standing over there’

Cook notes that in Cherokee, with non-motion verbs the translocative can further indicate that

the actor or the object acted on is oriented away from the speaker: wikato:‘ka ‘he’s standing

over there (facing away from me)’ (Cook 1979: 63).

The subtle diﬀerence in semantics between the cislocative and the translocative suggests that

they were not originally part of the same paradigmatic set, and not grammaticalized at the same

time. It would appear that the cislocative was ﬁrst grammaticalized with a general locative

function, one that it retains in all of the modern languages. It was not until the translocative was

added to the verbal morphology sometime later that a contrast with distal location was

established.

References
Baker, Mark. 1985. “The mirror principle and morphosyntactic explanation”. Linguistic Inquiry 16: 373–416.
Bybee, Joan. 1985. Morphology. Amsterdam and Philadelphia: John Benjamins [Typological Studies in Language 9].
Chafe, Wallace. 1967. Seneca Morphology and Dictionary. Washington D.C.: Smithsonian Institution.
Chaumonot, Pierre Joseph Marie. 1831. “Grammar of the Huron language”. Quebec Literary and Historical Society Transactions 2: 94–198. Reprinted 1920 in Alexander Fraser (ed.), Fifteenth Report of the Bureau of Archives for the Province of Ontario, 1918–1919. Toronto: Clarkson James.
Comrie, Bernard. 1980. “Morphology and word order reconstruction: Problems and prospects”. In Jacek Fisiak (ed.), Historical Morphology. The Hague: Mouton. 83–96.
Cook, William. Manuscript. “The Iroquoian Origins of the Cherokee Language: Part I: The Pronominal Preﬁxes.

THE REORDERING OF MORPHEMES

255

Cook, William. 1979. A Grammar of North Carolina Cherokee. Yale University, Ph.D. dissertation.
Fortescue, Michael, Jacobson, Steven and Kaplan, Lawrence. 1994. Comparative Eskimo Dictionary, with Aleut Cognates. Fairbanks: Alaska Native Language Center, University of Alaska.
Givón, T. 1971. “Historical syntax and synchronic morphology: An archaeologist’s ﬁeld trip”. Proceedings of the Chicago Linguistics Society 1971: 394–415.
Harris, Alice. 1997. “Order of Morphemes: Change and Maintenance”. Paper presented at the International Congress of Historical Linguistics, Düsseldorf.
Haspelmath, Martin. 1993. “The Diachronic Externalization of Inﬂection”. Linguistics 31: 279–310.
Jacobson, Steven. 1982. “Types of partial nominalization in central Yup’ik Eskimo. Etudes/Inuit/Studies 6:2.
Jacobson, Steven. 1984. Yup’ik Eskimo Dictionary. Fairbanks: Alaska Native Language Center, University of Alaska.
King, Duane. 1975. A Grammar and Dictionary of the Cherokee Language. University of Georgia, Ph.D. dissertation [University Microﬁlms 76–13,965].
Lagarde, Pierrette. 1980. Le verbe huron. Paris: Editions L’Harmattan. Lounsbury, Floyd. 1953. Oneida Verb Morphology. New Haven: Yale University Press. Meillet, Antoine 1912. “L’évolution des formes grammaticales”. Seintia (Rivista di
scienza) 12.26: 6. Reprinted 1958 in Linguistique historique et linguistique générale, Antoine Meillet. Paris: La Société de Linguistique de Paris — 8. Librairie Honoré Champion. 30–48. Michelson, Karin. Manuscript. Language Patterns in Ontario Oneida, Cayuga and Mohawk. Mithun, Marianne. 1995. “Aﬃxation and morphological longevity”. In Geert Booij and Jaap van Marle (eds), Yearbook of Morphology 1994. Dordrecht: Kluwer. 73–97. Pulte, William. 1975. “Outline of Cherokee grammar”. In Durbin Feeling (ed.), CherokeeEnglish Dictionary. Tahlequah, OK: Cherokee Nation of Oklahoma. Rice, Keren. 1991. “Predicting the order of the disjunct morphemes in the Athapaskan languages”. Toronto Working Papers in Linguistics 11(1): 99–121. Woodbury, Hanni. 1992. Concerning the League. Algonquian and Iroquoian Linguistics Memoir 9. Woodbury, Hanni. Manuscript. Language Patterns in Onondaga. To be published by the University of Toronto Press.

Language and Language Family Index

A Acehnese 211 Algonkian 168 Aluet 161, Apalaí 69, 70, 75, 81, 90, 99, 104,
201, 202, 208–210, 212, 215, 218, 219, 220, 222, 223, 230 Arawak family 32 Armenian 172–173 Athabascan 19
B Balto-Slavic 166 Baniwa 3, 7, 9, 34 Barasano 9 Bare 3, 7, 9 Basque 171 Blackfoot 168 Boumaa Fijian 11 Burmese 168
C Caddoan x, 40–42, 63, 249 Carib of Surinam (see also Kari’ña)
viii, 69, 70, 74, 89, 93, 95, 103, 227, 229 Cariban family v, viii, xi, xii, xiv, 65–72, 74, 76, 83, 87, 89–91, 93, 94, 97–100, 102, 103, 105, 198, 201, 202, 208–212, 214, 215, 217, 219, 218, 222–224, 226–230

Cayuga 40, 63, 238, 250, 255 Central Alaskan Yup’ik 232, 242 Central Pomo 211, 215, 228 Cherokee xiii, 39–43, 50–53, 63, 64,
168, 236, 238–240, 245–255 Chibchan 22 Chinese 168 Chukotian 168
D Dâw 10, 33 De’kwana 69, 70, 97, 104, 201, 229 Dyirbal 12
E East-Tucano 2–3, 7–12, 32–33 English 19, 30, 39, 52, 58, 60–64, 75,
78–80, 82, 85, 87, 88, 100, 104, 118, 119, 163, 171, 173, 175, 178, 179, 192, 255 Eskimo 161, Eskimo-Aleut 244 Eskimoan xiii, 232, 241, 242, 244 Estonian 171 Ewe 23
F Finnish 165, 171 Finno-Ugric 163–164, 169, 171 French 42, 47, 91, 171–173, 191

258

LANGUAGE AND LANGUAGE FAMILY INDEX

G Georgian 209, 211, 229 German 171–172 Greek 172–173 Guaraní 102, 103, 214
H Hixkaryana viii, 65, 69–71, 74, 76, 90,
94, 95, 97, 102, 201, 220 Hungarian 165 Hupda 10, 33 Huron 40, 42, 44, 46–48, 63, 64, 238,
254, 255
I Ikpeng 228 Indo-European family 165–166, 171,
173 Inuit 161, Iroquoian family x, xiii, 39–41, 40–47,
50, 51, 59, 61–64, 168, 235–240, 245–251, 253–255 Iroquoian-Caddoan x, 41, 42 Italian 171–172
J Japanese 162,
K Kahkwa 49 Kamchadal 168 Kari’ña 201, 202, 208–210, 212, 215,
218–220, 222, 223, 227, 228 Katxuyana 201, 209, 222, 224, 225,
229 Khoe (Central Khoisan) xii, 177,
179–183, 187–189, 191, 193–197, 199 Korean 162, Kxoe 180–189, 191–193, 195–199

L Lake Iroquoian 40, 45, 47, 46, 47 Lakhota 211 Latin 55, 166, 167, 174, 191 Laurentian 40
M Makú 2, 7–8, 10, 33–34 Makushi 69, 70, 72, 74–76, 82, 87, 99,
100, 201, 219, 222, 223, 225, 227 Mayan 229 Mohawk 40, 45, 46, 59, 63, 215, 228, 236–239, 247–250, 253, 255
N Nadëb 34 Nama 180, 182, 189–191, 198 North Arawak 2, 7–9, 11, 32, 34 Northern Iroquoian x, 39–41, 43, 44,
46, 50, 51, 59, 61–63, 236, 238, 249, 250, 251, 253
O Oneida 40, 45, 46, 61, 63, 64, 238,
255 Onondaga 40, 45, 46, 63, 238, 255
P Paleo-Siberian 165 Panare viii, ix, xiv, 67, 69, 70, 74, 77,
79–88, 93–95, 97, 99–105, 201, 209, 219, 222, 223, 225, 226, 230 Panoan 229 Pemon xiv, 69, 72, 76, 81–84, 99–101, 209 Penutian 164 Penutian, California 164 Proto-Arawak 2, 7 Proto-Carib xi, 65, 66, 70–72, 76, 79, 83, 87, 88, 90, 92, 94–98, 217

LANGUAGE AND LANGUAGE FAMILY INDEX

259

R Rama 22 Romance 173, 202, 217, 227
S Seneca 40, 45, 49–55, 57–63, 238, 254 Sino-Tibetan 168 Slavic 166, 202 Spanish 172 Stadaconan 40 Susquehannock 40, 238
T Tamanaku 201, 209 Tariana 2–35 Tatuyo 10 Thai 168 Tibetan 168 Tiriyó 69, 89–92, 94, 96, 97, 99, 100,

104, 201, 202, 207–212, 214–217, 219, 220, 222, 223, 225, 228, 230 Tucano 7, 9–12, 30–34 Tunayana 209 Tuscarora 40, 63, 238–240, 247, 248, 253, 254
U Uralic 165–166
W Warekena 3, 7, 9 Welsh 171
Y Yidiny 34 Yuit 161 Yukaghir 165

Name Index

A Abbott 45, 46, 63, 69, 72–75, 82, 87,
100, 101, 201, 229 Aikhenvald 3, 7–8, 24, 32–33 Álvarez ix, xiv, 82, 84, 100, 101 Aristar 101
B Biggar 46, 63 Bisang 33 Bresnan 101 Bopp 164, 174 Buck 174 Burzio 216, 229 Bybee viii, xiv, 6, 23, 26, 28, 36, 68,
71, 101, 103, 156, 157, 231, 232, 254
C Callaghan 164, 174 Campbell 12 Carson 101 Cartier 46, 63 Chafe x, 39–42, 55, 63, 249, 254 Claudi 1, 12, 16, 27, 29, 34, 36, 68,
71, 102, 177, 197, 199 Collinder 174 Comrie 64, 67, 102, 158, 232, 254 Cook 9, 50, 56, 63, 239, 245–249,
251, 253–255 Craig 22–23 Crowley 4

Cysouw 42, 63
D Darwin 173 Delbrück 169 Derbyshire ix, xiv, 35, 37, 65, 67,
69–71, 74, 76, 90, 92, 94, 95, 97, 98, 101, 102, 104, 220, 229 Dixon 3, 5, 11, 30, 33–37, 99, 100, 102, 164, 201, 229 Donner 163, 174 Dorian 2, 12 Downing 63, 67, 102 Dowty 210, 229 Durie 4–5, 33 Dyen 173, 174
E Emanatian 5
F Feeling 64, 255 Foley 210, 211, 229 Foster 63
G Gildea ix, x, xi, xiv, 33, 65, 67, 69,
71–75, 77, 83–86, 89–95, 97, 99, 100, 101, 103, 105, 177, 179, 188, 197, 198, 201, 227, 228, 229 Gilij 32

262

NAME INDEX

Givón vii, ix, x, xi, xii, 103, 107, 114, 122, 133, 139–141, 156–158, 197, 198, 229, 232, 255
Goddard 170, 174 Gomez-Imbert 9–10 Greenberg x, xi, 66, 103, 111, 156,
158, 161, 167, 170–172, 174, 190, 191, 198 Gyarmathi 163
H Hall 69, 70, 104, 201, 229 Harris 216, 229, 232, 255 Haspelmath 232, 240, 255 Hawkins 66–69, 101, 104 Heath 6, 33 Heine vii, viii, x, xii, xiv, 1, 6, 11, 16,
22, 23, 27, 29, 30, 33, 34, 36, 37, 104, 140, 156–159, 177, 179, 188, 191, 193, 197–199 Hiechware 181–183, 185–189, 195–197 Hoﬀ 69, 70, 74, 83, 89, 92–95, 98, 101, 104, 201, 220, 228, 230 Hopper 1, 20 Hübschmann 175 Hünnemayer 1, 12, 16, 27, 29, 34, 36, 177, 197, 199
I Itkonen 169
J Jimerson 49
K Kaufman 6 Kemmer 226, 230 Klumpp 34 Koch 34 Koehn 230

L Lord 5–6 Lounsbury 40, 63, 255 Lyell 173
M Martins 8, 10 Matisoﬀ 32, 33 Mattei Muller 230 McRobbie 163, 175 Meillet 172–173, 175 Meira x, xi, xii, xiii, 69, 89–94, 96,
97, 104, 201, 228, 230 Merlan 211, 230 Michelson 45, 64, 255 Mithun x, xiii, 40, 49–51, 53, 59, 64,
67, 104, 174, 211, 214, 215, 228, 230–232, 255 Morgan 59, 64 Mosonyi 201, 230 Muntzel 12
N Naro 180–182, 184–189, 191,
194–197, 199 Newman 170, 175 Nichols 230 Nikiforidou 27
P Paasonen 175 Pagliuca viii, xiv, 6, 23, 26, 28, 36,
102, 104 Payne, David 32, 37 Payne, Doris 67, 69, 70, 74, 76, 77,
93, 95, 98–100, 103–105, 230 Payne, Thomas 105, 223, 230 Perkins viii, xiv, 6, 23, 26, 28, 36 Perlmutter 216, 230 Pitkin 164, 175 Pullum 35, 37, 65, 69, 101, 102, 104,
229 Pulte 64, 250, 255

R Ramirez 9–10, 30–31, 33–34 Ravila 163, 175 Rice 156, 158, 231, 237, 255 Rodrigues 32 Rosen 216, 230
S Sajnovics 163 Scancarelli 43, 64 Schleicher 164, 173 Schmidt 12 Sherzer 6 Shimony 48, 49, 64 Shipley 164, 175 Simpson 34 Sorensen 7 Steinitz 169 Strahlenberg 163 Sweetser 29, 31

NAME INDEX

263

T Tavares 69, 70, 89, 92, 101, 105, 201,
230 Thomason 6, 37 Thompson 19 Thwaites 47, 64 Tooker 48, 64 Traugott 1, 6, 19–20 Trigger 47–48
U Uhlenbeck 161
V Van Valin 209–211, 214, 229, 230 Vendler 210, 214, 230
W Watkins 170, 175 West 11 Williams 201, 230 Woodbury 230, 255

Subject Index

A accent 60, 93 adjective 183, 187 agent markers 41–47 Agent/Patient see split-S aktionsart 33, 214
aktionsart clitics 2–4, 6, 8–10, 12–23, 28–30
analogy viii, 68, 84, 92, 99, 101, 112, 150, 167, 173, 240
animacy 76, 211–213, 247 areal diﬀusion see linguistic area areal typology see linguistic area aspect 2–4, 22–31, 33–35, 114–119,
136, 140, 214–216, 231, 239, 249–251 anterior 22–26, 30, 33 perfective 22, 25–26, 89–91, 122, 135–137, 140, 148–152, 215 auxiliary verb 89
B basic word order 65–68, 96, 98
and reanalysis 68, 70, 75–88 nonconﬁgurational 65, 69, 89–92
C calquing 10, 12 causative 3, 124–125, 137, 140,
207–208, 220, 246–248, 251 code-switching 60

cognate constructions 65, 85, 90, 94, 101
constituency 65–67, 69, 77, 87, 89, 92, 94, 96–99
continuum 151, 177, 244 counting 54, 57
D demonstrative 181–187, 189–192, 195,
197 derivation see morphology detransitivization 201–202, 217–227
E evidentials 8 extension 27, 41, 100, 141
G gender 3–4, 41, 44, 62, 180–199 genetic inheritance 2, 32 glottochronology 39 grammaticalization vii, 1, 3–12,
14–17, 19–23, 27–34, 108, 111, 115–117, 119–121, 138–139, 142, 155–156, 177–179, 182, 196–197, 226, 232, 237–240 and semantic change 19, 29, 229 directionality vii, 5–6 from lexicalization 58–59, 226 grammaticalization chain viii, xii, 14, 22, 177–179, 181–182, 188–189, 196–197

266

SUBJECT INDEX

grammaticalization theory vii–ix mechanism xiii, 196, 245, 251 overlapping 196 Parallel Reduction Hypothesis 6,
28–30 polygrammaticalization 22–23,
27–29, 31, 191 productivity in grammaticalization
10–12
I imperative 3, 85, 192, 195, 204–206,
241 inﬁnitives 115, 245–251 inﬂection see morphology instrumentals 246–248, 250–251 internal reconstruction viii–xiii, 92,
107–109, 111–114, 120–121, 138–139, 155 inverse inverse person-marking 92, 95, 137, 202–203, 228 inverse voice 101
J Jesuit Relations 47–48
L lexicalization 4, 53–54, 141, 224–226
and productivity 53, 59, 61, 218 and proper names 53, 57 linguistic area 1, 6–7, 249 areal diﬀusion 2, 6, 10, 31–33, 35 areal typology v, 1, 6, 33 multilingualism 1, 37 loan translation see calquing
M morphology 12, 31–32, 60, 71, 115,
119, 121–123, 137–141, 188, 201–202, 205–208, 217,

221–223, 226, 231–233, 237–240, 245, 250–255 derivation 134, 221–222, 236, 240, 244–245, 251–252 inﬂection 79, 82–83, 222, 240–252 historical connection between morphology and syntax 71, 96–97, 232 templatic ordering 235 multilingualism see linguistic area
N nominalization 72, 75–88, 100, 194,
205–206, 249 nonconﬁgurational see basic word
order noun incorporation 39–40, 49–59, 62 numeral 184–185, 189
O obsolescence 1–2, 7, 12, 32 oratory 59
P Parallel Reduction Hypothesis see
grammaticalization 6, 28–30 patients 41–47 perfective see aspect personal pronoun 188, 193–196 plausibility viii–ix, 115, 120 postposition 5, 23, 25–26, 80–83, 203 productivity 10–12, 32, 53, 59, 61,
218 pronominal preﬁxes 39–40, 46, 140,
151–152, 235, 239, 246 proper names see lexicalization prototype 122
R reanalysis viii–ix, 11, 68, 70, 75–88,
92, 229, 240, 251–252

SUBJECT INDEX

267

S semantic change 19, 29, 120, 229
speciﬁcation 19–21 serial verb constructions 4–5, 14–31 speciﬁcation 19, 21, 30, 192–194 split-S 201–208, 218, 221, 226–227
and aﬀectedness 215–216, 228 and agency 211 and aktionsart 214 and animacy 211–213 and aspect 214–216 and detransitivization 201–202,
217–227

and the Unaccusative Hypothesis 216
Agent/Patient 41 emergence of verb classes 226 switch-reference 2, 8, 11–12, 20–22,
28, 29–29, 35
V verb compounding x, 6–12, 20, 31, 32 verb phrase/VP 66–67, 71, 181, 216,
232 reconstructing 65–67, 72–88, 92–96

In the series TYPOLOGICAL STUDIES IN LANGUAGE (TSL) the following titles have been published thus far:
1. HOPPER, Paul J. (ed.): Tense-Aspect: Between semantics & pragmatics. 1982. 2. HAIMAN, John & Pamela MUNRO (eds): Switch Reference and Universal Grammar.
Proceedings of a symposium on switch reference and universal grammar, Winnipeg, May 1981. 1983. 3. GIVÓN, T.: Topic Continuity in Discourse. A quantitative cross-language study. 1983. 4. CHISHOLM, William, Louis T. MILIC & John A.C. GREPPIN (eds): Interrogativity: A colloquium on the grammar, typology and pragmatics of questions in seven diverse languages, Cleveland, Ohio, October 5th 1981-May 3rd 1982. 1984. 5. RUTHERFORD, William E. (ed.): Language Universals and Second Language Acquisition. 1984 (2nd ed. 1987). 6. HAIMAN, John (Ed.): Iconicity in Syntax. Proceedings of a symposium on iconicity in syntax, Stanford, June 24-26, 1983. 1985. 7. CRAIG, Colette (ed.): Noun Classes and Categorization. Proceedings of a symposium on categorization and noun classification, Eugene, Oregon, October 1983. 1986. 8. SLOBIN, Dan I. & Karl ZIMMER (eds): Studies in Turkish Linguistics. 1986. 9. BYBEE, Joan L.: Morphology. A Study of the Relation between Meaning and Form. 1985. 10. RANSOM, Evelyn: Complementation: its Meaning and Forms. 1986. 11. TOMLIN, Russel S.: Coherence and Grounding in Discourse. Outcome of a Symposium, Eugene, Oregon, June 1984. 1987. 12. NEDJALKOV, Vladimir (ed.): Typology of Resultative Constructions. Translated from the original Russian edition (1983). English translation edited by Bernard Comrie. 1988. 14. HINDS, John, Shoichi IWASAKI & Senko K. MAYNARD (eds): Perspectives on Topicalization. The case of Japanese WA. 1987. 15. AUSTIN, Peter (ed.): Complex Sentence Constructions in Australian Languages. 1988. 16. SHIBATANI, Masayoshi (ed.): Passive and Voice. 1988. 17. HAMMOND, Michael, Edith A. MORAVCSIK and Jessica WIRTH (eds): Studies in Syntactic Typology. 1988. 18. HAIMAN, John & Sandra A. THOMPSON (eds): Clause Combining in Grammar and Discourse. 1988. 19. TRAUGOTT, Elizabeth C. and Bernd HEINE (eds): Approaches to Grammaticalization, 2 volumes (set) 1991 20. CROFT, William, Suzanne KEMMER and Keith DENNING (eds): Studies in Typology and Diachrony. Papers presented to Joseph H. Greenberg on his 75th birthday. 1990. 21. DOWNING, Pamela, Susan D. LIMA and Michael NOONAN (eds): The Linguistics of Literacy. 1992. 22. PAYNE, Doris (ed.): Pragmatics of Word Order Flexibility. 1992. 23. KEMMER, Suzanne: The Middle Voice. 1993. 24. PERKINS, Revere D.: Deixis, Grammar, and Culture. 1992. 25. SVOROU, Soteria: The Grammar of Space. 1994. 26. LORD, Carol: Historical Change in Serial Verb Constructions. 1993. 27. FOX, Barbara and Paul J. Hopper (eds): Voice: Form and Function. 1994. 28. GIVÓN, T. (ed.) : Voice and Inversion. 1994. 29. KAHREL, Peter and René van den BERG (eds): Typological Studies in Negation. 1994.

30. DOWNING, Pamela and Michael NOONAN: Word Order in Discourse. 1995. 31. GERNSBACHER, M. A. and T. GIVÓN (eds): Coherence in Spontaneous Text. 1995. 32. BYBEE, Joan and Suzanne FLEISCHMAN (eds): Modality in Grammar and Discourse.
1995. 33. FOX, Barbara (ed.): Studies in Anaphora. 1996. 34. GIVÓN, T. (ed.): Conversation. Cognitive, communicative and social perspectives. 1997. 35. GIVÓN, T. (ed.): Grammatical Relations. A functionalist perspective. 1997. 36. NEWMAN, John (ed.): The Linguistics of Giving. 1998. 37. RAMAT, Anna Giacalone and Paul J. HOPPER (eds): The Limits of Grammaticalization.
1998. 38. SIEWIERSKA, Anna and Jae Jung SONG (eds): Case, Typology and Grammar. In honor
of Barry J. Blake. 1998. 39. PAYNE, Doris L. and Immanuel BARSHI (eds.): External Possession. 1999. 40. FRAJZYNGIER, Zygmunt and Traci S. CURL (eds.): Reflexives. Forms and functions.
2000. 41. FRAJZYNGIER, Zygmunt and Traci S. CURL (eds): Reciprocals. Forms and functions.
2000. 42. DIESSEL, Holger: Demonstratives. Form, function and grammaticalization. 1999. 43. GILDEA, Spike (ed.): Reconstructing Grammar. Comparative Linguistics and Gram-
maticalization. 2000. 44. VOELTZ, F.K. Erhard and Christa KILLIAN-HATZ (eds.): Ideophones. n.y.p. 45. BYBEE, Joan and Paul HOPPER (eds.): Frequency and the Emergence of Linguistic
Structure. 2001. 46. AIKHENVALD, Alexandra Y., R.M.W. DIXON and Masayuki ONISHI (eds.): Non-
canonical Marking of Subjects and Objects. 2001. 47. BARON, Irene, Michael HERSLUND and Finn SORENSEN (eds.): Dimensions of Pos-
session. n.y.p. 48. SHIBATANI, Masayoshi (ed.): The Grammar of Causation and Interpersonal Manipula-
tion. n.y.p. 49. WISCHER, Ilse and Gabriele DIEWALD (eds.): New Reflections on Grammaticalization.
n.y.p.

