Syntax of the Phrase Types in Canamari

by Christa Groth (New Tribes Mission)

Introduction Canamari (Kanamaré, Kanamari) is spoken by approximately 1.000 Indians located along
the upper reaches of the Juruá, Xeruá, Tarauacá, Jutai, and Itacuaí Rivers in Amazonas, Brazil. Alfred Métraux classified Canamari as Catukinan.

Bilingualism Canamari-Portuguese bilingualism is limited to the use of bartering terms or "small talk"
with Brazilians in the area, merchants and government representatives. Apart from this Canamari is spoken exclusively within the culture.
Phrases are units of modification, coordination, apposition, and preposition. Potentially they consist of two or more words, including nuclear and peripheral items. Long phrases are not common in Canamari. Usually a minimal expression of the phrase is used, i.e. item and possessor is the usual manifestation of the possessive phrase.

15. Noun Phrase Structure

15.1 Marking for case There is no direct marking on the nouns itself. However, there is an indirect marking on
the verb construction for distinguishing the syntactic functions of a noun phrase. The marking occurs with subject-function in the transitive clause.
The inflection is expressed through preverbal clitic pronouns. The pronominal bound form, which expresses agreement with the subject, occurs in word initial position.
(1) inu nhama ma- pu mawa bara far then they- eat their animal Far away then they eat their animais.

(2) Pajaham nhama tso- koni -tikok tsabo

later

then we- word -know future

Later then we will know (the) language.

If the subject is represented through a proper noun or noun phrase, the verb agreement is expressed through proclitic na-. In this construction no distinction is made between singular and plural.

(3) proper noun:
Aro na- nobu
name 3NP- reign Aro reigns.

(4) Noun Phrase singular:
atsa pamah na- tikok
my father 3NP- know My father knows (it).

(5) Noun phrase plural:
o tukuna hinuk na- wunimdak idik
other Indian plural 3-NP- remember you The other Indians remember you.
There is no marking of noun phrase in object-function.

15.2 Genitives
There is no distinction between temporary v. permanent, present v. past, specific v. nonspecific possession. However, distinction is made between alienable and inalienable possession. Inalienable possession includes human and non-human body parts, inseparable parts of things (like a handle of a basket), certain kinship terms and -wadik 'name'. Inalienable possessions are signalled by bound possessive pronouns which occur as prefixes to the possessed item. (see section 16.3)

Alienable possession is expressed through free pronouns which occur adjectivally in a possessive noun phrase construction. The possessive noun phrase consists of an optional referent, obligatory genitive and optional possession. The genitive precedes the possessed item in the noun phrase construction.

(6)
atsa hak
my house my house

inowa hak
your house your (sg) house

awa hak
his/her house his/her house

itsowa hak
our house our house

idiki nawa hak
your (pl) house your (pl) house

mawa hak
their house their house

The head of the construction (possessed item) can be optionally omitted in context, so that the genitive is the only manifestation of the noun phrase.
(7) Whose house is it? Response:
atsa
mine mine.

When the referent is represented through a singular proper noun or a noun phrase, there occurs between the genitive NP and the possessed item the NP-agreement possessive pronoun nawa.

(8) Poroya nawa

wapah

name 3NP-POS dog

Poroya's dog.

(9) inowa pamah nawa wapha your father 3NP-POS dog Your father's dog.

2

(10) ma- wabara hinuk nawa wapah their husband plural 3NP-POS dog Their husband's dog.

15.3 Modifiers

The head of a modified noun phrase can be filled by a common noun, proper noun, nominalized verb or nominalized adjective. Modifiers occur in the following obligatory ordering: demonstrative and indefinite pronouns occur adjectivally preceding the head noun.

(11) tiyam itsaroh this woman this woman

o tukuna
other man other men

Following the head are adjective, quantifier, or pluralizer.

(12) itsaroh baknim woman pretty the pretty woman

kaitsa ayuhtunim

box

lots-of

lots of boxes.

Pluralizer hinuk occurs with certain kinship terms and proper nouns, nuk occurs with other nouns which can take plural.

(13) pok nuk canoe plural the canoes

ma- wabara hinuk
their- husband plural their husbands

When pluralizer hinuk occurs with proper nouns, it changes its meaning to 'others'.

(14) Kitsarak hinuk

name

plural

Graham and the others...

A modifying numeral may precede or follow the head noun. It precedes the head when the head is represented by a common noun and follows the head when the head is represented by a compound noun or noun phrase with preceding modifiers tiyam, tuwum 'demonstratives' or o 'indefinite pronouns'.

(15) ikik a-

opu

one her- baby=son

one baby/one little boy

takara -po obowa
chicken -egg two two chicken eggs

More than one modifier may occur:

(16) tiyam itsaroh baknim this woman pretty this pretty woman

(17) tiyam itsaroh bak tihtam this woman pretty very This woman is very pretty.

anim
be

3

(18) o tukuna wamamnim other Indian strong/healthy another strong/healthy Indian

For nominalized verb or adjective as head noun see section 15.4

Relative clauses may occur as modifiers also. The head nouns precedes the relative clause. The personal pronoun anham 'he,she' also serves as the only relative pronoun in Canamari. At this point of research, it seems that only third person is relativized. See also section 16.6.

(19) inu tsirorokananim anham a- pu -nim

far type-of-grass

which he- eat -DIS

Far away is a type of grass which he eats.

The relative pronoun may also occur in sentence final position.

(20) ma- mam nimbaktih ta'anham totsawa na- nobu

-nim anham

they- do all

thing

chief

3NP- command -DIS which

They will do all things which the chief commanded.

Coordination of noun phrases is quite common in Canamari. The coordinate noun phrase consists of two or more noun phrases of equal syntactic status.
An optional grouping of all the referente may occur preceding or following the listing.
(21) preceding grouping:
ayuhtu anim dom
many are fish

listing:
mamuru, tsapakom,
matrixã, small=fish,

dom-nhanim,
cat=fish,

numoi-nuk,
tiny=fish,

kariwiri
big=fish

There are many types of fish: matrixã, a type of small fish, catfish, another type of tiny fish and a type of big fish.

(22) listing:

adu Madawí Bahi Madawi-Nhanim

I Paul

Bahi Luis

Koriya
Chico

grouping following:

tsímko na

adik a- katu anim

five

PROM we he- with be

I, Paul, Bahi, and Chico, the five of us were with him.

15.4 Nominalization There are two types of nominalization: nominalization of the verb and nominalization of
the adjective. The nominalization of verbs is manifested through verbal suffix -nham which is added to the verb stem. Nominalization is more frequent with transitive verbs. Tense and aspect
4

are not affected by nominalization. There is no restriction on the syntactic functions of these nominalized constructions on the clause level compared with the function of minimum noun phrases. They can function as subject or object in main clauses.

(23) dom -ma -nham hinuk wa- o

-ji tu da

fish -get -NOM plural O- drink -DIR ? again

The fishermen came to drink again.

(24) tso- nakibak -tu kotu anham koni- mapikam -tu -nham

we- like

-NEG also that word- hear

-NEG -NOM

We do not like that not-listener 'one who does not listen'.

(25) ihta -tsik -nham na- tatam nhama a- nobu

firewood -chop -NOM 3NP- to

then he- send

He sent them to the wood chopper.

(26) anham tori -bu -nham nawa hak tiyam anim that basket -make -NOM his house this be This is that basket maker's house.

Nominalization of adjectives is manifested by discontinuous affix a...nim. There is no restriction on the syntactic function of these nominalized constructions.
(27) a- bak -nim tso- wu NOM- good -NOM we- want The good one we want.

(28) da'am nhama a-

tsahim -nim

go=away then NOM- fat

-NOM

The fat one went away then.

(29) a-

konama -nim nawa tsawahmini

NOM- sick

-NOM his food

This is the food of the sick one.

tiyam anim
this be

16. Pronoun system Canamari employs personal, indefinite, possessive, demonstrative, interrogative, and
relative pronouns. There are neither case distinctions nor distinctions in respect to gender or person inclusive vs. exclusive.
16.1 Personal pronouns occur in free and bound form. The bound form as inflection through prefixation on the verb construction.

5

person
1st singular plural
2nd singular plural
3rd singular plural

free subject/object
adu adik idik idiki anham anham hinuk nuk

bound inflection to verb/subject
i- hi- ytsononaa- hama-

Free pronouns occur in syntactic functions as subject and object. The bound form only occurs as subject.

Free pronoun as subject:

(30) tsamahdak oma nimwu adu tsabo

clothes

buy want I future

I want to buy clothes.

Free pronoun as object:
(31) o tukuna na- wunimdak other Indian 3NP- remember Other Indians remembered you.

idik
you

Bound pronoun as subject: (32) ma- tikok -tu
they- know -NEG They do not know (it).
Personal pronouns do not occur with verbs of events of nature such as him 'to rain', wánim 'to blow/wind', or kipom'obahi 'to flower'.
Only the free form of personal pronouns occurs with intransitive motion verbs such as da'am 'to go away', dadohi 'to run', or kimhi 'to return'. Only the bound form of personal pronouns occurs with perception verbs such as -pikam 'to hear', or -hik 'to see'.
However, both free and bound form maintain reference of participants in text.
In first person narratives, free pronouns occur as first introductions of first person participants, which may be singular or plural.
(33) Tiyaham da'am adu tsabo tomorrow go=away I future Tomorrow I will go away.
After the first introduction, free pronouns can be omitted and occur only in the following situations in text:

6

1. In all clauses marked with positive evaluation particles na...tso or with progressive

aspect.

(34) damwam nhama am na

adik tso

fly

then be EVAL we EVAL

Then we flew.

(35) Kirim

-na nhama adik anhumdak anhumdak anhumdak

walk=across=land DIR then we walk

walk

walk

Then we walked over land, walked, walked, and walked.

2. As contrastive (re)introduction:
(36) Kirimi nhama dadoham ... adu -ti nhama ha'am name then go=uphill ... I -only then stay Graham went uphill ... only I stayed.

3. As re-orienting or updating identification of participants at the beginning of a new major section in discourse, i.e. leaving an established spatial setting:
(37) kimhi -na nhama adik tso return -DIR then we closure Then we returned.

4. As more participants appear at a certain place in a text, they tend to be referred to more by free pronouns: (38) Makona na- ta nhama kitam adik tso ... tsakarona
name 3NP- at then sleep we closure ... narcotic=drink
o nhama adik
drink then we We stayed overnight at Makona's place (many other Indians were there also) and
we drank narcotics.

Bound forms occur elsewhere.
In third person narratives participants are introduced by noun phrases. As long as the participant stays in focus, the noun phrase can be omitted and reference is maintained by the bound form of personal pronouns. There is no reorienting or updating of participants at new sections. However, in most cases new participants are introduced at such a point.

(39) Anim anham -ti tunim Tamakori. first he -only long=ago name

anham -ti -ti awa natsi
he -only -only his corn

a- bohi anham nhama a- pu -ti -nim anham -ti -ti

he- plant which then he- eat -only -DIS he

-only -only

First Tamakori was alone. Very much alone he planted his corn which he then ate all by

himself also.

7

16.2 Indefinite pronouns occur in Canamari only as quantifiers.

Employed are: wa'ikik 'something', oikinuk 'everyone else', and o 'others/someone else'.

(40) o

na- ama watahi hina jibo

someone=else 3NP- for water get please

Please, go and fetch some water for someone else also.

(41) da'am nhama oikinuk kotu wa go=away then everyone also future Everyone else will go away also.

16.3 Possessive pronouns occur as adjectival possessives in free and bound form. The bound occurs as prefixes to the possessed item.

possessor (person)

free possessive (alienable possession)

bound possessive inalienable possession)

1st singular plural
2nd singular plural
3rd singular plural
NP

atsa itsowa inowa idiki nawa awa mawa nawa

i- hi- ytsononaa- hamana-

The free form of possessives occurs with alienable possession in a possessive noun phrase construction (see section 15.2). The bound form occurs with inalienable possession which includes human and non-human body parts, inseparable parts of thing (1ike the handle of a basket), certain kinship terms, and -wadik 'name'.

human
ipam nopam apam tsopam idiki napam mapam

my arm your arm his/her arm our arm(s) your (pl) arms their arm(s)

animate
– –
apam
– –
mapam

its foreleg their forelegs

non-animate

– –
apam
– –
mapam

its handle their handle(s)

When a possessor is represented through a proper noun or a noun phrase, the possessed noun takes the prefix na- or free possessive nawa. No distinction between singular or plural is made.

(42) proper noun: Aro na- piya name 3NP- son Aro's son

(43) Noun phrase singular:
atsa pamah na- piya
my father 3NP- son my father's son

8

(44) Noun phrase plural:
itsaroh nuk na- tso
woman plural 3NP- daughter the daughters of the women

16.4 Demonstrative pronouns are used to indicate or specify things or persons referred to. Only tiyam 'this' and tuwum 'that' are employed and are generally defined by their nearness to the speaker. There is no distinction for number categories as for personal pronouns.

Demonstrative pronouns can be used adjectivally (see section 15.3) or independently as gestural deictics to point out objects.

(45) tiyam y- owu this I- want This (pointing to the item) I want.

(46) tuwum bak nimkanaham that good superlative That (pointing to item) is the best.

There are no reflexive or reciprocal pronouns in Canamari.

16.5 Interrogative pronouns are: hanhamtu 'what/who/whom', hanimtu 'what (re: proper noun)', hatu 'where' hanhamatu 'why', hanim na (noun) -tu 'whose' (inalienable possession), hanim nawa (noun) -tu 'whose' (alienable possession) (see section 16.3), na'animtam 'when', and naitam 'how', (see also section 10).

(47) hatu idik wa where you future Where are you going?

(48) na'animtam idik da'am wa

when

you go=away future

When are you going?

16.6 Relative pronouns relate a subordinate clause to a phrase or clause. Only anham is used, covering the areas of meaning of 'who/whom/what/which', and 'that'. (see also section 15.3)

(49) ma- mam nimbaktih ta'anham totsawa na- nobu

-nim anham

they- do all

thing

chief

3NP- command -DIS which

They will do all things which the chief commanded.

Anham may also be employed to relate a complement clause to the main clause.

(50) A- wunimdak a- piya na-

ama a- tohoki -nham anham

he- remember his- son 3NPPOS for he- say

-NOM what

He remembered what he had said to his son.

17. Adpositional phrase structure All adpositions are postpositions in Canamari. The postpositional phrase consists of a
proper noun or a noun phrase followed by a postposition.
Two sets of postpositions take inflection signalled through person prefixation:

9

Person prefixes are a follows:

1st person

singular plural

2nd person

singular

plural

3rd person

singular plural

i- hi- ytsononaa- hama-

The inflected postposition may occur without noun phrase: (51)

(51) Homara -pa nimwu adu no- katu

toy

-play want I you- with

I want to play with you.

In one set of the postpositions the meaning is changed through the inflection:

with inflection

without inflection

-ama 'for'

benefactive

ama 'for'

-ta 'of/from' source

ta

'at'

-tom 'to'

transference

tom 'on'

-katu 'with'

accompaniment

katu 'with'

(co-agent/patient)

-wa- 'with'

accompaniment

wa- ' alongside'

(walking only)

(wa- obligatorily suffixes -na or -ji 'direction of motion'

purpose/specification location location instrument
riverbank/path

(52) Kati na- katu pamah wa- o

kotu

name 3NP- with father O- drink also

Father and Kati drank it.

(53) tsowi katu mi owurahi axe with hole chop (He) chopped a hole with an axe.

With the exception of -wa 'with' inflected postpositions can be incorporated into the verb construction (see also section 18.7).
In another set of postpositions, the meaning is not changed through inflection. Part of this set obligatorily takes directional suffixes -na and -ji 'direction of motion'.

postposition
naki to towi konamtom omkana pori
opoto-

'in' 'in' 'beside' 'beside' 'in front' 'behind' 'under '

location location Iocation location location location location

suffix -na/-ji
yes no no no no yes yes

10

postposition
takoda okotutu
pato-
tatam
motsa-

'between' 'above' 'to' 'to' 'behind'

location location direction direction position/time

suffix -na/-ji
yes yes yes no yes

Postpositions can also express direction of motion. Some have inherent direction of motion, i.e. tatam 'to' implies direction of motion away from the spatial setting.

(54) atsa nhama na- tatam nhama a- na adu wa

my mother 3NP- to

then go DIR I future

I will go to my mother.

(55) inowa hak tatam nhama a- na adu wa

your house to

then go DIR I future

I will go to your house.

Other postpositions are without inherent direction in the stem and obligatorily suffix -na and -ji to express a variety of relationships, i.e. pato- 'to'.
(56) destination of motion:
Jaimi na- pato -na nhama a- nobu
name 3NP- to -DIR then he- send Then he sent (us) to Jim.

(57) location:
hak pori -na
house behind -DIR There behind the house.

hak pori -ji
house behind -DIR Here behind the house.

(58) position and time:

motsa- 'behind/later' is ambiguous as to locational or temporal reference. It has a meaning of 'behind' when it refers to position and a meaning of 'later' when it refers to time:

motsa -na
behind -DIR-away Walk behind someone going away/
arrive there later.

motsa -ji
behind -DIR-toward Walk behind someone coming here/
arrive here later.

(59) Means of travel:

The postpositions naki 'in' and tom 'on' with directional suffixes -na and -ji express direction of motion combined with the means of travelling:

pok naki -na
canoe in -DIR go away by canoe

omam tom -na
wood on -DIR go away on crutches

11

The third set of postpositions take neither inflection nor suffixation for direction of motion.

They are as follows:

orom ikina patom wakonaki tsinaki tatamnim

'with' 'with' 'on top of something' 'middle of something/inside' 'middle of river/path' 'from'

accompaniment (in respect to food) accompaniment (mixed into/with food) location location location direction

(60) bari paranim pu na

adik tso tawabi orom

banana ripe

eat EVAL we closure farinha with

We ate ripe bananas with farinha.

(61) atsóka ikina nhama tso- mam, tso- mirikmirik sugar with then we- do, we- knead Then we put in sugar, we kneaded it (into the dough).

Postposition phrases can be modified by the suffix -ti 'only' which occurs on the postposition. Exceptions are orom/ikina 'with' and tatamnim 'from'.

(62) Kariwa koni katu -ti am na

nuk i- katu -hoki

Brazilian word with -only be EVAL they I- with -speak

Only in Portuguese did I converse with the others (them).

18. Verb or Verb phrase structure In Canamari verb structure subject, action before motion, oblique object, direct object can
be expressed through prefixation to the verb stem in that order, however, no more than three prefixes can co-occur. Intransitive verbs do not take any prefixation. The incorporation of direct object and postpositions affects the valency of the verb. (see section 18.5)
Motion/direction, distributive/continuative/repetitive aspect, -ti 'only', and either negative or intentive mood occur as suffixes to the verb stem, again in the order listed. No more than three suffixes can co-occur. As ambifixes occur the adverbs 'always' tu-(verb stem)-ti and 'never' tu-(verb stem)-tu.
The verb phrase, which functions as the predicate of a clause, typically consists of a head followed by adverbial modifiers, non-inflected verbs(s) and enclitics of tense/aspect/mood. If modifier ariki 'nearly' occurs, it precedes the head. Modifier panim 'already' may precede or follow the head.
This overall pattern of the verb phrase can be formulated as follows: (adv. modifier) indep. verb (adv. modifier) (non-inflected verb) (adv. modifier) (enclitic of tense/ aspect/mood). The components following the head of the verbal phrase occur either contiguously to the verb or in clause final position. Examples to illustrate this are given in the respective categories.
A second overall pattern is simply a cluster of independent verbs.
12

(63) Kirim-na

nhama adik anhumdak anhumdak anhumdak

walk=across=land-dir then use walk

walk

walk

'Then we walked over land, walked, walked and walked.'

(64) ta'anham nuk -ti am ma- mam wa- pu -nim wa- o

thing

plural -only be they- do O- eat -DIS O- drink

ohuk
get=married (These) things only they do. (They) eat, drink, and get married.

18.1 Canamari does not have tense in the sense of verbal inflection. Time words, time phrases, particles and contextual clues are the devices of relating the time of action, event or state of affairs referred to in the sentence to the time of utterance 'now'.

Distinction is made between future and non-future in that only future has clause final tense particles. Non-future, past and present, are only marked through time words or time phrases which usually occur in clause initial position. A very distant past (historical time) is marked through tobowa in clause medial position. Besides time words and time phrases, future may also be marked with particles tsa or wa in clause final position. However, not all clauses with future meaning have a particle or time word. tsa is employed at the beginning of a future oriented text and occurs within the text when "new information" is introduced. Wa occurs at other times when the narrator chooses to verify that the event will take place in the future. (Further research needs to be done on particles tsa and wa).

(65) Tiyahamtam na

awiyaum wauk -ji nimkimam

early/morning PROM airplane arrive -DIR quickly

Early in the morning the airplane arrived. (Only through context is it known that the

airplane had arrived, brought visitors and had left again).

(66) pidah -ti am tobowa watahi warah tu tso tiger -only be historical water own ? closure In ancient times only the tiger owned the water.

(67) Tiyaham tso

-pu -na adik tsabo

tomorrow pupunha -eat -DIR we future

Tomorrow we will go away to eat pupunha.

(68) Tú adik tso

-pu -na wa

there we pupunha -eat -DIR future

Far away we will go to eat pupunha.

18.2 Aspect
1. Distributive aspect describes some activity dispersed in space or time, i.e. distributive in space or continuative in time. It is signalled through the verb suffix -nim. The narrator may

13

choose to view an event from two different directions. He may see the action as an event to which different actors contribute:

(69) bak tihtam na

nuk bo haihai -pa -nim

good very PROM they do chant -sing -DIS

They sang the chants very well.

One action: singing, chanting Different actors: many Indians

The narrator may see a single actor carrying out a distributive action. The actor might, for example, share or divide something among several or many; or he might also impart or communicate information to several or many:

(70) i- pu -tu nhama i-da-

nuhuk -nim dom miwara

i- eat -NEG then I-before=leaving- give -DIS fish type=of=fish

ma- tom
they- to I did not eat then. Before leaving I gave my fish miwara to them.

One actor: narrator (in this text) Distributive action: give away fish to many

Or alternatively, the narrator may choose to express the distributive idea in reference to time only.

(71) Tatamtih ha'a -nim am na

adu tso

there

stay -DIS be EVAL I EVAL

There I stayed (for several days and nights).

2. Perfective aspect is signaled by the unmarked form of the basic verb. It neither describes duration of an event nor focuses on a specific part of it. Instead, the event is viewed as a whole unit.

(72) adu nhama tam totikik awiyaum naki

I then here enter

airplane in

Then here I entered (got into) the airplane.

3. Iterative aspect occurs only as explanatory information of a main event in discourse. The action verb occurs in the main event line in its basic form (without aspect suffix) and is then repeated three times, employing the suffix -nim.
(73) bohi nhama bohi -nim bohi -nim bohi -nim plant them plant -REP plant -REP plant -REP Then (they) plant, plant, plant and plant.

4. Progressive aspect describes an uninterrupted activity which is extensive in time and increases in difficulty as the action is progressing. Progressive aspect occurs as explanatory

14

information in discourse and is signaled by repeating the verb in its basic form two or three times.

(74) kirim

-na nhama adik anhumdak anhumdak

walk=across=land -DIR then we walk

walk

Then we walked over land, walked, walked and walked.

5. Recurrent aspect is employed when a previous action recurs. It occurs in the main event line of narrative discourse.

(75) tú Tsirimkau-Nówo kitam kotu da

there name-of-place

sleep also again

There at Seringal Novo (we) slept again.

18.3 Mood/Modality

1. Indicative mood is signalled by lack of morphological mood marklng and by indicative intonation which is characterized by a falling pitch on the last syllable of the indicative clauae.

(76) kitsarak hinuk -ti dam tom tóna

name

plural -only trail on stay=overnight

Only Graham and the others stayed overnight on the trail.

2. Dubitative mood expresses a doubt or lack of sureness as to whether an action has taken place, is taking place, or will take place. It also expresses doubt in regards to knowledge about a fact. Doubt about actions in the past and present are expressed through nihu; doubt about future actions is expressed through niwahu. Both are sentence-final particles.

(77) kaki naki tu na

nihu

break inside – PROM dubitative

It seems it is broken inside. (referring to a thorn in the foot).

(78) anim pok warah -tu amti adik niwahu first canoe have- NEG be we dubitative (I) doubt that we will have a canoe at first.

3. Intentive mood expresses determination as to what one purposes to do. It is signaled by the verb suffix -hu.

(79) mawa hunu'am ma- bu -hu

their flute

they- make -intentive

They intended to make their flutes.

4. Contrafactive mood expresses the idea that the actual fact is contrary to whatever was expected to exist or to happen. In other words, whatever the opinion was as to an expected event or state, it was mistaken. It is signalled by the particle ru which follows directly after the element which expresses the expected event or state.

15

(80) itsonim pajati

am -ti ki

ru

tu tso

world only=one=type be -only PROM contrafactive ? closure

We were the only ones in this world. (we thought, but we were mistaken)

5. Imperative mood contains jussive, polite, prohibitive and hortative as subdivisions. The imperative is the mood of an utterance which expects an activity as its response. Jussive (peremptory) mood is signalled by the particle tso. (see section 11)
(81) da'am tso go=away jussive Go away!

Polite imperative mood is signalled through the particle jibo 'please '
(82) da'am jibo go=away please Please, go away!

The prohibitive imperative mood is signalled through the auxiliary verb nimwu 'want' and future particle tsa. Even though no negative is expressed overtly, a negative meaning of 'don't' is implied.

(83) jam

nimwu idik tsa

run=away want you future

Don't you run away.

Hortative imperative mood is signalled through the particle tso also. However, the speaker includes himself choosing first person plural as the subject.
(84) kirak, natsi hi -na adik tso, ija name corn get -DIR we hortative brother Kirak, let us go and get corn, brother.

6. Interrogative mood consists of polar and non-polar questions. Polar questions are signalled by the particule ki preceding the subject of the clause. (see section 10)
(85) wa- pu ki idik object- eat polar you Do you eat?

Non-polar questions are manifested by question words, which occur in clause initial position.

(86) hanhamtu tso- ma -nim wa Tamakori

what

we- do -DIS future (name)

What are we going to do, Tamakori? (see also section 16.5)

16

18.4 Person, Number and Gender. Verb agreement is in the categories of person and number. Person categories are first,
second, and third person; number categories are singular and plural. There is no other agreement such as gender. Person markers occur as free and bound pronouns. (see also section 16.1) The bound form occurs as inflection through prefixation to the verb. Person and number agree with the subject. (87) tsowunimdak idiki tsabo
we-remember you (pl) future We will remember you (plural). (88) a- nakibak tihtam adik tso he- like/love very we closure He likes us very much. If the subject occurs as a full noun phrase, the agreement prefix is na. In this construction, no distinction is made between singular and plural. (89) proper noun:
Aro na- tikok nimbaktih
(name) 3NP know all Aro knows {it) all. (90) singular: NP:
atsa pamah na- kanaro -titok
my father 3NP remember we Other Indians remember us. Neither direct object, indirect object, nor any other grammatical relation besides subject is cross-referenced by verbal agreement. 18.5 Valency and valency changes The three types of verbs intransitive, transitive, and distransitive undergo valency changes through prefixation, suffixation, and incorporation. Both raising and lowering valency occurs.
17

RAISING VALENCY

(1) -tiki/-mam/-bu

(3) incorp. of postposition

(2) -tiki/-mam/-bu

adj.

(6) incorp.

vt (+oblique) vi

vi (+oblique)

of

obj.

of

(4) wa-

postposition

(5) incorp. of dir. obj.

LOWERING VALENCY

Mechanisms affecting valency

For the purpose of investigating mechanisms affecting valency, it is convenient to temporarily ignore the question of whether oblique arguments that occur with (otherwise) intransitive or transitive verbs are obligatory, because these mechanisms operate on both obligatory and optional oblique arguments. This treatment, therefore, does not distinguish between ditransitive verbs (which have both an obligatory direct object and an obligatory oblique argument object) and transitive verbs with an optional oblique argument; both would be vt + oblique.

18.5.1 Certain adjectives can be made into a transitive verb, adding an agent, by combining with either the causative suffix -tiki or one of the stems -bu or -mam 'make'.

(92) bak beautifu1/nice

bak ki

am omam

good PROM be log

The log looks nice.

omam i- bak

-tiki

log I- beautiful/nice- cause

I cause the log to look nice (I squared the log)

(93) bakna well (re: health)

bakna ki

am tukuna

well PROM be Indian

The Indian is well.

tukuna -bauh

na- bakna -tiki tukuna konamanim

Indian -witch=doctor 3NP- well- cause Indian sick

The witch doctor cures sick Indians.

(94) nok 'angry'

nok ki

am atsa

angry PROM be my

My dog is angry

wapah
dog

18

opatsim na- nok -bu atsa wapah tso

child

3NP- angry -make my dog closure

The child made my dog angry.

(95) tsuram 'dry'

tsuram ki

am bara -hai

dry

PROM be wild -meat

The wild meat is dry.

burihnim to nhama bara -hai ma- tsuram -mam

sunshine in then wild -meat they- dry

-make

(A long time ago) they dried the wild meat in the sun.

18.5.2 Similarly, an intransitive can be made into a transitive verb, adding an agent, by combining with either the causative suffix -tiki or one of the verb/stems -bu or -mam 'make'.

(96) timhi

nhama awiyaum

come=down then airplane

The airplane comes down/lands.

piróto na- timhi

-mam -dak

nhama awiyaum

piloto 3NP- come=down -make -while=going then airplane

The pilot made the airplane come down (slowly) (preparing to land).

(97) omotoh -tu nhama awa tsamahdak

fit

-NEG then her clothes

Her clothes do not fit correctly.

a- motoh

-bu nhama awa tsamahdak

she- fit=correctly -make then her clothes

She made her clothes fit correctly.

(98) kitam opatsim ki

am

sleep child

PROM be

The child sleeps.

a- kitam -tiki nhama opatsim
she- sleep -cause then child She caused the child to sleep.

18.5.3 An intransitive verb with an oblique object can, if the postposition is of the inflectable kind, (see section 17), be made into a transitive verb by incorporating the postposition; the oblique object of the intransitive verb becomes the direct object of the transitive verb. As a result, the transitive verb contains a morphological signal of the case-role of its direct object. This mechanism is obligatory. Starred (*) examples are ungrammatical.

(99) hoki nhama Tamakori speak then (name) Then Tamakori spoke.

* a- hoki nhama i- tom
* we- speak then I- to Then he said to me.

19

a- to- hoki nhama adu
he- goal- say then I Then he said to me.

(100) hoki nhama adu speak then I Then I spoke.

* i- hoki nhama Hobíto na- katu
* I- speak then name 3NP- with Then I conversed with Robert.

tatamtih nhama Hobíto i- katu -hoki

There

then Robert I- with -speak

There then I conversed with Robert.

(101) jam

nhama itsaroh

run=away then woman

The woman ran away.

* a- jam nhama tso- ta
* she -run then we- off She ran away from us.

a- ta- jam

nhama adik

she- source- run=away then we

She ran away from us.

18.5.4 A transitive verb can be made into an intransitive verb, losing its direct object, by incorporating the dummy object prefix wa-. No patient is then referred to.

(102) tsamahdak koji nhama Komoko

clothes

wash then name

Komoko washed clothes then.

wa- koji ki

am

O- wash PROM be

She is washing.

(103) tatamtih nhama ma- pu bari

there

then they eat banana

There then they ate bananas.

wa- pu nhama nuk
O- eat then they Then they ate.

18.5.5 Similarly, a transitive verb can be made into an intransitive verb, by incorporating its direct object noun, if that object is nonreferential (nonspecific). In that case, this mechanism is obligatory.

(104) i- tikok no- koni I- know your- language I know your language.

i- koni

-tikok

I- language- know

I know (a/the) language.

(105) bara -wadik nhama Tamakori na- banimam

animal -name then name

3NP- mix=up/change

Tamakori mixed up/changed the names of the animais.

Tamakori na- wakik -banimam

name

3NP- name -mix=up/change

Tamakori did some name- changing.

20

18.5.6 An intransitive verb with an oblique object of range can incorporate that oblique object (the object of a inflected postposition); it remains intransitive. This mechanism is obligatory if the oblique object is nonreferential (nonspecific).

(106) Paramtsítsiko na- kanaro -bu i - pan tom

name

3NP- design- make my- arm on

Francisco wrote (made designs) on my arm.

Paramtsítsiko na- pam -kanaro -bu

name

3NP - arm -design- make

Francisco wrote (made designs) on arm(s).

18.5.7 These valency-affecting mechanisms can be applied successively on a verb.

(107 a)

tiyam kanaro baknim nhama Paramtsítsiko na- bu i-

this design good then name

3NP- make my

pam tsuruh tom

arm left

on

Francisco made this good design on my left arm.

(107 b)

Paramtsítsiko na- kanaro -bu

name

3NP- design -make

Francisco made designs ou my left arm.

i- pam
my- arm

tsuruh tom

left

on

(107 c)

Paramtsítsiko na- pam -kanaro

name

3NP- arm design

Francisco made design(s) (on) arm(s).

-bu
make

18.5.8 There are no passives in Canamari.
18.6 Other Catagories
18.6.1. Adverbial modifiers Verbs can be modified by adverbs. ariki 'nearly/just about' occurs preceding the head
verb; panim 'already' may occur in pre- or postverbal position.

(108) ariki taitam japa anha nearly arrive/come clan woman The clan=woman nearly arrived. / She was just about to arrive.
(109) panim kimhi -na already return -DIR (They) already left/returned.

21

(110) mawa homo

ma- totsik -na panim

their hammock -they- fasten -DIR already

They fastened their hammocks already.

(111) tsuku nimwuti Ita'i die nearly name Ita'i nearly died.

(112) ma- tikok nimbak they- know certainly They certainly knows (it).

(113) da'am

nimkimam

leave/go=away quickly/soon

(They) left quickly. / They left soon.

18.6.2. Prominence-indicating particles ki and na.

The particle ki gives prominence to one element in a clause expressing a concept. The particle na gives prominence to a whole clause expressing an event. Even though both particles need to be seen in context, they are included here as isolated examples, as they are also part of the verb phrase construction.

(114) nuhuk ki

nhama jinhíro wa- mam a- hom

give/sell PROM then money o - make it-exchange

I will sell it in exchange for money. (usually this product is made for private

use only)

(115) tú

nhama adik dom -ma -na na

adik

there/far then we fish -get -DIR PROM we

There we were, we fished.

(Usually fishing is an every-day-activity. Here is a special occasion described:

after a strenuous trip over several weeks, fishing seemed to be a welcome activity.)

18.6.3 Motion categories.
Verbs can also be categorized into motion and non-motion verbs. Motion verbs can be subdivided into verbs with inherent direction of motion in the stem i.e. dadoham 'go up steps', or verbs without inherent direction in the stem, which obligatorily suffix one of the directionals -na or -ji 'away from or towards a spatial setting', i.e. to -na 'go away', to -ji 'come here'. A set of non-motion verbs takes suffixes of directions -na and -ji to imply prior motion in the direction of the location where the action is expected to take place; i.e. oma-ji 'come here to buy'. The same set of verbs may also take suffixes -dak and -dakji expressing motion simultaneous with action of the verb; i.e. ohik-dak 'search while going', ohik-dakji 'search while coming'. The directional system, which is rather involved, is discussed in detail in Here and There in Canamari, Groth, 1977,

22

18.7 Incorporation. See section 18.5 Valency and valency changes.

18.8 Auxiliary verb system
10.8.1 Auxiliary verb nimwu 'want' occurs in the verb phrase construction following the head. Nimwu expresses a wish or desire in respect to an action or state. ('to want something tangible' is expressed through the verb owu, i.e. paum owu adu 'bread want I').
Nimwu takes the suffixation of the head verb of a verb construction.
(116) paum oma nimwu adu tso bread buy want I closure I want to buy bread.

(117) da'am nimwu -tu tukuna tso go=away want -NEG Indian closure The Indian does not want to go.

(118) tukuna nhama i- katu -hoki nimwu -nim Indian then I- with -talk want -DIS I want to converse with the Indians.

(119) watahi o

nimwu -ti adu

water drink want -only I

I only want to drink water.

The verb phrase may also be expanded through further adverbial modifiers.

(120) a- dahu

nimwu dirim

he- take=away want very=much

He wants very much to take it away.

Nimwu may be dislocated to the right if the narrator chooses to modify the head verb of the verb phrase.
(121) a- tikok nimbak nimwu dirim he- know certainly want very=much He wants very much to know for sure.

18.8.2 Auxiliary verb nhohimtu 'not able to' occurs in the verb phrase constructions following the head verb. Nhohimtu expresses a natural lack of sufficient power, resources, or capacity. It shows the inability of the actor to perform a certain action, that is, it expresses limitation in nature.

(122) tso- kajohdak -puni nhohimtu na

amtinim

we- placenta -remove not=able=to PROM NEG=EVAL

We were not able to remove the placenta.

18.8.3 Auxiliary verb am 'be' is the main copulative or equative verb. Its main function is to relate other elements, especially subject and complement.
23

(123) nok ki

am

angry PROM be

(He) is mad/angry.

Am occurs with distributive suffix -nim 'distributive in space and continuative in time. It becomes anim and occurs as copulative verb.
(124) Horom anim burihnim hot be=DIS sunshine It is hot in the sunshine.

Am also take negative suffixes -tu or -tamtam.

(125) Batih am -tu Tamakori today be -NEG name Not today, Tamakori.

(126) tukuna -naham am -tamtam Indian -less be -NEG There are not very few Indians.

Am occurs with suffix -ti 'only'

(127) tsawahmini ohik ki

am -ti kotu

food

search PROM be -only also

He is only looking for food also.

Am occurs with anim in tailing. It takes sentence final position for clarification and identification of participants in cases of potential ambiguity.

(128) ..., am na

tukuna anim

..., be PROM Indian be

..., It is the Indian (meaning: it is still the Indian I am talking about.

Am occurs in verb phrase constructions with positive evaluation marker na ... tso, which combines highlighting of an event with the personal involvement of the speaker or participant in focus.

(129) To dajoram am na

adik tso

inside enter

be EVAL we EVAL

We went inside (the airport building).

Am occurs in verb phrase constructions with future marker tsa/-wa

(130) doi jíya nhama tatamtih am adik tsa

two day then there

be we future

There we will be for two days.

(131) i- paka -na nhama a- warah na- tom am wa I- leave -DIR- then its- owner 3NP- at be future I will leave (it) with its owner.

Am occurs with historical time marker tobowa

24

(132) o paiko -ti ya -tu am tobowa

tso

other man -only afraid -NEG be historical=time closure

One other man only was not afraid.

The unmarked order is am tobowa. However, in verb phrase constructions with ki 'prominence' (see section 18.6) or with dirim 'very much', am occurs in verb phrase-final position.

(133) ihtakirakom komhu ki

tobowa am

otter

lie

PROM historical be

The otter lied.

Am occurs as closure of direct speech in historical text.
(134) ..., am tobowa kodakpaja ..., be historical vulture ..., said the vulture.

Further research on am remains to be done.

19. Adjective phrase structure An adjective phrase consists of the adjective and optional modifiers which follow it.
There are two types of adjective modifiers: intensifying adverbs and the superlative.

19.1. Intensifiying adverbs.

Adjectives with an intensifying adverb can occur either in a noun phrase construction or a descriptive clause.

(135) Animtam nok tihtam nhama a- wahara ...

then

angry very then her- husband ...

Then her husband is very angry.

(136) Pajaham nhama waik bak tihtam tso- pa -nim

later

then song good very we- sing -DIS

Later then we sang very good songs.

(137) wah nhanim tintam ki

am

lake big

very PROM be

It is a very big lake.

(138) tomah tihtam nimbak

anham tori am tso

heavy very certainly/really that basket be closure

That basket is certainly very heavy.

19.2. The superlative. This modifier is the enclitic nimkanaham 'superlative'.

25

(139) kodoh nimkanaham Dori anim tall superlative name be Dori is the tallest.
(140) tiyam bak nimkanaham anim this good superlative be This (pointing) as the best. (tiyam is in focus here)

20. Adverb phrase structure There are two types of adverb phrases: the adverb time phrase and the adverb location
phrase.
20.1. The adverb time phrase occurs as a modified phrase or in the construction with enclitic particles nim...anim 'when'.
20.1.1 The modified adverb time phrase consists of an adverb of time optionally followed by another adverb as modifier. The adverb time phrase occurs in clause-initial or clause-final position.
(141) bakna adu tso batih well I closure now I am well now (after being sick).
(142) tiyahamtam nimbak dom -ma -na adik tsabo tomorrow=early really fish -get -DIR we future Tomorrow morning real early we will go fishing.

20.1.2 The adverb time phrase occurs also in a construction with enclitic particles -nim ... anim 'when'.
The head adverb occurs in phrase initial position.
(143) otiya -nim anim haihai -pa nhama adik evening when when chant -sing then we When it is evening we chant.

This construction can be expanded by embedding a noun phrase.

(144) batih -nim wuni opurudak anim tukuna bauhnim tokak

now -when river dried=up when Indian field

cut-underbrush

Now, in dry season, Indians cut the underbrush in their (new) fields.

20.2. The adverb location phrase consists of an adverb optionally followed by the postposition katu 'with'. The adverb location phrase occurs in sentence initial position

(145) tatamtih katu nhama Tsamta Maríya wauk -na

there

at then (name- of-place) arrive -DIR

There at Santa Maria we arrived then.

26

ABBREVIATIONS

3NP 3NPPOS DIR DIS EVAL NEG

3rd person noun phrase agreement 3rd person noun phrase possessive direction distributive aspect evaluation negative

NOM NP O POS PROM REP

nominalizer noun phrase object possessive prominence repetitive

ACKNOWLEDGEMENT
This paper was written at a linguistic workshop of the Summer Institute of Linguistics under the direction of Dr. Desmond Derbyshire of the Summer Institute of Linguistics. The workshop was held in Porto Velho, Rondônia, Brazil, during September through November 1984.
The author wishes to thank Dr. Derbyshire for theoretical orientation, Dr. Robert A. Dooley, not only for theoretical orientation, but also for valuable suggestions in the preparation of this paper, and Miss Tine van der Meer for encouragement and help. The author is indebted to Mr. David Fortune who gave appreciated help in preparation of this paper on the computer.
The author is also indebted to Katu and Hidoni who provided the texts on which this analysis is based.
REFERENCES
COMRIE, BERNARD, 1981, Language Universals and Linguistic Typology, The University of Chicago Press
DIXON, R. M. W., 1979 Ergativity, LANGUAGE, Vol. 55, No. 1, March 1979
GROTH, CHRISTA, 1977, HERE and THERE in Canamari, ANTHROPOLOGICAL LINGUISTICS, May 1977
–––––, 1979, Prominence, Evaluation, and the Use of tso in Canamari (to appear)
–––––, 1979, Mood and Aspect in Canamari Discourse (to appear)
LEHMANN, WINFRED P., Syntactic Typology, University of Texas Press
MALLISON, GRAHAM, and BLAKE, BARRY J., 1981. Language Typology, North Holland Linguistic Series 46. Amsterdam.

27

