DIRECTIONALS VERSUS ASSOCIATED MOTIONS IN CAVINEÑA

Antoine Guillaume University of Oregon

This paper is an attempt to analyze1 some verbal inﬂections having to do with notions of motion in Cavineña, an Amazonian language of the Takanan family, spoken in northern Bolivia.
The study is based on a corpus of 23 texts that I personally collected and transcribed from three different native speakers (four months of ﬁeldwork in summer 1997 and summer 1998).
Cavineña is a highly agglutinative language in terms of its verbal morphology. Among the many possible inﬂections a verb can take, many have to do with notions of motion. An example of a verb inﬂected with motion morphemes is given in (1) below2:

(1) tudya ike

taraka-ju bade-tsura-diru-kware

then 1sing.abs coral-loc perch-upward-while.going.back-past

‘Then, I perched up on the corral while I was going back.’

In the data, I found a total of thirteen different motion inﬂections. The purpose of this paper is an attempt at analyzing seven of them3. The seven inﬂections are given in Table 1 (overleaf). I will give evidence that these seven motion inﬂections can be further subdivided into two sets: a ﬁrst set labeled associated motions and a second set labeled directionals.
In order to better understand the discussion of motion inﬂections, I will ﬁrst give basic information about the morpho-syntactic structure of Cavineña.

1. general morpho-syntactic facts about cavineña. Cavineña is an ergative language. The ergative argument is case-marked by the morpheme -ra. The absolutive argument is unmarked. There are no cross-referencing afﬁxes or clitics in the verb. As an illustration, consider the following pair of examples, the ﬁrst one transitive, the second intransitive:

(2) Roberto

etare-ju

judiru-kware

Roberto.abs house-loc arrive-past

‘Roberto arrived at the house.’

(intransitive)

(3) Roberto-ra Rosa

riwi-sha-jeri-nuka-kware (transitive)

Roberto-erg Rosa.abs fall-caus-almost-iterative-past

‘Roberto almost made Rosa fall again.’

146

-tsura -bute -ti -na -nati -diru -eti

‘upward’ ‘downward’ ‘go and do’ 4 ‘come and do’ ‘do while going’ ‘do while going back’ ‘do while coming back’

Table 1. Cavineña set of motion inﬂections.

antoine guillaume

Set 1: Directionals -tsura ‘upward’ -bute ‘downward’

Set 2: Associated motions

-ti

‘go and do’

-na ‘come and do’

-nati ‘do while going’

-diru ‘do while going back’

-eti ‘do while coming back’

Table 2. Directionals and associated motions in Cavineña.

Word order is ﬂexible but SOV seems the unmarked order as in the example (3). Also Cavineña has further features often associated with SOV languages such as postpositions, possessor-possessed order, verb-auxiliary order, as well as a propensity to sufﬁxation as opposed to preﬁxation.
Finally, a ﬁnite verb in Cavineña minimally consists of the root followed by a tense sufﬁx as in (2). Potentially, other sufﬁxes—including the motion inﬂections to be discussed—can attach to the root which yields highly agglutinative verbs. This is seen in examples (1) and (3) above. These examples also show another characteristic of the Cavineña verb, namely that the tense sufﬁx always occurs in the last position.

2. distribution of motion inﬂections. Based on their distribution inside the verb, the motion inﬂections can be split into two subsets as in Table 2. The distribution is as follows. First, inﬂections inside one set are mutually exclusive, that is, they never co-occur. On the other hand, an inﬂection from one set can co-occur with an inﬂection of the other set. Finally, in the case of co-occurrence, the order is ﬁxed, namely inﬂections from set 1 obligatorily precede inﬂections from set 2.
The following example illustrates these observations:

(4) tudya ike

taraka-ju

then 1sing.abs coral-loc

bade-tsura-diru-kware

perched-upward(dir)-while.going.back(assoc.motion)-past

‘Then, I perched up on the corral while I was going back.’

directionals versus associated motions in cavineña

147

Thus we can observe that -tsura ‘upward’, an inﬂection from Set 1 co-occurs with and precedes -diru ‘do while going back’ which is an inﬂection from Set 2.
In the following, I will present further characteristics of each set, ﬁrst the set of associated motions, second the set of directionals.

3. cavineña associated motions. The term associated motions comes from descriptions of Australian languages which have highly elaborated systems of this category (Koch 1984, Tunbridge 1988, Wilkins 1991).
As the term indicates, associated motion inﬂections associate the verb stem event with an event of motion. Thus in (5) the verb ba ‘see’ is associated with the motion event -diru ‘going back’.

(5) senda-ju ba-diru-kware

beta dati

path-loc see-while.going.back-past two tortoise.abs

‘I saw two tortoises in the path while I was going back5.’

Associated motions always encode the motion of the nominative argument6. This is to say that, regardless of the transitivity of the verb stem, they always encode the motion of the subject argument7. As an illustration, consider (6) and (7)—in both cases the motion event encoded by -diru is the motion of the subject argument, namely ‘he’ in (6) and ‘I’ in (7) (but not the object ‘it’ in the latter example).

(6) tuja ekari-ju

kwinana-diru-kware

(intransitive)

his path-loc go.out-while.going.back-past

‘He went out of his path while he was going back.’

(7) era

amena etare japadama ijewe-diru-kware (transitive)

1sing.erg then house close throw-while.going.back-past

‘I threw it (a crocodile) close to the house while I was going back.’

Another property of associated motions is to encode some temporal relation distinctions between the verb stem event and the motion event. The preceding examples (5), (6) and (7) encode concurrent motion, which means that the verb stem event and the motion event are simultaneous. In addition to the inﬂection -diru ‘going back’, the set of concurrent associated motion also includes -nati ‘going’ and -eti ‘coming back’.
On the other hand, two inﬂections, -ti and -na, encode prior motion, which means that the event of motion precedes the verb stem event in time8. As an illustration, consider (8):

(8) rewa yatse

espere-ju kutsa-ti-chine (prior motion)

here 1dual.abs creek-loc bathe-go.and.do-past

‘Here (on the picture), we two went and bathed in the creek.’

148

antoine guillaume

concurrent motion -nati ‘do while going’ -diru ‘do while going back’ -eti ‘do while coming back’

prior motion

-ti

‘go and do’

-na ‘come and do’

Table 3. Associated motions in Cavineña.

‘straight’ forms ‘return’ forms

‘going’ forms (away from speaker) -nati ‘do while going’ -ti ‘go and do’ -diru ‘do while going back’

‘coming’ forms (toward speaker) -na ‘come and do’
-eti ‘do while coming back’

Table 4. Cavineña basic deictic motion verbs.

The three concurrent associated motions and the two prior associated motions are summarized in Table 3.
Finally, associated motions encode notions of path/trajectory9. First, they encode deictic information. Thus there are ‘going’ versus ‘coming’ forms. ‘Going’ forms include -nati ‘do while going’, -diru ‘do while going back’ and -ti ‘go and do’ and encode motion away from the speaker. In opposition, the ‘coming’ forms, namely -eti ‘do while coming back’ and -na ‘come and do’ encode motion toward the speaker. Another path/trajectory distinction encoded by the associated motions is the notion of ‘returning’. ‘Returning’ associated motions include -diru ‘do while going back’ and -eti ‘do while coming back’ as opposed to ‘non returning’ or ‘straight’ motion associated motions as for -nati ‘do while going’, -ti ‘go and do’ and -na ‘come and do’10. These distinctions are summarized in Table 4.

4. cavineña directionals. The term directionals comes from descriptions of Mayan languages (Robertson 1980, Haviland 1991, 1993, Craig 1994, Zavala 1994) and Papua New Guinea languages (Foley 1986) which have extensive systems of this type of category.
Similarly to associated motions, Cavineña directionals also encode path/trajectory, namely the upward/downward opposition11. Thus, consider the following example showing the upward trajectory:

(9) ukeda ba-tsu-tu juye chamakama neti-tsura-chine

hot feel-and-clit ox.abs ﬁnally

stand-upward-past

‘The ox felt hot and ﬁnally stood up.’

As stated in the preceding section, associated motions encode the motion of the nominative argument. However, this is not the case for directionals which encode the motion of the absolutive argument12. Thus, in the case of a transitive verb

directionals versus associated motions in cavineña

149

moving figure semantics

5 associated motions

2 directionals

nominative argument

absolutive argument

trajectory

motion

no motion (?)

3 concurrent 2 prior

Figure 5. Summary of verbal motion inﬂections in Cavineña.

inﬂecting with a directional, as for the verb iya ‘put’ and the directional -tsura as in (10), the upward trajectory is the trajectory of the object argument, namely ‘the wild pig and the two tortoises’, and not the subject argument ‘I’.

(10) tudya amena kwaba-ju iya-tsura-kware waburu (trans)

hence then canoe-loc put-upward-past wild.pig.abs

beta dati

jadya

two tortoise.abs and

‘Then, I put the wild pig and the two tortoises [up] in the canoe.’

Unlike associated motions, Cavineña directionals do not specify any temporal relation between the verb event and the motion event. Interestingly, descriptions of directionals in Mayan and Papua New Guinea languages do not report any kind of temporal relation speciﬁcations either. What is more, Craig (1994) argues that in Jakaltek, a Mayan language, directionals do not actually encode any motion whatsoever but only specify the path/trajectory. Possibly, Cavineña directionals, similarly to Jakaltek directionals, only encode path/trajectory but not motion.
Thus in (10) the directional -tsura is attached to a motion verb, iya ‘put’. In other words, the motion element is already encoded by the lexical root and it is possible that the directional only brings path/trajectory speciﬁcation but not motion.

5. conclusion. In this study, I showed that Cavineña has ﬁve associated motions and two directionals. I ﬁrst showed that both categories have distinct distributional properties—namely that they form two different paradigms and that each paradigm has its own slot in the verb. Then I discussed the fact that they both encode notions of motion, precisely the notion of path/trajectory. However I showed that they diverge on the argument on which their speciﬁcation is applied, namely that associated motions specify the nominative argument whereas directionals specify the absolutive argument. Finally I discussed the fact that associated motions clearly encode motion but that directionals might not. Table 5 recapitulates the characteristics of each set.
I have thus shown, based on the analysis of 7 verbal motion inﬂections, that Cavineña is a language with a highly sophisticated system of grammaticalized motion. Also, it is interesting to remind that Cavineña has actually more motion

150

antoine guillaume

inﬂections than the one discussed in this paper13, a fact which suggests that the overall system might be even more rich and complex.

1 I thank Roberto Zavala and Colette Grinevald for their suggestions in preparing this

paper. 2 Glosses are as follows:

abs absolutive case

loc locative

caus causative

past past tense

clit clitic (function unclear)

1sing 1st person singular

erg ergative case

1dual 1st person dual

3 The nature of the six remaining motion inﬂections is not clear enough for me at the

present to include them in the discussion. Below is the list of these inﬂections with ten-

tative glosses:

-aje ‘do continuously while going’

-tsa ‘do while going toward someone’

-etibe ‘do continuously while coming -dadi ‘do while going behind someone’

back’

-kena ‘do while leaving’

-be ‘do continuously while coming’

4 In the glosses, do stands for the verb stem on which an inﬂection attaches to. 5 The subject (1st person singular) is not overtly expressed in this example. This is
another feature of Cavineña morpho-syntax that arguments need not be overtly expressed if the context can disambiguate. The same remark applies for some of the following examples. Thus the subject (3rd person singular) in (7), the object (3rd person singular) in (8) and the subject (1st person singular) in (10). 6 By ‘nominative argument’ I mean the subject argument of an intransitive verb and the subject argument of a transitive verb, regardless of their case marking. As we saw in section one, Cavineña is an ergative language, and the two types of subjects do not receive the same marking: the ﬁrst receives an absolutive marking whereas the second receives an ergative marking. 7 Directionals on the other hand encode the motion of the absolutive argument as will be discussed below. 8 Subsequent motion, where the motion event follows in time the verb stem event is not attested in Cavineña. However this distinction does indeed exist as it is found in some Australian languages (Tunbridge 1988, Wilkins 1991). 9 I use the term path in the sense of Talmy (1984) which decomposes any motion event into the following elements: ﬁgure, motion, path, ground and manner. Other authors such as Craig (1994) also use the term trajectory to refer to the same notion. 10 Further possible notions encoded in associated motions are illustrated in some Australian languages: path/trajectory notions such as upward/downward and past a point and manner notions such as the speed of the motion. 11 Further path/trajectory distinctions are found in Mayan languages. For example, Jakaltek has the following inventory of directionals (Craig 1994):

directionals versus associated motions in cavineña

151

-toj ‘away from’ -tij ‘toward’ -(a)h ‘up’ -(a)y ‘down’ -(o/e/i) ‘in’

-(e/i)l ‘out’ -(e/i)k ‘passing, through’ -pax ‘back, again’ -kan ‘remaining, still’ -kanh ‘up, suddenly’

12 Again, I remind the reader that the notions of 'nominative' versus 'absolutive' arguments used in our discussion of motion inﬂections are not to be confused with the marking of the grammatical functions which are those of an ergative language, as we described in section 1.
13 See footnote 3.

REFERENCES
Camp, Elizabeth L. 1982. Referentes de movimiento y ubicacion en el discurso narrativo en Cavineña. Revista latinoamericana de estudios etnolinguisticos 2:81–122. Lima. Peru.
Craig, Colette G. 1994. Jakaltek directionals: their meaning and discourse function. Languages of the world 7:23–36.
Foley, William A. 1986. The Papuan languages of New Guinea. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Haviland, John B. 1991. The grammaticalization of motion (and time) in Tzotzil. (Working paper N° 2, Cognitive anthropological research group). Nijmegen: Max Planck Institute For Psycholinguistics.
———. 1993. The syntax of Tzotzil auxiliaries and directionals: the grammaticalization of ‘motion’. Proceedings of the nineteenth annual meeting of the Berkeley Linguistics Society. Berkeley: University of California Press.
Koch, Harold. 1984. The category of ‘associated motion’ in Kaytej. Language in central Australia 1:23–34.
Robertson, John S. 1980. The structure of pronoun incorporation in the Mayan verbal complex. New York: Garland.
Talmy, Leonard. 1985. Lexicalization patterns: Semantic structure in lexical form. In Language typology and syntactic description, vol. 3, ed by. Timothy Shopen, 57–148. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press
Tunbridge, Dorothy. 1988. Afﬁxes of motion and direction in Adnyamathanha. In Complex sentences constructions in Australian languages, ed. Peter Austin, 265–83. Amsterdam: John Benjamins.
Wilkins, David P. 1991. The semantics, pragmatics and diachronic development of ‘associated motion’ in Mparntwe Arrernte. Buffalo papers in linguistics 1:207–57.
Zavala, Roberto. 1994. Clause integration with verbs of motion in Mayan languages. M.A. thesis. University of Oregon.
✥

