WACKERNAGEL, JACOB
Wackernagel’s other major accomplishment in the field of syntax is constituted by the two volumes of lectures on syntax (Vorlesungen über Syntax), 1926–1928, in which the scholar addressed several problems connected with the syntactic behavior of nouns and verbs in the Indo-European languages (mostly based on Latin, Greek, and Germanic). Wackernagel’s approach is typical of historical linguistics in the late nineteenth to early twentieth century, insofar as—from today’s perspective—the word is still the dominant unit of analysis. In Wackernagel’s times, linguists were in the process of developing distinctive theories of word and sentence structure, but word-related issues were still defining and delimiting syntactic problems. Although he announced a further volume on sentence structure, Wackernagel never wrote it. Since the newly individuated field of syntax could not yet rely on a theoretical framework, Wackernagel’s syntactic work remains descriptive, his insights mostly deriving from his deep knowledge of languages and texts.
Biography
Jacob Wackernagel was born in Basle in 1853. He studied Classical Philology in Basle, and was then

appointed in the same university, where he taught from 1877 to 1902. He was appointed in Göttingen in 1902–1915. Then he returned to Basle and resumed his former position, which he held until 1937. He died in Basle on May 22, 1938.
References
Collinge, N.E. 1985. The laws of Indo-European. Amsterdam and Philadelphia: Benjamins.
Eichner, Heiner, and Helmut Rix (eds.) 1990. Sprachwissenschaft und Philologie. Jacob Wackernagel und die Indogermanistik heute. Wiesbaden: Reichert.
Hale, Ken. 1983. Warlpiri and the grammar of non-configurational languages. Natural Language and Linguistic Theory 1(1). 5–47.
Halpern, Aaron, and Arnold Zwicky (eds.) 1996. Approaching second: second position clitics and related phenomena. Chicago: CSLI Publications.
Luraghi, Silvia. 1998. The grammaticalization of the left sentence boundary in Hittite. The limits of grammaticalization, ed. by, A. Giacalone Ramat and P. Hopper, 189–210. Amsterdam and Philadelphia: Benjamins.
Wackernagel, Jacob. 1926–1928. Vorlesungen über Syntax, 2 vols. Basle: Birkhäuser.
———. 1953. Kleine Schriften, 2 vols. Göttingen: Vandenhoek & Ruprecht.
Watkins, Calvert. 1963. Preliminaries to a historical and comparative analysis of the Old Irish verb. Celtica 6. 194–249.
SILVIA LURAGHI

Warao

Warao is an Amerindian language spoken in the Orinoco Delta and adjoining areas in northeastern Venezuela and Guyana. Its speakers, the Warao, are the aboriginal population of the Delta, who have been present for as long as 9,000 years (W. Wilbert 1995:336). They have an estimated population of about 30,000, which is increasing. Although they form the second largest indigenous group in Venezuela, given that the total indigenous population of the country comprises only 1.5%, they are clearly a minority. The latest reliable official census rates 90% of the Venezuelan Warao as speaking their indigenous language and 48% of them as being bilingual in Warao and Spanish (Venezuela 1993). Especially in the central part of the Delta, missionary boarding schools have had the—albeit unintended—effect of language loss. There are therefore a growing number of monolingual Spanish speakers in this area and in the slums found in Tucupita and Barrancas.

The estimated 1,000 Warao on the Guyanese side are all in close contact with wider Guyanese society so that all of them can be assumed to be English speaking: some being bilingual Warao-English or even trilingual including Spanish. There is however the tendency to give up Warao (Forte 2000).
Social and Political Status of the Language
Up to now, Warao is a language with no genuine writing tradition. Nevertheless, recordings mainly of myths have been written down and published by anthropologists (J. Wilbert 1970; Heinen 1988), missionaries, and linguists (Osborn 1966a, b, 1967; Lavandero 1991, 1992). The diversified oral tradition includes different styles of speech and various genres. It differentiates for instance between ‘denobo’ (Ͻdeje nobo: old stories) mythology on the one hand and ‘deje jiro’ (new stories) or ‘deje kwamotane abane,’

1164

which contain recent stories, gossip, and jokes, on the other hand. In addition, there is special language use during ritual as in shamanistic curing sessions and wailing for the dead (Briggs 1993).
The large majority of Warao speakers live in communities that are exclusively Warao. Outside these communities there is no social space for the usage of the indigenous language. In Guyana, there has been no bilingual education so far (Forte 2000). In Venezuela, indigenous languages were authorized for school education by a presidential decree in 1979, and official alphabets for most of them including Warao were released subsequently. Nevertheless, due to lack of political support these regulations were never put to practice on a larger scale (Villalón 1994). Warao language and culture are subject to strong pressure by the Spanish- and English-speaking majority, urging them to assimilate into the national Criollo or Creole culture of the respective countries. The awareness among the Warao concerning their language and culture as being endangered is just starting to rise, but still the future of their whole cultural heritage has to be regarded as most uncertain.
Dialects
There is no reliable information concerning the number of dialects. Some authors claim that there are none (Romero-Figeroa 1997); others have suggested that there are only slight regional variations (Osborn 1966a:108f.). For their part, Warao speakers claim not being able to understand speakers from certain other groups. Due to Delta internal migration, the situation has become regionally complex. Nevertheless, at least four major linguistic and cultural variants have been assumed by most researchers (Weisshar 1982; Wilbert 1957). Certainly, the different Warao groups are for ecological and historical reasons culturally quite heterogeneous (Heinen and Garcia-Castro 2000).
Genealogy
Because of a lack of historical information, it is impossible to prove membership in a language family for Warao and it has therefore to be considered an isolate (Weisshar 1982). Certain resemblances with other languages have to be attributed to the phenomenon of a ‘linguistic area’, where languages of a certain region (in this case the Amazon and neighboring areas) show similarities across the boundaries of different language families.
Typology
Typologically speaking, Warao shows characteristics of an ‘agglutinating’ language. Languages of this type tend

WARAO
to have one morpheme (smallest meaningful unit, which can be a word or a part of a word) per grammatical function. Larger words are then composed of a basic word or root and these morphemes. In the case of Warao, most of them—suffixes—occur after the root, although some of them—prefixes—are attached in front of it. For example, the phrase: ‘ine najoro-turu-ae’, structurally ‘I foodϩalmost-would-haveϩcompletedaction’, equals the English expression ‘I almost ate.’ (Please note that in these examples of Warao, the Spanish-based official spelling is used and the letter ‘j’ therefore corresponds to ‘h’ for English speakers. Hyphens are intended to clarify the structure of a word.)
Word Classes
The categories of adjective and noun are not clear-cut. A word can function as noun or adjective according to its place in a sentence and the suffixes it combines with. Nouns and adjectives do not have gender. There are furthermore ‘noun–verbs’ (Osborn 1967). Normally verbs and nouns can be distributionally differentiated according to the suffixes and prefixes (classed together as affixes) that can occur with them. Some roots, however, can combine with verb and noun affixes alike. To give an example, the root ‘najoro’ (food) alone is a noun that can combine, for example, with the suffix ‘-noko’ (place/instrument) to form ‘najoro-noko’ (place of the food/instrument for eating). On the other hand, in the construction ‘najoro-ya’ (literally, foodϩdurative aspect), ‘is/are eating’, the same root functions as part of a verb combining with a verb suffix.
Tense, Mood, and Time
In Warao a wide range of such notions as tense, aspect, and mood are marked on the verb. The above-mentioned morphemes accomplish this task mainly suffixed to the basic verb form. In order to clarify this point, there is a nonexhaustive list of examples given below. However, as there is no consistent labeling in the literature for these forms, I will limit myself to give an approximate translation into English:
najoro-kitane (to eat) i-najoro-kitane (to cause someone to eat/to feed someone) najoro-kitia (going to eat immediately) najoro-te (probably going to eat in the future) najoro-ya (is/are eating at that moment/will surely be eating in the future) najoro-ae (ate) najoro-ya-ja (eating) najoro-kuna (could eat) najoro-turu-ae (was/were about to eat)

1165

WARAO
najoro-mejerei (in order to have him/her eat) najoro-moana (has/have not yet eaten but should have done so) najoro-komoni (cannot eat) najoro! (eat!, singular) najoro-kotu! (eat!, plural) najoro-na-ja (is/are not eating) najoro-na-tan-ae (has/have not eaten) najoro-naka! (don’t eat!, singular) najoro-naka ja-kotu! (don’t eat!, plural)
In this last example, ‘jakitane’ (to be/to have) functions as an auxiliary verb taking on the imperative plural ending ‘-kotu’ because it is impossible to attach it to the preceding suffix ‘-naka’.
Taken together, ‘jakitane’ with ‘tikitane’ (to say/to do) and ‘takitane’ (to be/to do) form an interesting group. They can not only be used as auxiliaries and as suffixes but also as clause introducers. As in ‘ta-kore’ (literally, this being so), then/when.
Analyzing ‘najoro-na-ta-n-ae’ (has/have not eaten) from the above list, ‘ta-n-ae’ really is the root of the verb ‘ta-kitane’, followed by a marker for singularity of action ‘-n-’, followed by the suffix expressing completeness of an action: ‘foodϩnotϩdoϩsingularity of actionϩcompleted action’.
Discourse Markers
In addition, there are morphemes that allow the modification of verbs, nouns, and adjectives and sometimes range over the whole sentence: So, for instance, ‘yama’ is a citation marker specifying that something is known from hearsay: najoro-ae-yama (it is said/someone told that he ate). It is prevalent in storytelling.
Other morphemes like ‘-kore’ or ‘-rone’, which mean ‘while/if’ and ‘although’, respectively, play the role of conjunctions connecting sentences or phrases: nojoro-ya-kore dani mi-ae (while I was eating I saw my mother); najoro-ya-rone dani mi-ae (although I was eating I saw my mother). For questioning a sentence, the suffix ‘-ra’ is attached to the last word of that sentence.
Sentence Structure
As regards the ‘basic’ or unmarked word order in Warao, there is no general agreement. Some take a Subject–Object–Verb (SOV) word order to be basic (Osborn 1966b) while others argue in favor of Object–Subject–Verb (OSV) (Romero-Figeroa 1997). All that can be stated safely is that Warao is a ‘verbfinal’ language.
In a number of languages, the copula ‘to be’ (as in an English sentence of the type: ‘I am Warao’) is not obligatory. The same holds true for Warao. Thus,

‘ine warao’ (literally, I Warao) would be the equivalent of the English sentence.
The direct complements of a verb (subject, object) do not have case marking or gender and are often omitted, especially when they have been mentioned previously or are assumed to be known. Besides, there are stylistic reasons for omission. Nouns can take on suffixes (-si/-ma/-to) that specify that they are not the subject of a sentence: dima-si konaria (he takes father along) as opposed to dima konaria (father takes something/someone along).
A study of the ‘pivot’ in Warao is yet lacking. In languages with nominative and accusative case marking, the nominative (case of the subject of an intransitive and a transitive sentence) functions as the pivot. Thus, two sentences are connected having a common subject: ‘the man ate an apple and smiled’. In ergative languages, however, which show the same case for the subject of an intransitive sentence and for the object of a transitive one, this juncture would be impossible. ‘The man ate an apple and smelled good’ would hence mean that the apple smelled good, not the man. In Warao storytelling, such connections are frequently made. This gives rise to the question of whether this language is syntactically ergative.
Person, Number, and Plurality of Action
Basically, there is no agreement for person and number on the verb, although interestingly singularity or plurality of the action itself can be marked and thus emphasized. Compare, for example, ‘boro-te’ (will be jumping) with ‘boro-bu-te’ (will be jumping repeatedly/a lot of people will be jumping). Here the morpheme ‘-bu-’ underlines that the action is performed repeatedly either by one person or simultaneously by many.
The case of a morpheme that depicts singularity (‘-n-’) is more complicated as some verbs exist both with and without this morpheme and others only occur in one of these forms. An example of alternating verbs would be ine oa-e (I grabbed several things) in opposition to ‘ine oa-n-ae’ (I grabbed once/one thing). It is not clear whether or not ‘-n-’ is still a productive morpheme.
With respect to number marking on nouns, there is a suffix ‘-tuma’ that is often regarded as plurality marker. But it is not obligatory and, especially when used with people, rather expresses the idea of ‘theones- belonging-to’ as in ‘Maria-tuma’ (Maria and her friends/family).
Possession and Article
The possessive construction has the form ‘possessor possession-markerϩpossessed-item’: dima a-janoko (father’s house, literally ‘father his-house’).

1166

There is no definite or indefinite article in Warao. But person markers used in possessive constructions function like a definite article. In the following text recorded by the author, definiteness is assured in this way:
Tau-tuma manamo ja. Ta-kore a-raiba a-rajia tane.
Two womenfolk is/has. Then her older sister her younger sister so (literal translation).
There were two women: an older and a younger sister (free translation).
Future of the Language
Clearly a most interesting language with phenomena awaiting to be investigated, Warao presents a challenge to linguists. Unfortunately, like most amerindian languages the future vitality of Warao is not assured.
References
Briggs, Charles L. 1993. The pattering of variation in performance. American dialect research, ed. by Dennis R. Preston, 379–431. Amsterdam: Benjamins.
Forte, Janette. 2000. Amerindian languages of Guyana. As línguas amazonicas hoje, ed. by F. Queixalós and O. RenaultLescure. Sao Paulo: Instituto Socioambiental.
Heinen, Dieter. 1988. Oko Warao: marshland people of the Orinoco-Delta. Münster: Lit.
Heinen, Dieter, and Alvaro Garcia-Castro. 2000. The multiethnic network of the lower Orinoco. Ethnohistory 47. 561–79.
Lavandero, Julio Perez (ed.) 1991. I Ajotejana, Mitos (Myths from Ajotejana). Caracas: Hermanos Capuchinos.
———. 1992. II Ajotejana, Relatos (stories from Ajotejana). Caracas: Hermanos Capuchinos.

WAYAMPI AND TUPI-GUARANI LANGUAGES
Osborn, Henry. 1966a. Warao I: phonology and morphophonemics. IJAL 32.
———. 1966b. Warao II: Nouns, relationals, and demonstratives. IJAL 32.
———. 1967. Warao III: Verbs and suffixes. IJAL 33. Romero-Figeroa, Andrés. 1997. A reference grammar of Warao.
München, Newcastle: Lincom. Vaquero, P. Antonio. 1965. Idioma Warao. Morfología, sintaxis,
literatura (Warao language. Morphology, syntax, literature). Caracas: Estudios Venezolanos Indígenas. Venezuela. 1993. Oficina Central de Estadística e Informática, Censo Indígena de Venezuela 1992, Tomo I (Venezuelan Indigenous Census of 1992, Part I). Caracas: OCEI. Villalón, María E. 1994. Educación para indígenas en Venezuela: Una crítica razonada (Education for indigenous people in Venezuela: a reasoned critique). Caracas: CEVIAP. Weisshar, Emmerich. 1982. Die Stellung des Warao und Yanomama in Beziehung zu den indigenen Sprachen Südamerikas nördlich des Amazonas: Studien zur genetischen und areal-typologischen Klassifikation (The position of Warao and Yanomama in relation to the indigenous languages of South America North of the Amazon: study in genetic and areal-typological classification). University of Tübingen: Dissertation. Wilbert, Johannes. 1957. Prologo. Diccionario GuaraoEspañol, Español-Guarao, ed. by Sucre, 7–18. Basilio María de Barral. Caracas: Sociedad de Ciencias Naturales la Salle. ———. 1970. Folk literature of the Warao Indians. Narrative material and motive content. Los Angeles: Latin American Center University of California. Wilbert, Werner. 1995. Conceptos etnoecológicos Warao. Naturaleza y Ecología Humana en el Neotrópoco/Nature and human ecology in the neotropics (Scientia Guaianæ. No. 5), ed. by Dieter Heinen, José J. San-José and Hortensia Caballero-Arias, 312–70. Caracas: Instituto Venezolano de Investigaciones Científicas.
STEFANIE HERRMANN

Wayampi and Tupi-Guarani Languages

Wayampi is one of the more than 40 closely related languages that comprise the Tupi-Guarani language family. These languages descend from a common ancestor, referred to as Proto-Tupi-Guarani, whose speakers probably lived in or around the state of Rondonia in western Brazil. Long before the arrival of Europeans to the New World, extensive migration of small groups contributed toward the development of a large number of closely related languages, scattered throughout the Amazon region and beyond. As individual groups migrated, many of them through the Amazon rain forest, they eventually lost contact with each other. The language spoken by each group gradually changed in unique ways, until the speech of the individual groups

was no longer mutually intelligible. There are no written records for this early history.
The first contacts that Europeans had with TupiGuarani languages were with Tupinambá and Guarani, at that time spoken along the eastern coast of South America. As explorers, anthropologists, and linguists came in contact with other indigenous groups whose languages showed a high degree of similarity in vocabulary and word structure to Tupinambá and Guarani, they referred to these languages as Tupi-Guarani languages.
The Tupi-Guarani family is one branch of a larger grouping of Tupi languages. Tupi-Guarani languages have a number of features that define them as a group, separate from the other Tupi languages. For example,

1167

