 Berbice Dutch
Silvia Kouwenberg
. Dutch-lexicon creole in Guyana
At the time of writing this, early , the last speakers of Berbice Dutch Creole () number only four or ﬁve.  was once the vernacular of the Dutch-owned Berbice colony, which consisted of plantations and small settlements along the Berbice River, Canje River, and Wiruni Creek in Guyana. Its demise started around  when plantations were relocated to the coastal area, while around the same time the colony changed to British ownership, and Guyanese Creole, an English-lexicon creole, developed in the coastal area. Not until the mid seventies, when Ian Robertson discovered that the language was still spoken, was  studied (Robertson , ). Up to this time it was assumed that if a Dutch-lexicon creole had ever existed in Guyana, it would certainly have become extinct. In fact, Robertson found vestiges of another Dutch-lexicon creole, Skepi Dutch (), in the Essequibo area of Guyana, also a one-time Dutch colony. The communities in which these languages were spoken were a good distance apart and the character of the natural terrain was such that traveling from one to the other was not easy. This explains why we ﬁnd two diﬀerent Dutch-lexicon creoles developing at roughly the same time. A comparison of the basic vocabulary of these two creoles in Robertson () shows that they are dissimilar to the point of being mutually unintelligible. The lexical diﬀerences are of three kinds (Dutch etyma are given in their modern orthography; where an Eastern Ijo etymon is given, the Kalabari form has been selected for reasons explained in Smith, Robertson & Wiliamson ). (a) Some words have the same Dutch () etymon, but have diﬀerent forms in  and
. For example, quite a few words end in consonants in  but in vowels in , and some show diﬀerences in voicing of consonants:  frag  fragi ‘ask’ <  vragen,  blut  blutu ‘blood’ <  bloed,  slanka  slangi ‘snake’ <  slang,  brant  brandi ‘burn’ <  branden. (b) Some words have diﬀerent  etyma: ‘under’ is  bεnεr <  beneden,  ondro <  onder, ‘roast’ is  brai <  braaien,  brandi <  branden, ‘back’ is  lεnt <  lende,  atrε/atri <  achter. (c) A large proportion of  basic vocabulary is not of  etymology; many of these words have Eastern Ijo (), a Nigerian language, as their source (Smith et al. ): ‘black’

 Berbice Dutch
is  swati <  zwart,  kurkuru <  kúrúkúrú, ‘eat’ is  skaf <  schaften,  jeﬁ <  yé f´, ‘woman’ is  jufrau <  juﬀrouw,  jεrma <  éré-me. Only about  basic vocabulary items are known from , and the people who remembered them when Ian Robertson interviewed them in the seventies may be referred to as ‘terminal’ speakers, incapable of conversing, bartering, or any other communicative eﬀort in . Their memory did not include sentences other than formulaic expressions such as hos mεt ju ‘how are you?’. We may conclude that  stopped being taught to children before the turn of this century.  on the other hand, was still used in some families in the Berbice River area early this century; children growing up in and around these families learned both  and Guyanese Creole. As adults, although Guyanese-dominant, they retain the ability to engage in conversation in . Their ability to do so ranges from that of ﬂuent speakers (four or ﬁve), to that of semispeakers (about ten). The youngest of the ﬂuent speakers was born in . Modern  contains many Guyanese Creole elements in vocabulary and grammar, reﬂecting its history of contact with Guyanese and the speakers’ Guyanese dominance.
. Berbice Dutch grammar
In the following, we will examine some aspects of  grammar, organized as follows: . word order and other properties of the clause, . lexicon and morphology, . phonology. Bear in mind that the discussion below is very summary, and that the properties of  are merely indicated, not described in any detail. Exceptions and constructions of minor importance have been left out of consideration altogether.
.. Word order and other properties of the clause In general, we can say that word order in  shows mixed characteristics. Most of the phenomena illustrated below are typically associated with  order: complements follow verbs and prepositions, relative clauses follow nouns, auxiliaries and similar elements precede the main verb; in each of these cases, a dependent follows a head. But we will see some divergences from this pattern in the form of postpositions, suﬃxes on the verb, and clauseﬁnal negation.
As in other Caribbean creoles,  basic word order is strictly  in all sentence types: in interrogatives and non-interrogatives, in main and in embedded clauses. Where a verb takes two internal arguments (e.g. pi ‘give’, tiri ‘send’, twa ‘put’), an indirect object precedes a direct object, a location argument follows a direct object.  does not employ morphological case marking of subjects and objects or agreement marking on the verb form: word order carries the full functional load of the diﬀerentiation of arguments. The foregrounding strategies of focus, passive, and dislocation may produce word orders diﬀerent from the basic

Silvia Kouwenberg 
 order. Each of these is illustrated below. Focus optionally uses the copular form da as ‘highlighter’ (glossed as ), and/or a focus marker sa/so (glossed as ) which follows the focused constituent, both of which are present in (). Passive constructions, as in (), show no passive morphology. In () we have a case of left-discolation.

() Da hatbeʃi bwa so o wa hangitε ﬁni ofro.  deer foot    hang- ﬁre over ‘(It) was deer feet he had hung over the ﬁre.’

[ lukuba:p]

() O kor djas kεk hos di.. kori.  work just like how this work ‘It is made just like this one is made.’

[ :p]

() Di wari wato

wa lefa da a, o kikjo babaka. [ lukuba:p]

the house what=  live- there  see= anymore=

‘(As for) the house that he had been living in there, he doesn’t see it anymore.’

The formation of question-word questions involves the movement of the questioned constituent to initial position in the clause. The elicited judgements indicate that, if the questioned constituent is the complement of a preposition, the preposition optionally moves too. Below, the questioning of a subject human referent is illustrated in (), the questioning of the adverbial complement of a preposition, with pied-piping of the preposition in (). Note the use of the focus marker sa/so in both examples; focus is optional, but quite frequent in question-word questions.

() Wisa das kom hir kom.. mja di bεrap di? who=  come here come do the story- this ‘Who comes here to do these things?’

[ :]

() Fan wa sin

kumtε?

from where== come-

‘Where have they come from?’

[! :p, ! :p]

Determiners, numerals, adjectives and genitives precede the noun, relative clauses and demonstratives follow it (* indicates the possibility of recursion):

() Determiner Adjective* Noun Demonstrative Relative Clause Possessor  Numeral 

 Berbice Dutch
Relative clauses are introduced by the initial element wati, which may have human as well as non-human and inanimate reference; human reference is illustrated in () below, inanimate reference in (). Wati also occurs as a question word, but can only have non-human and inanimate reference when used that way, whereas human referents are questioned by use of the question word wi ‘who’. This combined with some other diﬀerences between question formation and relative clause formation leads us to suspect that wati is a complementizer rather than a relative pronoun when heading relative clauses.
() di jεrmatoko wat jεnda birbiʃi, ori da də laʃtijε [ :,] the woman=child what be=there Berbice  be the last- ‘The daughter who lives on the Berbice River, she is the last one (of my children).’
Interestingly,  has both prepositions and postpositions, most of which have  prepositions as their etymons.  prepositions are the following: mεtε ‘with’, fan ‘from, of ’, tutu ‘until’, foro ‘before’, fu/ﬁ ‘for’, sondro ‘without’, afta ‘after’, abot ‘about’. Of these, fu/ﬁ, afta, abot are Guyanese Creole, while all others have  preositions as their etymons. Example () above contains fan ‘from’.
 also has a class of words which may either refer to a part of an object or body (atrε ‘back’, ben ‘inside’, bofu ‘top’, foro ‘front’, kandi ‘side’, ondro ‘underside’) or to the situation of an object or body in relation to another one (behind, inside, on top of, in front of, near, underneath). For instance, εkε atrε [ back] is ambiguous between possessive ‘my back’ and spatial ‘behind me’. In their former use, these words are clearly nouns, in their latter use they are referred to as postpositions and behave ambiguously: they have some noun-like properties, some preposition-like properties. In addition, three postpositions, viz. anga locative marker, tosn ‘between’ and ofru ‘over’ are not used as nouns at all. Example () illustrates the use of ofru.Of these words, the only ones which do not have  prepositions as their etyma are kandi <  kant ‘side’ (n.) and anga <  ángá ‘side’ (n.).
Markers of tense, mood and aspect either precede the verb, in the form of auxiliary verbs and particles, or are suﬃxes on the verb (aspectual only). The examples below illustrate a combination of preverbal particles wa (tense), sa (mood) with the suﬃx -tε (aspect) in (), the use of an auxiliary in (). The past tense marker wa with a perfective verb form creates an anterior reading as in (), its appearance with an irrealis mood marker creates a future-inthe-past reading. () shows that a combination of past, irrealis and perfective is also possible. If a past reading rather than an anterior is intended, only the perfective form of the verb will appear, without the preverbal tense marker. Examples are () and (). Furthermore, overt tense reference is conditioned by principles governing discourse: in a chronologically ordered account of events, past is not marked overtly, while an overt mark appears in

Silvia Kouwenberg 

utterances that provide background information for such an account. Thus, () below is given a past tense translation, while no overt past tense reference appears; it is taken from a chronologically ordered account of events.

() εk wa sa kutε.. en or twe fan eni.    catch- one or two of them ‘I would have caught a couple of them.’

[ :]

() Ju mu jeﬁ, ju mu talma jeﬁ.  must eat  must dish.out food ‘You must eat, you must serve yourself.’

[ lukuba:p]

The standard negator kanε or its short form ka is clause-ﬁnal, certain other types of negation employ a preverbal negator in addition to the standard negator. Both are illustrated below.

() εk suk mu lasan eni ka.  want go leave   ‘I didn’t want to leave them.’

[ :p]

() Titi ori kumtε en wa noko la noko kanε. time  come-   not= reach yet  ‘When he came they hadn’t arrived yet.’

[ :p]

Although  does not have the instrumental and benefactive serial verb constructions which are typically quoted in discussions of such constructions in creole languages, it does have a number of other serial verb constructions with a variety of functions such as dative, direct object, location, direction, complementation, and others.

.. Lexicon and morphology  major word classes are nouns, adjectives, verbs. Closed classes are pronouns, prepositions, postpositional nouns, conjunctions, auxiliary verbs, and other functional items such as negators and particles. In this section, we will look at  morphological processes; in general, these aﬀect only words of major class membership, with the exception of the plural pronouns which sometimes appear with the plural suﬃx.
In the preceding section, we have seen an illustration of the existence of verbal inﬂection in . There are three suﬃxes which mark aspectual categories: -tε for perfective aspect, -arε or the short form -a for imperfective aspect, and a reduplicative suﬃx for iterative

 Berbice Dutch

aspect. A reduplicated verb form can take one of the other suﬃxes, as shown in the following example.

() Kaljap,

kεkε di wat mangimangja.

small-- like this what run-run-

‘Small ones, like this one that is running up and down.’

[ :]

 reduplication is totally productive over the classes of adjectives (where it marks either intensity or distribution) and verbs (where it marks diﬀerent kinds of iterative aspect), while the reduplication of nouns occurs only ocassionally; the latter marks an individuated plural, and may be contrasted with the normal process of plural formation, which involves the suﬃxation of -apu to the noun, as in () above. The use of a normal plural in () would have meant that the speaker received several  cents pieces every day. The plural suﬃx -apu may also be used to mark an associative plural, as in εkε papapu ‘my father and people of his generation’.

() Idri daka εk justu

krik skeli skeli

every day  , get  cent- cent

‘Every day I would get an  cents piece.’

[ :p]

 makes fairly extensive use of the process of zero derivation, whereby a word of a diﬀerent category is derived without a change in phonological form. The following processes of zero derivation can be distinguished: (a) Zero derivation applies to verbs, also reduplicated forms, and derives deverbal nouns, e.g. kapu ‘cut (/), operation’, kosokoso ‘coughing (/)’. This process is not very productive. (b) Zero derivation applies to adjectives, and derives intransitive and transitive process verbs, e.g. kurkuru ‘black/become black/blacken’. This process is almost fully productive over the class of adjectives. (c) Zero derivation applies to intransitive verbs, and derives transitive and causative verbs, e.g. kori ‘work/construct’, sara ‘fall, drop (/)’. Lastly we mention here a derivational process which involves the bound morpheme -jε, possibly a clitic element, by means of which adjectives, possessive pronouns, and attributive nouns may be nominalized: e.g. kalijε ‘small one’, jujε ‘yours’, jεrmajε ‘female kind’. Another example may be found in example sentence () above.
 compounds are always headed by a nominal element, and rarely consist of more than two members. We ﬁnd - compounds (jεrmatoko woman=child ‘girl, daughter’, mingikui

Silvia Kouwenberg 

water=cow ‘manatee’), - compounds (bambita nice=dress ‘clothes for special occasions’, grotala great=boss ‘Governor’), - compounds (branhautu burn=wood ‘ﬁrewood’, jagiman hunt=man ‘hunter’). Temporal and location compounds are formed with nouns: titi ‘time’, ʃi ‘side’ (combined with kandi ‘side’) as right-most elements ( εnεtiti rain=time ‘rainy season’, bofuʃi(kandi) top=side(=side) ‘upriver’).
The  pronoun system does not diﬀerentiate for features such as gender, animateness, in/exclusivity, or case, except for a special genitive form of the third person singular. The variation in the plural forms is dialectal: the forms preceding the slashes are used by a diﬀerent set of speakers from those following the slashes. Where the  forms are concerned, the use of a is peculiar to the speech of one particular speaker of , and only occurs as a subject.

()

Singular

Plural

. εkε

enʃi/iʃi,içi

. ju

jεndε

. ori (all positions) eni/ini

o (subject/object)

a (subject)

ʃi (genitive)

All personal pronouns except for the short  forms and the special genitive form may appear in any syntactic position, may be focused/conjoined/modiﬁed by the reﬂexive selfu ‘self ’ (the  reﬂexive forms being either ori selfu or ʃi selfu), modiﬁed by adverbs oko ‘too’ and alen ‘only’, or modiﬁed by the emphatic markers -jε and di. Of the  pronouns, ori only may appear in left-dislocated position, while all forms may be used as resumptive pronouns; if ori is dislocated, the short form is employed as the resumptive pronoun.

.. Sound system  has an asymmetrically distributed six vowel system. The mid front vowels /e/ and /ε/ are in near-complementary distribution, and may have been allophones of a single vowel phoneme at an earlier stage.

()

Front Back

High

i

u

Mid

e

o

ε

Low

a

 Berbice Dutch
Thus, the lower mid front vowel occurs as ﬁnal vowel, as in kanε ‘’, or in monomorphemic polysyllabic words which contain more than one mid front vowel, as in kεnε ‘person’. The higher mid front vowel occurs as sole mid front vowel in non-ﬁnal position, as in alen ‘alone’. Due to the existence of some exceptions, e.g. jεrma ‘woman’ (possibly from earlier *jεrεma) and twe ‘two’ (a variant of twε), we need to postulate a marginal phonemic distinction between the two in modern .
There is considerable overlap in the allophony of adjacent phonemes. Thus, /i/ and /e/ share [ ] as a possible allophone, /a/ and /o/ share [ ] as a possible allophone, and [o] is an allophone of /u/ (but [u] is an allophone of /u/ only). This allophony is not conditioned, i.e. the various allophones are in free variation. Unstressed vowels are frequently reduced by centralization, i.e. [ə] is a possible allophone of all vowel phonemes. Length is not phonemic; long vowels occur phonetically as a result of emphatic stress.
For oral stops,  distinguishes three points of articulation and exploits voiceless/voiced pairing. Only two points of articulation, labial and alveolar, are contrastive for fricatives and nasals. Voicing is not distinctive for fricatives: voiced fricatives /v,z/ occur only as borrowed phonemes in a few Guyanese Creole loanwords. The palato-alveolar fricative is a predictable realization of /s/ in most of its occurrences, viz. preceding the high front vowel /i/, but there are a few words where its occurrence is not predictable, e.g. ʃurum ‘dirty’, ʃepu ‘soap’.

() oral stop nasal stop fricative approximant

labial labio-dental alveolar velar

p,b

t,d

k,g

m

n

f

s,ʃ

l,r

glottal h

A velar nasal occurs as a predictable realisation of /n/, viz. preceding a velar plosive, as in gungu ‘sift’, pringi ‘jump’. The occurrence of [ ] in many of the examples without the accompaniment of a velar plosive results from the application of processes of reduction.
 does not employ pitch or length distinctively, i.e. independent from stress, except in that rising ﬁnal intonation over an utterance distinguishes yes/no questions and conﬁrmative questions from the corresponding statements. Regular stress assignment assigns penultimate main stress in monomorphemic words. Irregular stress means, in the majority of cases, initial stress in a trisyllabic word, as for instance in ′alala ‘tongue’, ′stelingi ‘jetty’. Suﬃxation, including the suﬃxation of a reduplicative morpheme, does not aﬀect the position of stress (but see below for ‘therapeutic’ measures connected with suﬃxation and the position of stress). In compounds, the right-hand member of the compound receives main stress.

Silvia Kouwenberg 
Several processes of reduction may apply within and between words. We will brieﬂy discuss the most frequent of these. Unstressed vowels may delete irrespective of their position in the word, e.g. initially in baba < ababa ‘anymore’, medially in korma < koroma ‘lay (eggs)’, ﬁnally in war < wari ‘house’. A favourable environment is that in which deletion results in penultimate stress, for instance in irregularly stressed monomorphemic words such as ′korma < ′koroma and in the case of words which have antepenultimate stress due to suﬃxation, as in ′koptε < ′kopu-tε ‘buy-’. Deletion also takes place where two syllabic vowels are adjacent, for instance as a result of suﬃxation or cliticisation. In these cases, the ﬁrst vowel is suppressed, as in tokapu < toko-apu ‘child-’. If the ﬁrst vowel is a high vowel, it may either be suppressed or changed to the corresponding glide, as in gutapu/gutwapu < gutu-apu ‘thing-’.
Syllable suppression takes place in a phonological environment of the form ..-.. in which  and  share all place and manner features but may diﬀer in voicing. In such an environment, reduction applies optionally but quite frequently, resulting in ..... The boundary and vowel between  and  are ignored; thus, ‘-’ ranges from morpheme-boundaries to word-boundaries across sentences. For instance, the regularly used expression kε.na.pan.tε.kε ‘people told me../I was told..’ (the dots indicate syllable boundaries) derives from kεnε-apu pama-tε εkε ‘person- tell- ’, which contains the sequence ..pu-p...

. Text
In the following text, Ernest King tells us about the time he worked pulling logs on the timber-grants. He sings a worksong (timbabos ‘timber song’) which bears witness to a limited form of contact that must have existed between workmen of ,  and Guyanese Creole linguistic backgrounds in the second half of the th century, before  and  entered their ﬁnal stages of decay. Seeking work in logging, these men met on the timber-grants where they were employed to pull logs to the riverside, where the trees were then tied into rafts to be transported to the saw-mill through the river. The men used to form chaingangs, pulling in pairs on a long chain. Worksongs, sung as call-and-answer, served to synchronize their movements. The worksong in this text is meant to be used at the break of day, when work begins. The songs recorded are probably just frozen versions of songs in continuous change. In addition to the transcribed recording, the literal gloss and the free translation, there is also a morpheme by morpheme representation given.

(a) titi

wa korja timbagrant, i wa justu (Ernest King :-)

titi=iʃi wa kori-a timba=grant iʃi wa justu

time=  work- timber=grant   ,

 Berbice Dutch

(b) nunu timbə, wat en rup grestik, ju nim, ju nok

nunu timba wati eni rupu gred=stik ju nimi ju no=ko

pull timber what  call grade=stick  know  not=

(c) horəbə

dida ka?

horo=abot dida ka

hear=about that 

‘When we worked on the timber-grants, we used to pull timber, what they call gradesticks.

Do you know.. haven’t you heard about that?’

(d) εk mεten

man mai, hab en.. stoko nangwa so, an di.. tau

εkε mεtε=en man ma habu en stoko nangwa so an di tau

 with=one man  have one stick long so and the rope

(e) nangwa kεk fa hi tut so, somtit

 gre, di gre

nangwa kεkε fan hiri tutu so somtiti  gred di gred

long like from here until so sometimes  grade the grade

(f ) en rup, εk mεt ju da en gred.

eni rupu εkε mεtε ju da en gred

 call  with  be one grade

‘Me and another man would have a stick about this long, and the rope is as long as from here

to over there. Sometimes (there are)  grades. The grades they call.. me and you is one grade.’

(g) da sosiʃ das nun, en hondid salid, fu di dak,

da soso=iʃi das nunu en hondrid salid fu di daka

 thus=  pull one hundred solid for the day

(h) bibiru

i wa bri

mi kan

fu di dak, wεl i

bibiru

iʃi wa bringi mingi=kandi fu di daka wεl iʃi

greenheart   bring water=side for the day well 

(i) da ʃi i di timbabos, ju suka hor?

das ʃingi di timba=bos ju suku-a horo

 sing the timber=song  want- hear

‘This is how we pulled, one hundred solid for the day, greenheart we would bring to the

waterside, for the day. Well we would sing the timber song. Do you want to hear it?’

(j) daka daka, nani brεku, mi jungu jalu, daka daka, nani skweru (k) [then you go say] háb héb datiʃ mu nau, jεn fal
háb héb dat=iʃi mu nau jεndε fala(?) then you go say háb héb let= go now  follow(?)

Silvia Kouwenberg 

(l) jεn ma nun, titimba

tantε wεr ju ma ʃingi wε

jεndε ma nunu titi=timba tan-tε wεrε ju ma ʃingi wεrε

  pull time=timber stand- again   sing again

‘Then you say: up! up! let us go now! you... you pull. When the timber stands (i.e. rests) again

you sing again.’

Notes: (a)-(c) The men pulled in pairs; the gradesticks are the sticks that the men on each side of the chain held on to pull. (g)-(i) Greenheart (Ocotea rodiaei): a hardwood. hondid and salid are Guyanese Creole loans. The formative bos is only used in the combination timbabos. (j) According to  and other men, daka daka, nani brεku refers to the break of day. daka means ‘day’ in , and brεku can be related to  brεkε (the ﬁnal u is a rhyming vowel), but the meaning of nani is unknown. Note also that  uses bidaka, not a construction of the type *daka brεkε, for ‘daybreak’. Everyone agrees that mi jungu jalu means ‘my young lady’. mi would have to be Guyanese Creole ( has εkε,  has εk for ), jungu is  (compare  junk), while jalu probably represents a corruption of  hiaro ‘woman’, not unlikely in view of the instability of /r/ in  as well as in : both have [l] as an allophone of /r/. skwer in the next line is Guyanese Creole for squaring timber.

Further reading Kouwenberg () contains a comprehensive grammar, a vocabulary and a number of texts. Smith, Robertson and Williamson () and Kouwenberg () discuss the Ijo element in the language. Bruyn & Veenstra () compare  to other Dutch creoles.

